---
pmid: '9784967'
title: 'CD28/B7 costimulation: a review.'
authors:
- Greenfield EA
- Nguyen KA
- Kuchroo VK
journal: Crit Rev Immunol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1615/critrevimmunol.v18.i5.10
---

# CD28/B7 costimulation: a review.
**Authors:** Greenfield EA, Nguyen KA, Kuchroo VK
**Journal:** Crit Rev Immunol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1615/critrevimmunol.v18.i5.10](https://doi.org/10.1615/critrevimmunol.v18.i5.10)

## Abstract

1. Crit Rev Immunol. 1998;18(5):389-418. doi: 10.1615/critrevimmunol.v18.i5.10.

CD28/B7 costimulation: a review.

Greenfield EA(1), Nguyen KA, Kuchroo VK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

The current model of T cell activation requires two signals. The first signal is 
specific, requiring T cell receptor recognition and binding to MHC/Antigen 
presented by an antigen-presenting cell. The second signal is nonspecific, 
resulting from the binding of B7 ligand on the antigen-presenting cell with its 
receptor, CD28, on the T cell. If both signals are provided, the T cell will 
proliferate and secrete cytokines. Recently, it has been shown that CTLA4, 
another receptor for B7 that is upregulated following T cell after activation, 
can deliver an inhibitory signal, downregulating T cell proliferation. The B7 
family of ligands has two family members, B7-1 and B7-2. They both bind to CD28 
and CTLA4, but they differ in their binding affinity, structure, and temporal 
expression. Considerable research has been done on the CD28/B7 costimulatory 
pathway. Different ways of manipulating this pathway could provide insights into 
the mechanism and treatment of opposing pathological states. Blocking the 
CD28/B7 pathway could result in immunosuppression, with implications for the 
treatment of autoimmune diseases, organ transplantation, and graft vs. host 
disease. Activating the CD28/B7 pathway could be useful for including the immune 
system to recognize and eliminate tumors that evade the immune system. Finally, 
the CD28/B7 pathway could be involved with maintaining immune tolerance, as 
recent studies suggest the preferential binding of the B7-CTLA4 pathway results 
in the down-regulation of the responding T cells. Thus, the B7/CD28/CTLA4 
pathway has the ability to both positively and negatively regulate immune 
responses.

DOI: 10.1615/critrevimmunol.v18.i5.10
PMID: 9784967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
