---
pmid: '31837246'
title: High-throughput competitive fluorescence polarization assay reveals functional
  redundancy in the S100 protein family.
authors:
- Simon MA
- Ecsédi P
- Kovács GM
- Póti ÁL
- Reményi A
- Kardos J
- Gógl G
- Nyitray L
journal: FEBS J
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.15175
---

# High-throughput competitive fluorescence polarization assay reveals functional redundancy in the S100 protein family.
**Authors:** Simon MA, Ecsédi P, Kovács GM, Póti ÁL, Reményi A, Kardos J, Gógl G, Nyitray L
**Journal:** FEBS J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.15175](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.15175)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2020 Jul;287(13):2834-2846. doi: 10.1111/febs.15175. Epub 2020 Jan 3.

High-throughput competitive fluorescence polarization assay reveals functional 
redundancy in the S100 protein family.

Simon MA(1), Ecsédi P(1), Kovács GM(2), Póti ÁL(3), Reményi A(3), Kardos J(1), 
Gógl G(1)(4), Nyitray L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Plant Anatomy, Institute of Biology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Research Center for Natural Sciences, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Equipe Labellisee Ligue 2015, Department of Integrated Structural Biology, 
Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM 
U1258, CNRS UMR 7104, Universite de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

The calcium-binding, vertebrate-specific S100 protein family consists of 20 
paralogs in humans (referred as the S100ome), with several clinically important 
members. To explore their protein-protein interactions (PPIs) quantitatively, we 
have chosen an unbiased, high-throughput, competitive fluorescence polarization 
(FP) assay that revealed a partial functional redundancy when the complete 
S100ome (n = 20) was tested against numerous model partners (n = 13). Based on 
their specificity, the S100ome can be grouped into two distinct classes: 
promiscuous and orphan. In the first group, members bound to several ligands 
(> 4-5) with comparable high affinity, while in the second one, the paralogs 
bound only one partner weakly, or no ligand was identified. Our results 
demonstrate that FP assays are highly suitable for quantitative interaction 
profiling of selected protein families. Moreover, we provide evidence that 
PPI-based phenotypic characterization can complement or even exceed the 
information obtained from the sequence-based phylogenetic analysis of the 
S100ome, an evolutionary young protein family.

© 2019 The Authors. The FEBS Journal published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15175
PMID: 31837246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
