---
pmid: '10479688'
title: Bax-dependent caspase-3 activation is a key determinant in p53-induced apoptosis
  in neurons.
authors:
- Cregan SP
- MacLaurin JG
- Craig CG
- Robertson GS
- Nicholson DW
- Park DS
- Slack RS
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6782440
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-07860.1999
---

# Bax-dependent caspase-3 activation is a key determinant in p53-induced apoptosis in neurons.
**Authors:** Cregan SP, MacLaurin JG, Craig CG, Robertson GS, Nicholson DW, Park DS, Slack RS
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-07860.1999](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-07860.1999)
**PMC:** [PMC6782440](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6782440/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 1999 Sep 15;19(18):7860-9. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-07860.1999.

Bax-dependent caspase-3 activation is a key determinant in p53-induced apoptosis 
in neurons.

Cregan SP(1), MacLaurin JG, Craig CG, Robertson GS, Nicholson DW, Park DS, Slack 
RS.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, 
K1H-8M5, Canada.

p53 is a pivotal molecule regulating the death of neurons both after acute 
injury and during development. The molecular mechanisms by which p53 induces 
apoptosis in neuronal cells, however, are not well understood. We have shown 
previously that adenovirus-mediated p53 gene delivery to neurons was sufficient 
to induce apoptosis. In the present study we have examined the molecular 
mechanism by which p53 evokes neuronal cell death. Adenovirus-mediated delivery 
of p53 to cerebellar granule neurons resulted in caspase-3 (CPP32) activation 
followed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated biotinylated UTP nick 
end labeling (TUNEL) staining and loss of viability as determined by an MTT 
survival assay. To determine whether Bax is essential for caspase-3 activation, 
p53 was expressed in Bax-deficient cells. Bax null neurons did not exhibit 
caspase-3 activation in response to p53 and were protected from apoptosis. To 
determine whether Bax-dependent caspase-3 activation was required in 
p53-mediated neuronal cell death, caspase-3-deficient neurons were examined. Our 
results indicate that caspase-3-deficient neurons exhibit a remarkable delay in 
apoptosis and a dramatic decrease in TUNEL-positive cells. These studies 
demonstrate that p53-induced cell death in postmitotic neurons involves a 
Bax-dependent caspase-3 activation, suggesting that these molecules are 
important determinants in neuronal cell death after injury.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-18-07860.1999
PMCID: PMC6782440
PMID: 10479688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
