---
pmid: '18621681'
title: Crystal structures of substrate-bound and substrate-free cytochrome P450 46A1,
  the principal cholesterol hydroxylase in the brain.
authors:
- Mast N
- White MA
- Bjorkhem I
- Johnson EF
- Stout CD
- Pikuleva IA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2474539
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0803717105
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structures of substrate-bound and substrate-free cytochrome P450 46A1, the principal cholesterol hydroxylase in the brain.
**Authors:** Mast N, White MA, Bjorkhem I, Johnson EF, Stout CD, Pikuleva IA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0803717105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0803717105)
**PMC:** [PMC2474539](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2474539/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 15;105(28):9546-51. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0803717105. Epub 2008 Jul 9.

Crystal structures of substrate-bound and substrate-free cytochrome P450 46A1, 
the principal cholesterol hydroxylase in the brain.

Mast N(1), White MA, Bjorkhem I, Johnson EF, Stout CD, Pikuleva IA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
TX 77555, USA.

By converting cholesterol to 24S-hydroxycholesterol, cytochrome P450 46A1 
(CYP46A1) initiates the major pathway for cholesterol removal from the brain. 
Two crystal structures of CYP46A1 were determined. First is the 1.9-A structure 
of CYP46A1 complexed with a high-affinity substrate cholesterol 3-sulfate 
(CH-3S). The second structure is that of the substrate-free CYP46A1 at 2.4-A 
resolution. CH-3S is bound in the productive orientation and occupies the entire 
length of the banana-shaped hydrophobic active-site cavity. A unique helix B'-C 
loop insertion (residues 116-120) contributes to positioning cholesterol for 
oxygenation catalyzed by CYP46A1. A comparison with the substrate-free structure 
reveals substantial substrate-induced conformational changes in CYP46A1 and 
suggests that structurally distinct compounds could bind in the enzyme active 
site. In vitro assays were performed to characterize the effect of different 
therapeutic agents on cholesterol hydroxylase activity of purified full-length 
recombinant CYP46A1, and several strong inhibitors and modest coactivators of 
CYP46A1 were identified. Structural and biochemical data provide evidence that 
CYP46A1 activity could be altered by exposure to some therapeutic drugs and 
potentially other xenobiotics.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0803717105
PMCID: PMC2474539
PMID: 18621681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
