---
pmid: '23452853'
title: Regulation of WASH-dependent actin polymerization and protein trafficking by
  ubiquitination.
authors:
- Hao YH
- Doyle JM
- Ramanathan S
- Gomez TS
- Jia D
- Xu M
- Chen ZJ
- Billadeau DD
- Rosen MK
- Potts PR
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3640276
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.051
---

# Regulation of WASH-dependent actin polymerization and protein trafficking by ubiquitination.
**Authors:** Hao YH, Doyle JM, Ramanathan S, Gomez TS, Jia D, Xu M, Chen ZJ, Billadeau DD, Rosen MK, Potts PR
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.051)
**PMC:** [PMC3640276](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3640276/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2013 Feb 28;152(5):1051-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.051.

Regulation of WASH-dependent actin polymerization and protein trafficking by 
ubiquitination.

Hao YH(1), Doyle JM, Ramanathan S, Gomez TS, Jia D, Xu M, Chen ZJ, Billadeau DD, 
Rosen MK, Potts PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, UT Southwestern Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Endosomal protein trafficking is an essential cellular process that is 
deregulated in several diseases and targeted by pathogens. Here, we describe a 
role for ubiquitination in this process. We find that the E3 RING ubiquitin 
ligase, MAGE-L2-TRIM27, localizes to endosomes through interactions with the 
retromer complex. Knockdown of MAGE-L2-TRIM27 or the Ube2O E2 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme significantly impaired retromer-mediated transport. 
We further demonstrate that MAGE-L2-TRIM27 ubiquitin ligase activity is required 
for nucleation of endosomal F-actin by the WASH regulatory complex, a known 
regulator of retromer-mediated transport. Mechanistic studies showed that 
MAGE-L2-TRIM27 facilitates K63-linked ubiquitination of WASH K220. 
Significantly, disruption of WASH ubiquitination impaired endosomal F-actin 
nucleation and retromer-dependent transport. These findings provide a cellular 
and molecular function for MAGE-L2-TRIM27 in retrograde transport, including an 
unappreciated role of K63-linked ubiquitination and identification of an 
activating signal of the WASH regulatory complex.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.051
PMCID: PMC3640276
PMID: 23452853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
