---
pmid: '29309586'
title: Cytosolic HSC20 integrates de novo iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis with the
  CIAO1-mediated transfer to recipients.
authors:
- Kim KS
- Maio N
- Singh A
- Rouault TA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6075588
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy004
---

# Cytosolic HSC20 integrates de novo iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis with the CIAO1-mediated transfer to recipients.
**Authors:** Kim KS, Maio N, Singh A, Rouault TA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddy004](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddy004)
**PMC:** [PMC6075588](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6075588/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Mar 1;27(5):837-852. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy004.

Cytosolic HSC20 integrates de novo iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis with the 
CIAO1-mediated transfer to recipients.

Kim KS(1), Maio N(1), Singh A(1), Rouault TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are cofactors in hundreds of proteins involved in 
multiple cellular processes, including mitochondrial respiration, the 
maintenance of genome stability, ribosome biogenesis and translation. Fe-S 
cluster biogenesis is performed by multiple enzymes that are highly conserved 
throughout evolution, and mutations in numerous biogenesis factors are now 
recognized to cause a wide range of previously uncategorized rare human 
diseases. Recently, a complex formed of components of the cytoplasmic Fe-S 
cluster assembly (CIA) machinery, consisting of CIAO1, FAM96B and MMS19, was 
found to deliver Fe-S clusters to a subset of proteins involved in DNA 
metabolism, but it was unclear how this complex acquired its fully synthesized 
Fe-S clusters, because Fe-S clusters have been alleged to be assembled de novo 
solely in the mitochondrial matrix. Here, we investigated the potential role of 
the human cochaperone HSC20 in cytosolic Fe-S assembly and found that HSC20 
assists Fe-S cluster delivery to cytosolic and nuclear Fe-S proteins. Cytosolic 
HSC20 (C-HSC20) mediated complex formation between components of the cytosolic 
Fe-S biogenesis pathway (ISC), including the primary scaffold, ISCU1, and the 
cysteine desulfurase, NFS1, and the CIA targeting complex, consisting of CIAO1, 
FAM96B and MMS19, to facilitate Fe-S cluster insertion into cytoplasmic and 
nuclear Fe-S recipients. Thus, C-HSC20 integrates initial Fe-S biosynthesis with 
the transfer activities of the CIA targeting system. Our studies demonstrate 
that a novel cytosolic pathway functions in parallel to the mitochondrial ISC to 
perform de novo Fe-S biogenesis, and to escort Fe-S clusters to cytoplasmic and 
nuclear proteins.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddy004
PMCID: PMC6075588
PMID: 29309586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
