---
pmid: '10818100'
title: Endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin 1-lbeta (ERO1-Lbeta), a human gene induced
  in the course of the unfolded protein response.
authors:
- Pagani M
- Fabbri M
- Benedetti C
- Fassio A
- Pilati S
- Bulleid NJ
- Cabibbo A
- Sitia R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003061200
---

# Endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin 1-lbeta (ERO1-Lbeta), a human gene induced in the course of the unfolded protein response.
**Authors:** Pagani M, Fabbri M, Benedetti C, Fassio A, Pilati S, Bulleid NJ, Cabibbo A, Sitia R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003061200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003061200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 4;275(31):23685-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003061200.

Endoplasmic reticulum oxidoreductin 1-lbeta (ERO1-Lbeta), a human gene induced 
in the course of the unfolded protein response.

Pagani M(1), Fabbri M, Benedetti C, Fassio A, Pilati S, Bulleid NJ, Cabibbo A, 
Sitia R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology and Medicine, DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific 
Institute, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano, Italy.

Oxidative conditions must be generated in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to 
allow disulfide bond formation in secretory proteins. A family of conserved 
genes, termed ERO for ER oxidoreductins, plays a key role in this process. We 
have previously described the human gene ERO1-L, which complements several 
phenotypic traits of the yeast thermo-sensitive mutant ero1-1 (Cabibbo, A., 
Pagani, M., Fabbri, M., Rocchi, M., Farmery, M. R., Bulleid, N. J., and Sitia, 
R. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 4827-4833). Here, we report the cloning and 
characterization of a novel human member of this family, ERO1-Lbeta. 
Immunofluorescence, endoglycosidase sensitivity, and in vitro 
translation/translocation assays reveal that the products of the ERO1-Lbeta gene 
are primarily localized in the ER of mammalian cells. The ability to allow 
growth at 37 degrees C and to alleviate the "unfolded protein response" when 
expressed in ero1-1 cells indicates that ERO1-Lbeta is involved also in 
generating oxidative conditions in the ER. ERO1-L and ERO1-Lbeta display 
different tissue distributions. Furthermore, only ERO1-Lbeta transcripts are 
induced in the course of the unfolded protein response. Our results suggest a 
complex regulation of ER redox homeostasis in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003061200
PMID: 10818100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
