---
pmid: '9774667'
title: 'Preprotein translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane: molecular dissection
  and assembly of the general import pore complex.'
authors:
- Dekker PJ
- Ryan MT
- Brix J
- Müller H
- Hönlinger A
- Pfanner N
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC109237
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.11.6515
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Preprotein translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane: molecular dissection and assembly of the general import pore complex.
**Authors:** Dekker PJ, Ryan MT, Brix J, Müller H, Hönlinger A, Pfanner N
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.11.6515](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.11.6515)
**PMC:** [PMC109237](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC109237/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6515-24. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.11.6515.

Preprotein translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane: molecular dissection 
and assembly of the general import pore complex.

Dekker PJ(1), Ryan MT, Brix J, Müller H, Hönlinger A, Pfanner N.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Freiburg, D-79104 
Freiburg, Germany.

The preprotein translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane (Tom) is a 
multisubunit machinery containing receptors and a general import pore (GIP). We 
have analyzed the molecular architecture of the Tom machinery. The receptor 
Tom22 stably associates with Tom40, the main component of the GIP, in a complex 
with a molecular weight of approximately 400,000 ( approximately 400K), while 
the other receptors, Tom20 and Tom70, are more loosely associated with this GIP 
complex and can be found in distinct subcomplexes. A yeast mutant lacking both 
Tom20 and Tom70 can still form the GIP complex when sufficient amounts of Tom22 
are synthesized. Besides the essential proteins Tom22 and Tom40, the GIP complex 
contains three small subunits, Tom5, Tom6, and Tom7. In mutant mitochondria 
lacking Tom6, the interaction between Tom22 and Tom40 is destabilized, leading 
to the dissociation of Tom22 and the generation of a subcomplex of approximately 
100K containing Tom40, Tom7, and Tom5. Tom6 is required to promote but not to 
maintain a stable association between Tom22 and Tom40. The following conclusions 
are suggested. (i) The GIP complex, containing Tom40, Tom22, and three small Tom 
proteins, forms the central unit of the outer membrane import machinery. (ii) 
Tom20 and Tom70 are not essential for the generation of the GIP complex. (iii) 
Tom6 functions as an assembly factor for Tom22, promoting its stable association 
with Tom40.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.11.6515
PMCID: PMC109237
PMID: 9774667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
