---
pmid: '2529117'
title: Leucine zipper structure of the protein CRE-BP1 binding to the cyclic AMP response
  element in brain.
authors:
- Maekawa T
- Sakura H
- Kanei-Ishii C
- Sudo T
- Yoshimura T
- Fujisawa J
- Yoshida M
- Ishii S
journal: EMBO J
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC401081
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03610.x
---

# Leucine zipper structure of the protein CRE-BP1 binding to the cyclic AMP response element in brain.
**Authors:** Maekawa T, Sakura H, Kanei-Ishii C, Sudo T, Yoshimura T, Fujisawa J, Yoshida M, Ishii S
**Journal:** EMBO J (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03610.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03610.x)
**PMC:** [PMC401081](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC401081/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1989 Jul;8(7):2023-8. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03610.x.

Leucine zipper structure of the protein CRE-BP1 binding to the cyclic AMP
response element in brain.

Maekawa T(1), Sakura H, Kanei-Ishii C, Sudo T, Yoshimura T, Fujisawa J, Yoshida
M, Ishii S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

By screening a lambda gt11 library with the multimerized sequence of the cAMP
response element (CRE), we isolated human clones encoding the CRE binding
protein, CRE-BP1, from a human brain cDNA library. CRE-BP1 expressed in
Escherichia coli bound not only to the CRE element of the somatostatin and
fibronectin genes, but also to the CRE element of the adenovirus E4 gene,
suggesting that the protein was not distinguishable from the adenovirus
transcription factor, ATF. The human CRE-BP1 clone encoded a 54.5 kd protein
similar at its carboxy terminus to the leucine zipper motifs found in other
enhancer binding proteins such as C/EBP and c-jun/AP-1. CRE-BP1 mRNA was
expressed in all of the cells examined and was abundant in brain. The structure
of CRE-BP1 and its recognition elements suggest that cellular response to
extracellular stimuli is controlled by a family of transcription factors that
bind to related cis-active elements and that contain several highly conserved
domains.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1989.tb03610.x
PMCID: PMC401081
PMID: 2529117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

By screening a lambda gt11 library with the multimerized sequence of the cAMP response element (CRE), we isolated human clones encoding the CRE binding protein, CRE-BP1, from a human brain cDNA library. CRE-BP1 expressed in Escherichia coli bound not only to the CRE element of the somatostatin and fibronectin genes, but also to the CRE element of the adenovirus E4 gene, suggesting that the protein was not distinguishable from the adenovirus transcription factor, ATF. The human CRE-BP1 clone encoded a 54.5 kd protein similar at its carboxy terminus to the leucine zipper motifs found in other enhancer binding proteins such as C/EBP and c-jun/AP-1. CRE-BP1 mRNA was expressed in all of the cells examined and was abundant in brain. The structure of CRE-BP1 and its recognition elements suggest that cellular response to extracellular stimuli is controlled by a family of transcription factors that bind to related cis-active elements and that contain several highly conserved domains.
