---
pmid: '12939278'
title: Fbs2 is a new member of the E3 ubiquitin ligase family that recognizes sugar
  chains.
authors:
- Yoshida Y
- Tokunaga F
- Chiba T
- Iwai K
- Tanaka K
- Tai T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304157200
---

# Fbs2 is a new member of the E3 ubiquitin ligase family that recognizes sugar chains.
**Authors:** Yoshida Y, Tokunaga F, Chiba T, Iwai K, Tanaka K, Tai T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304157200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304157200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43877-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304157200. Epub 
2003 Aug 25.

Fbs2 is a new member of the E3 ubiquitin ligase family that recognizes sugar 
chains.

Yoshida Y(1), Tokunaga F, Chiba T, Iwai K, Tanaka K, Tai T.

Author information:
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, 
Japan. yyosida@rinshoken.or.jp

F-box proteins are substrate recognition components of Skp1-Cullin1-F-box 
protein-Roc1 (SCF) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases. We reported previously that 
Fbs1 (F-box protein that recognizes sugar chains; equivalent to Fbx2 or NFB42) 
binds specifically to proteins attached with high mannose oligosaccharides and 
subsequently contributes to elimination of N-glycoproteins in cytosol (Yoshida, 
Y., Chiba, T., Tokunaga, F., Kawasaki, H., Iwai, K., Suzuki, T., Ito, Y., 
Matsuoka, K., Yoshida, M., Tanaka, K., and Tai, T. (2002) Nature 418, 438-442). 
Here we report the identification of another F-box protein that recognizes 
N-glycan, Fbs2 (called Fbx6b or FBG2 previously). Although the expression of 
Fbs1 was restricted to the adult brain and testis, the Fbs2 transcript was 
widely expressed. The Fbs2 protein forms an SCFFbs2 ubiquitinligase complex that 
targets sugar chains in N-glycoproteins for ubiquitylation. Only glycoproteins 
bound to concanavalin A lectin and not to wheat germ agglutinin or Ricinus 
communis agglutinin interacted with Fbs2 in various tissues and cell lines. 
Pull-down analysis using various oligosaccharides revealed that Man3-9GlcNAc2 
glycans were required for efficient Fbs2 binding, whereas modifications of 
mannose residues by other sugars or deletion of inner GlcNAc reduced Fbs2 
binding. Fbs2 interacted with N-glycans of T-cell receptor alpha-subunit 
(TCRalpha), a typical substrate of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated 
degradation (ERAD) pathway, and the forced expression of mutant Fbs2DeltaF, 
which lacks the F-box domain essential for forming the SCF complex, and decrease 
of endogenous Fbs2 by small interfering RNA led to inhibition of TCRalpha 
degradation in cells. Thus, Fbs2 is a novel member of F-box protein family that 
recognizes N-glycans and plays a role in ERAD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304157200
PMID: 12939278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
