---
pmid: '8044844'
title: The crystal structure of human hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
  with bound GMP.
authors:
- Eads JC
- Scapin G
- Xu Y
- Grubmeyer C
- Sacchettini JC
journal: Cell
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90301-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The crystal structure of human hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase with bound GMP.
**Authors:** Eads JC, Scapin G, Xu Y, Grubmeyer C, Sacchettini JC
**Journal:** Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(94)90301-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90301-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1994 Jul 29;78(2):325-34. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90301-8.

The crystal structure of human hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase 
with bound GMP.

Eads JC(1), Scapin G, Xu Y, Grubmeyer C, Sacchettini JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New 
York 10461.

The crystal structure of HGPRTase with bound GMP has been determined and refined 
to 2.5 A resolution. The enzyme has a core alpha/beta structure resembling the 
nucleotide-binding fold of dehydrogenases, and a second lobe composed of 
residues from the amino and carboxy termini. The GMP molecule binds in an anti 
conformation in a solvent-exposed cleft of the enzyme. Lys-165, which forms a 
hydrogen bond to O6 of GMP, appears to be critical for determining the 
specificity for guanine and hypoxanthine over adenine. The location of active 
site residues also provides evidence for a possible mechanism for general 
base-assisted HGPRTase catalysis. A rationalization of the effects on stability 
and activity of naturally occurring single amino acid mutations of HGPRTase is 
presented, including a discussion of several mutations at the active site that 
lead to Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90301-8
PMID: 8044844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
