---
pmid: '17604275'
title: Elevation of cellular NAD levels by nicotinic acid and involvement of nicotinic
  acid phosphoribosyltransferase in human cells.
authors:
- Hara N
- Yamada K
- Shibata T
- Osago H
- Hashimoto T
- Tsuchiya M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610357200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Elevation of cellular NAD levels by nicotinic acid and involvement of nicotinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase in human cells.
**Authors:** Hara N, Yamada K, Shibata T, Osago H, Hashimoto T, Tsuchiya M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M610357200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M610357200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 24;282(34):24574-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610357200. Epub 
2007 Jun 29.

Elevation of cellular NAD levels by nicotinic acid and involvement of nicotinic 
acid phosphoribosyltransferase in human cells.

Hara N(1), Yamada K, Shibata T, Osago H, Hashimoto T, Tsuchiya M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, 89-1, 
Izumo, Shimane 693-8501, Japan. nhara@shimane-u.ac.jp

NAD plays critical roles in various biological processes through the function of 
SIRT1. Although classical studies in mammals showed that nicotinic acid (NA) is 
a better precursor than nicotinamide (Nam) in elevating tissue NAD levels, 
molecular details of NAD synthesis from NA remain largely unknown. We here 
identified NA phosphoribosyltransferase (NAPRT) in humans and provided direct 
evidence of tight link between NAPRT and the increase in cellular NAD levels. 
The enzyme was abundantly expressed in the small intestine, liver, and kidney in 
mice and mediated [(14)C]NAD synthesis from [(14)C]NA in human cells. In cells 
expressing endogenous NAPRT, the addition of NA but not Nam almost doubled 
cellular NAD contents and decreased cytotoxicity by H(2)O(2). Both effects were 
reversed by knockdown of NAPRT expression. These results indicate that NAPRT is 
essential for NA to increase cellular NAD levels and, thus, to prevent oxidative 
stress of the cells. Kinetic analyses revealed that NAPRT, but not Nam 
phosphoribosyltransferase (NamPRT, also known as pre-B-cell colony-enhancing 
factor or visfatin), is insensitive to the physiological concentration of NAD. 
Together, we conclude that NA elevates cellular NAD levels through NAPRT 
function and, thus, protects the cells against stress, partly due to lack of 
feedback inhibition of NAPRT but not NamPRT by NAD. The ability of NA to 
increase cellular NAD contents may account for some of the clinically observed 
effects of the vitamin and further implies a novel application of the vitamin to 
treat diseases such as those associated with the depletion of cellular NAD 
pools.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M610357200
PMID: 17604275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
