---
pmid: '21454652'
title: SEL1L protein critically determines the stability of the HRD1-SEL1L endoplasmic
  reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) complex to optimize the degradation kinetics
  of ERAD substrates.
authors:
- Iida Y
- Fujimori T
- Okawa K
- Nagata K
- Wada I
- Hosokawa N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3089536
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215871
---

# SEL1L protein critically determines the stability of the HRD1-SEL1L endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) complex to optimize the degradation kinetics of ERAD substrates.
**Authors:** Iida Y, Fujimori T, Okawa K, Nagata K, Wada I, Hosokawa N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.215871](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.215871)
**PMC:** [PMC3089536](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3089536/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):16929-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215871. Epub 
2011 Mar 24.

SEL1L protein critically determines the stability of the HRD1-SEL1L endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) complex to optimize the degradation 
kinetics of ERAD substrates.

Iida Y(1), Fujimori T, Okawa K, Nagata K, Wada I, Hosokawa N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8397, 
Japan.

The mammalian HRD1-SEL1L complex provides a scaffold for endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated degradation (ERAD), thereby connecting luminal substrates for 
ubiquitination at the cytoplasmic surface after their retrotranslocation through 
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. In this study the stability of the mammalian 
HRD1-SEL1L complex was assessed by performing siRNA-mediated knockdown of each 
of its components. Although endogenous SEL1L is a long-lived protein, the 
half-life of SEL1L was greatly reduced when HRD1 is silenced. Conversely, 
transiently expressed SEL1L was rapidly degraded but was stabilized when HRD1 
was coexpressed. This was in contrast to the yeast Hrd1p-Hrd3p, where Hrd1p is 
destabilized by the depletion of Hrd3p, the SEL1L homologue. Endogenous 
HRD1-SEL1L formed a large ERAD complex (Complex I) associating with numerous 
ERAD components including ERAD lectin OS-9, membrane-spanning Derlin-1/2, VIMP, 
and Herp, whereas transiently expressed HRD1-SEL1L formed a smaller complex 
(Complex II) that was associated with OS-9 but not with Derlin-1/2, VIMP, or 
Herp. Despite its lack of stable association with the latter components, Complex 
II supported the retrotranslocation and degradation of model ERAD substrates 
α1-antitrypsin null Hong-Kong (NHK) and its variant NHK-QQQ lacking the 
N-glycosylation sites. NHK-QQQ was rapidly degraded when SEL1L was transiently 
expressed, whereas the simultaneous transfection of HRD1 diminished that effect. 
SEL1L unassociated with HRD1 was degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, 
which suggests the involvement of a ubiquitin-ligase other than HRD1 in the 
rapid degradation of both SEL1L and NHK-QQQ. These results indicate that the 
regulation of the stability and assembly of the HRD1-SEL1L complex is critical 
to optimize the degradation kinetics of ERAD substrates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215871
PMCID: PMC3089536
PMID: 21454652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
