---
pmid: '17094969'
title: Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) inhibits protein synthesis by interacting with
  the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit p44 (eIF3g).
authors:
- Kim JT
- Kim KD
- Song EY
- Lee HG
- Kim JW
- Kim JW
- Chae SK
- Kim E
- Lee MS
- Yang Y
- Lim JS
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.049
---

# Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) inhibits protein synthesis by interacting with the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit p44 (eIF3g).
**Authors:** Kim JT, Kim KD, Song EY, Lee HG, Kim JW, Kim JW, Chae SK, Kim E, Lee MS, Yang Y, Lim JS
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.049)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Nov 27;580(27):6375-83. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.049.
Epub  2006 Nov 3.

Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) inhibits protein synthesis by interacting with 
the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit p44 (eIF3g).

Kim JT(1), Kim KD, Song EY, Lee HG, Kim JW, Kim JW, Chae SK, Kim E, Lee MS, Yang 
Y, Lim JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Research Center for Women's Diseases, 
Sookmyung Women's University, Chungpa-Dong, Yongsan-Gu, Seoul 140-742, Republic 
of Korea.

Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) is a ubiquitous FAD-binding flavoprotein 
comprised of 613 amino acids and plays an important role in caspase-independent 
apoptosis. During apoptotic induction, AIF is translocated from the 
mitochondrial intermembrane space to the nucleus, where it interacts with DNA 
and activates a nuclear endonuclease. By performing a yeast two-hybrid screen 
with mature AIF, we have isolated the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 
subunit p44 (eIF3g). Our deletion mutant analysis revealed that the eIF3g 
N-terminus interacts with the C-terminal region of AIF. The direct interaction 
between AIF and eIF3g was confirmed in a GST pull-down assay and also verified 
by the results of co-immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy studies. Using 
an in vitro TNT coupled transcription-translation system, we found that mature 
AIF could inhibit newly-translated protein synthesis and this inhibition was 
significantly blocked by eIF3g competitively. These results were also confirmed 
in cells. In addition, mature AIF overexpression specifically resulted in the 
activation of caspase-7, thereby amplifying the inhibition of protein synthesis 
including eIF3g cleavage. Our data suggest that eIF3g is one of the cytosolic 
targets that interacts with mature AIF, and provide insight into the AIF's 
cellular functions of the inhibition of protein synthesis during apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.049
PMID: 17094969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
