---
pmid: '10655068'
title: Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase cause
  adult-onset sensory motor neuropathy.
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Denis S
- Clayton PT
- Graham A
- Rees JE
- Allen JT
- McLean BN
- Brown AY
- Vreken P
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/72861
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase cause adult-onset sensory motor neuropathy.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Clayton PT, Graham A, Rees JE, Allen JT, McLean BN, Brown AY, Vreken P, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/72861](https://doi.org/10.1038/72861)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Feb;24(2):188-91. doi: 10.1038/72861.

Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase cause 
adult-onset sensory motor neuropathy.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Denis S, Clayton PT, Graham A, Rees JE, Allen JT, McLean BN, 
Brown AY, Vreken P, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical 
Center, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Sensory motor neuropathy is associated with various inherited disorders 
including Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, X-linked 
adrenoleukodystrophy/adrenomyeloneuropathy and Refsum disease. In the latter 
two, the neuropathy is thought to result from the accumulation of specific fatty 
acids. We describe here three patients with elevated plasma concentrations of 
pristanic acid (a branched-chain fatty acid) and C27-bile-acid intermediates. 
Two of the patients suffered from adult-onset sensory motor neuropathy. One 
patient also had pigmentary retinopathy, suggesting Refsum disease, whereas the 
other patient had upper motor neuron signs in the legs, suggesting 
adrenomyeloneuropathy. The third patient was a child without neuropathy. In all 
three patients we discovered a deficiency of alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase 
(AMACR). This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of pristanoyl-CoA and 
C27-bile acyl-CoAs to their (S)-stereoisomers, which are the only stereoisomers 
that can be degraded via peroxisomal beta-oxidation. Sequence analysis of AMACR 
cDNA from the patients identified two different mutations that are likely to 
cause disease, based on analysis in Escherichia coli. Our findings have 
implications for the diagnosis of adult-onset neuropathies of unknown aetiology.

DOI: 10.1038/72861
PMID: 10655068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
