---
pmid: '12060739'
title: 'p38 is essential for the assembly and stability of macromolecular tRNA synthetase
  complex: implications for its physiological significance.'
authors:
- Kim JY
- Kang YS
- Lee JW
- Kim HJ
- Ahn YH
- Park H
- Ko YG
- Kim S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC122994
doi: 10.1073/pnas.122110199
---

# p38 is essential for the assembly and stability of macromolecular tRNA synthetase complex: implications for its physiological significance.
**Authors:** Kim JY, Kang YS, Lee JW, Kim HJ, Ahn YH, Park H, Ko YG, Kim S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.122110199](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122110199)
**PMC:** [PMC122994](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC122994/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 11;99(12):7912-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.122110199.

p38 is essential for the assembly and stability of macromolecular tRNA 
synthetase complex: implications for its physiological significance.

Kim JY(1), Kang YS, Lee JW, Kim HJ, Ahn YH, Park H, Ko YG, Kim S.

Author information:
(1)National Creative Research Initiatives Center for ARS Network, College of 
Pharmacy, Seoul National University, San 56-1, Shillim-dong, Kwanak-gu, Seoul 
151-746, Korea.

Mammalian tRNA synthetases form a macromolecular complex with three nonenzyme 
factors: p43, p38, and p18. Here we introduced a mutation within the mouse p38 
gene to understand its functional significance for the formation of the 
multi-tRNA synthetase complex. The complex was completely disintegrated by the 
deficiency of p38. In addition, the protein levels and catalytic activities of 
the component enzymes and cofactors were severely decreased. A partial 
truncation of the p38 polypeptide separated the associated components into 
different subdomains. The mutant mice showed lethality within 2 days of birth. 
Thus, this work provides the first evidence, to our knowledge, that p38 is 
essential for the structural integrity of the multi-tRNA synthetase complex and 
mouse viability.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.122110199
PMCID: PMC122994
PMID: 12060739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
