---
pmid: '18660822'
title: A conserved face of the Jagged/Serrate DSL domain is involved in Notch trans-activation
  and cis-inhibition.
authors:
- Cordle J
- Johnson S
- Tay JZ
- Roversi P
- Wilkin MB
- de Madrid BH
- Shimizu H
- Jensen S
- Whiteman P
- Jin B
- Redfield C
- Baron M
- Lea SM
- Handford PA
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2669539
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1457
---

# A conserved face of the Jagged/Serrate DSL domain is involved in Notch trans-activation and cis-inhibition.
**Authors:** Cordle J, Johnson S, Tay JZ, Roversi P, Wilkin MB, de Madrid BH, Shimizu H, Jensen S, Whiteman P, Jin B, Redfield C, Baron M, Lea SM, Handford PA
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.1457](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.1457)
**PMC:** [PMC2669539](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2669539/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Aug;15(8):849-57. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1457. Epub 2008 
Jul 27.

A conserved face of the Jagged/Serrate DSL domain is involved in Notch 
trans-activation and cis-inhibition.

Cordle J(1), Johnson S, Tay JZ, Roversi P, Wilkin MB, de Madrid BH, Shimizu H, 
Jensen S, Whiteman P, Jin B, Redfield C, Baron M, Lea SM, Handford PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK.

The Notch receptor and its ligands are key components in a core metazoan 
signaling pathway that regulates the spatial patterning, timing and outcome of 
many cell-fate decisions. Ligands contain a disulfide-rich Delta/Serrate/LAG-2 
(DSL) domain required for Notch trans-activation or cis-inhibition. Here we 
report the X-ray structure of a receptor binding region of a Notch ligand, the 
DSL-EGF3 domains of human Jagged-1 (J-1(DSL-EGF3)). The structure reveals a 
highly conserved face of the DSL domain, and we show, by functional analysis of 
Drosophila melanogster ligand mutants, that this surface is required for both 
cis- and trans-regulatory interactions with Notch. We also identify, using NMR, 
a surface of Notch-1 involved in J-1(DSL-EGF3) binding. Our data imply that cis- 
and trans-regulation may occur through the formation of structurally distinct 
complexes that, unexpectedly, involve the same surfaces on both ligand and 
receptor.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.1457
PMCID: PMC2669539
PMID: 18660822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
