---
pmid: '22939621'
title: Step-wise methylation of histone H3K9 positions heterochromatin at the nuclear
  periphery.
authors:
- Towbin BD
- González-Aguilera C
- Sack R
- Gaidatzis D
- Kalck V
- Meister P
- Askjaer P
- Gasser SM
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051
---

# Step-wise methylation of histone H3K9 positions heterochromatin at the nuclear periphery.
**Authors:** Towbin BD, González-Aguilera C, Sack R, Gaidatzis D, Kalck V, Meister P, Askjaer P, Gasser SM
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 Aug 31;150(5):934-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051.

Step-wise methylation of histone H3K9 positions heterochromatin at the nuclear 
periphery.

Towbin BD(1), González-Aguilera C, Sack R, Gaidatzis D, Kalck V, Meister P, 
Askjaer P, Gasser SM.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 
4058 Basel, Switzerland.

The factors that sequester transcriptionally repressed heterochromatin at the 
nuclear periphery are currently unknown. In a genome-wide RNAi screen, we found 
that depletion of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) synthetase reduces histone 
methylation globally and causes derepression and release of heterochromatin from 
the nuclear periphery in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. Analysis of histone 
methyltransferases (HMTs) showed that elimination of two HMTs, MET-2 and SET-25, 
mimics the loss of SAM synthetase, abrogating the perinuclear attachment of 
heterochromatic transgenes and of native chromosomal arms rich in histone H3 
lysine 9 methylation. The two HMTs target H3K9 in a consecutive fashion: MET-2, 
a SETDB1 homolog, mediates mono- and dimethylation, and SET-25, a previously 
uncharacterized HMT, deposits H3K9me3. SET-25 colocalizes with its own product 
in perinuclear foci, in a manner dependent on H3K9me3, but not on its catalytic 
domain. This colocalization suggests an autonomous, self-reinforcing mechanism 
for the establishment and propagation of repeat-rich heterochromatin.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051
PMID: 22939621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
