---
pmid: '16816117'
title: A20, a modulator of smooth muscle cell proliferation and apoptosis, prevents
  and induces regression of neointimal hyperplasia.
authors:
- Patel VI
- Daniel S
- Longo CR
- Shrikhande GV
- Scali ST
- Czismadia E
- Groft CM
- Shukri T
- Motley-Dore C
- Ramsey HE
- Fisher MD
- Grey ST
- Arvelo MB
- Ferran C
journal: FASEB J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4981com
---

# A20, a modulator of smooth muscle cell proliferation and apoptosis, prevents and induces regression of neointimal hyperplasia.
**Authors:** Patel VI, Daniel S, Longo CR, Shrikhande GV, Scali ST, Czismadia E, Groft CM, Shukri T, Motley-Dore C, Ramsey HE, Fisher MD, Grey ST, Arvelo MB, Ferran C
**Journal:** FASEB J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.05-4981com](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.05-4981com)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2006 Jul;20(9):1418-30. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4981com.

A20, a modulator of smooth muscle cell proliferation and apoptosis, prevents and 
induces regression of neointimal hyperplasia.

Patel VI(1), Daniel S, Longo CR, Shrikhande GV, Scali ST, Czismadia E, Groft CM, 
Shukri T, Motley-Dore C, Ramsey HE, Fisher MD, Grey ST, Arvelo MB, Ferran C.

Author information:
(1)The Immunobiology Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston 
Massachusetts, USA.

A20 is a NF-kappaB-dependent gene that has dual anti-inflammatory and 
antiapoptotic functions in endothelial cells (EC). The function of A20 in smooth 
muscle cells (SMC) is unknown. We demonstrate that A20 is induced in SMC in 
response to inflammatory stimuli and serves an anti-inflammatory function via 
blockade of NF-kappaB and NF-kappaB-dependent proteins ICAM-1 and MCP-1. A20 
inhibits SMC proliferation via increased expression of cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors p21waf1 and p27kip1. Surprisingly, A20 sensitizes SMC to cytokine- 
and Fas-mediated apoptosis through a novel NO-dependent mechanism. In vivo, 
adenoviral delivery of A20 to medial rat carotid artery SMC after balloon 
angioplasty prevents neointimal hyperplasia by blocking SMC proliferation and 
accelerating re-endothelialization, without causing apoptosis. However, 
expression of A20 in established neointimal lesions leads to their regression 
through increased apoptosis. This is the first demonstration that A20 exerts two 
levels of control of vascular remodeling and healing. A20 prevents neointimal 
hyperplasia through combined anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative functions 
in medial SMC. If SMC evade this first barrier and neointima is formed, A20 has 
a therapeutic potential by uniquely sensitizing neointimal SMC to apoptosis. 
A20-based therapies hold promise for the prevention and treatment of neointimal 
disease.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-4981com
PMID: 16816117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
