---
pmid: '36136088'
title: BiP inactivation due to loss of the deAMPylation function of FICD causes a
  motor neuron disease.
authors:
- Rebelo AP
- Ruiz A
- Dohrn MF
- Wayand M
- Farooq A
- Danzi MC
- Beijer D
- Aaron B
- Vandrovcova J
- Houlden H
- Matalonga L
- Abreu L
- Rouleau G
- Estiar MA
- Van de Vondel L
- Gan-Or Z
- Baets J
- Schüle R
- Zuchner S
journal: Genet Med
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.019
---

# BiP inactivation due to loss of the deAMPylation function of FICD causes a motor neuron disease.
**Authors:** Rebelo AP, Ruiz A, Dohrn MF, Wayand M, Farooq A, Danzi MC, Beijer D, Aaron B, Vandrovcova J, Houlden H, Matalonga L, Abreu L, Rouleau G, Estiar MA, Van de Vondel L, Gan-Or Z, Baets J, Schüle R, Zuchner S
**Journal:** Genet Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.019)

## Abstract

1. Genet Med. 2022 Dec;24(12):2487-2500. doi: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.019. Epub
2022  Sep 22.

BiP inactivation due to loss of the deAMPylation function of FICD causes a motor 
neuron disease.

Rebelo AP(1), Ruiz A(1), Dohrn MF(2), Wayand M(3), Farooq A(4), Danzi MC(1), 
Beijer D(1), Aaron B(1), Vandrovcova J(5), Houlden H(5), Matalonga L(6), Abreu 
L(1), Rouleau G(7), Estiar MA(7), Van de Vondel L(8), Gan-Or Z(7), Baets J(9), 
Schüle R(3), Zuchner S(10).

Author information:
(1)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics and John P. 
Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, FL.
(2)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics and John P. 
Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, FL; Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.
(3)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research (HIH), Center of Neurology, 
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative 
Diseases (DZNE), University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami, Miami, FL.
(5)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Queen Square Institute of 
Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(6)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; The Neuro (Montreal Neurological 
Institute-Hospital), McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(8)Translational Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(9)Translational Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium; Neuromuscular Reference Center, Antwerp 
University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine University of Antwerp, Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(10)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics and John P. 
Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of 
Miami, Miami, FL. Electronic address: szuchner@med.miami.edu.

PURPOSE: The chaperone protein BiP is the master regulator of the unfolded 
protein response in the endoplasmic reticulum. BiP chaperone activity is 
regulated by the post-translational modification AMPylation, exclusively 
provided by FICD. We investigated whether FICD variants identified in patients 
with motor neuron disease could interfere with BiP activity regulation.
METHODS: Exome sequencing was performed to identify causative pathogenic 
variants associated with motor neuron diseases. Functional studies were 
conducted on fibroblasts from patients to explore the molecular mechanism of the 
disease.
RESULTS: We identified biallelic variants in FICD causing a neurodegenerative 
disease of upper and lower motor neurons. Affected individuals harbor a specific 
missense variant, Arg374His, positioned in the catalytic motif of the enzyme and 
important for adenosine triphosphate binding. The mutated residue abolishes 
intramolecular interaction with the regulatory residue Glu234, essential to 
inhibit AMPylation and to promote de-AMPylation by FICD. Consequently, 
fibroblasts from patients with FICD variants have abnormally increased levels of 
AMPylated and thus inactivated BiP.
CONCLUSION: Loss of BiP chaperone activity in patients likely results in a 
chronic impairment of the protein quality control system in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. These findings will guide the development of therapeutic strategies 
for motoneuron and related diseases linked to proteotoxic stress.

Copyright © 2022 American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gim.2022.08.019
PMID: 36136088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interests.
