---
pmid: '11298454'
title: HIV-1 Nef inhibits ASK1-dependent death signalling providing a potential mechanism
  for protecting the infected host cell.
authors:
- Geleziunas R
- Xu W
- Takeda K
- Ichijo H
- Greene WC
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35071111
---

# HIV-1 Nef inhibits ASK1-dependent death signalling providing a potential mechanism for protecting the infected host cell.
**Authors:** Geleziunas R, Xu W, Takeda K, Ichijo H, Greene WC
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35071111](https://doi.org/10.1038/35071111)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2001 Apr 12;410(6830):834-8. doi: 10.1038/35071111.

HIV-1 Nef inhibits ASK1-dependent death signalling providing a potential 
mechanism for protecting the infected host cell.

Geleziunas R(1), Xu W, Takeda K, Ichijo H, Greene WC.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, PO Box 419100, San Francisco, 
California 94141-9100, USA.

In vivo infection of lymphatic tissues by the human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) leads to enhanced apoptosis, which prominently involves uninfected 
bystander cells. Increased killing of such bystander cells is mediated in part 
through Nef induction of Fas ligand (FasL) expression on the surface of the 
virally infected T cells. The subsequent interaction of FasL with Fas (CD95) 
displayed on neighbouring cells, including HIV-1-specific cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes, may lead to bystander cell killing and thus forms an important 
mechanism of immune evasion. As HIV-1 also enhances Fas expression on virally 
infected cells, it is unclear how these hosts avoid rapid cell-autonomous 
apoptosis mediated through cis ligation of Fas by FasL. Here we show that HIV-1 
Nef associates with and inhibits apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), a 
serine/threonine kinase that forms a common and key signalling intermediate in 
the Fas and tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) death-signalling pathways. 
The interaction of Nef with ASK1 inhibits both Fas- and TNFalpha-mediated 
apoptosis, as well as the activation of the downstream c-Jun amino-terminal 
kinase. Our findings reveal a strategy by which HIV-1 Nef promotes the killing 
of bystander cells through the induction of FasL, while simultaneously 
protecting the HIV-1-infected host cell from these same pro-apoptotic signals 
through its interference with ASK1 function.

DOI: 10.1038/35071111
PMID: 11298454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
