---
reference_id: PMID:12910271
title: "Comparative analysis of the genome sequences of Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella bronchiseptica."
authors:
- Parkhill J
- Sebaihia M
- Preston A
- Murphy LD
- Thomson N
- Harris DE
- Holden MT
- Churcher CM
- Bentley SD
- Mungall KL
- Cerdeño-Tárraga AM
- Temple L
- James K
- Harris B
- Quail MA
- Achtman M
- Atkin R
- Baker S
- Basham D
- Bason N
- Cherevach I
- Chillingworth T
- Collins M
- Cronin A
- Davis P
- Doggett J
- Feltwell T
- Goble A
- Hamlin N
- Hauser H
- Holroyd S
- Jagels K
- Leather S
- Moule S
- Norberczak H
- "O'Neil S"
- Ormond D
- Price C
- Rabbinowitsch E
- Rutter S
- Sanders M
- Saunders D
- Seeger K
- Sharp S
- Simmonds M
- Skelton J
- Squares R
- Squares S
- Stevens K
- Unwin L
- Whitehead S
- Barrell BG
- Maskell DJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1038/ng1227
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Bordetella/genetics, metabolism, pathogenicity"
- "Bordetella bronchiseptica/genetics, metabolism, pathogenicity"
- "Bordetella pertussis/genetics, metabolism, pathogenicity"
- "DNA, Bacterial"
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Species Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Comparative analysis of the genome sequences of Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella bronchiseptica.
**Authors:** Parkhill J, Sebaihia M, Preston A, Murphy LD, Thomson N, Harris DE, Holden MT, Churcher CM, Bentley SD, Mungall KL, Cerdeño-Tárraga AM, Temple L, James K, Harris B, Quail MA, Achtman M, Atkin R, Baker S, Basham D, Bason N, Cherevach I, Chillingworth T, Collins M, Cronin A, Davis P, Doggett J, Feltwell T, Goble A, Hamlin N, Hauser H, Holroyd S, Jagels K, Leather S, Moule S, Norberczak H, O'Neil S, Ormond D, Price C, Rabbinowitsch E, Rutter S, Sanders M, Saunders D, Seeger K, Sharp S, Simmonds M, Skelton J, Squares R, Squares S, Stevens K, Unwin L, Whitehead S, Barrell BG, Maskell DJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1227](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1227)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2003 Sep;35(1):32-40. doi: 10.1038/ng1227. Epub 2003 Aug 10.

Comparative analysis of the genome sequences of Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella 
parapertussis and Bordetella bronchiseptica.

Parkhill J(1), Sebaihia M, Preston A, Murphy LD, Thomson N, Harris DE, Holden 
MT, Churcher CM, Bentley SD, Mungall KL, Cerdeño-Tárraga AM, Temple L, James K, 
Harris B, Quail MA, Achtman M, Atkin R, Baker S, Basham D, Bason N, Cherevach I, 
Chillingworth T, Collins M, Cronin A, Davis P, Doggett J, Feltwell T, Goble A, 
Hamlin N, Hauser H, Holroyd S, Jagels K, Leather S, Moule S, Norberczak H, 
O'Neil S, Ormond D, Price C, Rabbinowitsch E, Rutter S, Sanders M, Saunders D, 
Seeger K, Sharp S, Simmonds M, Skelton J, Squares R, Squares S, Stevens K, Unwin 
L, Whitehead S, Barrell BG, Maskell DJ.

Author information:
(1)The Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 
1SA, UK. parkhill@sanger.ac.uk

Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis and Bordetella bronchiseptica are 
closely related Gram-negative beta-proteobacteria that colonize the respiratory 
tracts of mammals. B. pertussis is a strict human pathogen of recent 
evolutionary origin and is the primary etiologic agent of whooping cough. B. 
parapertussis can also cause whooping cough, and B. bronchiseptica causes 
chronic respiratory infections in a wide range of animals. We sequenced the 
genomes of B. bronchiseptica RB50 (5,338,400 bp; 5,007 predicted genes), B. 
parapertussis 12822 (4,773,551 bp; 4,404 genes) and B. pertussis Tohama I 
(4,086,186 bp; 3,816 genes). Our analysis indicates that B. parapertussis and B. 
pertussis are independent derivatives of B. bronchiseptica-like ancestors. 
During the evolution of these two host-restricted species there was large-scale 
gene loss and inactivation; host adaptation seems to be a consequence of loss, 
not gain, of function, and differences in virulence may be related to loss of 
regulatory or control functions.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1227
PMID: 12910271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]