---
pmid: '19966785'
title: Rab27a and Rab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway.
authors:
- Ostrowski M
- Carmo NB
- Krumeich S
- Fanget I
- Raposo G
- Savina A
- Moita CF
- Schauer K
- Hume AN
- Freitas RP
- Goud B
- Benaroch P
- Hacohen N
- Fukuda M
- Desnos C
- Seabra MC
- Darchen F
- Amigorena S
- Moita LF
- Thery C
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2000
---

# Rab27a and Rab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway.
**Authors:** Ostrowski M, Carmo NB, Krumeich S, Fanget I, Raposo G, Savina A, Moita CF, Schauer K, Hume AN, Freitas RP, Goud B, Benaroch P, Hacohen N, Fukuda M, Desnos C, Seabra MC, Darchen F, Amigorena S, Moita LF, Thery C
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2000](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2000)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;12(1):19-30; sup pp 1-13. doi: 10.1038/ncb2000. Epub 
2009 Dec 6.

Rab27a and Rab27b control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway.

Ostrowski M(1), Carmo NB, Krumeich S, Fanget I, Raposo G, Savina A, Moita CF, 
Schauer K, Hume AN, Freitas RP, Goud B, Benaroch P, Hacohen N, Fukuda M, Desnos 
C, Seabra MC, Darchen F, Amigorena S, Moita LF, Thery C.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U932, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.

Exosomes are secreted membrane vesicles that share structural and biochemical 
characteristics with intraluminal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes (MVEs). 
Exosomes could be involved in intercellular communication and in the 
pathogenesis of infectious and degenerative diseases. The molecular mechanisms 
of exosome biogenesis and secretion are, however, poorly understood. Using an 
RNA interference (RNAi) screen, we identified five Rab GTPases that promote 
exosome secretion in HeLa cells. Among these, Rab27a and Rab27b were found to 
function in MVE docking at the plasma membrane. The size of MVEs was strongly 
increased by Rab27a silencing, whereas MVEs were redistributed towards the 
perinuclear region upon Rab27b silencing. Thus, the two Rab27 isoforms have 
different roles in the exosomal pathway. In addition, silencing two known Rab27 
effectors, Slp4 (also known as SYTL4, synaptotagmin-like 4) and Slac2b (also 
known as EXPH5, exophilin 5), inhibited exosome secretion and phenocopied 
silencing of Rab27a and Rab27b, respectively. Our results therefore strengthen 
the link between MVEs and exosomes, and introduce ways of manipulating exosome 
secretion in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2000
PMID: 19966785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
