---
pmid: '20410296'
title: 'Ascorbate synthesis pathway: dual role of ascorbate in bone homeostasis.'
authors:
- Gabbay KH
- Bohren KM
- Morello R
- Bertin T
- Liu J
- Vogel P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2885230
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.110247
---

# Ascorbate synthesis pathway: dual role of ascorbate in bone homeostasis.
**Authors:** Gabbay KH, Bohren KM, Morello R, Bertin T, Liu J, Vogel P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.110247](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.110247)
**PMC:** [PMC2885230](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2885230/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 18;285(25):19510-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.110247. Epub 
2010 Apr 21.

Ascorbate synthesis pathway: dual role of ascorbate in bone homeostasis.

Gabbay KH(1), Bohren KM, Morello R, Bertin T, Liu J, Vogel P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. kgabbay@bcm.tmc.edu

Using mouse gene knock-out models, we identify aldehyde reductase (EC 1.1.1.2, 
Akr1a4 (GR)) and aldose reductase (EC 1.1.1.21, Akr1b3 (AR)) as the enzymes 
responsible for conversion of D-glucuronate to L-gulonate, a key step in the 
ascorbate (ASC) synthesis pathway in mice. The gene knock-out (KO) mice show 
that the two enzymes, GR and AR, provide approximately 85 and approximately 15% 
of L-gulonate, respectively. GRKO/ARKO double knock-out mice are unable to 
synthesize ASC (>95% ASC deficit) and develop scurvy. The GRKO mice ( 
approximately 85% ASC deficit) develop and grow normally when fed regular mouse 
chow (ASC content = 0) but suffer severe osteopenia and spontaneous fractures 
with stresses that increase ASC requirements, such as pregnancy or castration. 
Castration greatly increases osteoclast numbers and activity in GRKO mice and 
promotes increased bone loss as compared with wild-type controls and 
additionally induces proliferation of immature dysplastic osteoblasts likely 
because of an ASC-sensitive block(s) in early differentiation. ASC and the 
antioxidants pycnogenol and resveratrol block osteoclast proliferation and bone 
loss, but only ASC feeding restores osteoblast differentiation and prevents 
their dysplastic proliferation. This is the first in vivo demonstration of two 
independent roles for ASC as an antioxidant suppressing osteoclast activity and 
number as well as a cofactor promoting osteoblast differentiation. Although 
humans have lost the ability to synthesize ASC, our mouse models suggest the 
mechanisms by which suboptimal ASC availability facilitates the development of 
osteoporosis, which has important implications for human osteoporosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.110247
PMCID: PMC2885230
PMID: 20410296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
