---
pmid: '18957548'
title: 'Variable breakpoints target PAX5 in patients with dicentric chromosomes: a
  model for the basis of unbalanced translocations in cancer.'
authors:
- An Q
- Wright SL
- Konn ZJ
- Matheson E
- Minto L
- Moorman AV
- Parker H
- Griffiths M
- Ross FM
- Davies T
- Hall AG
- Harrison CJ
- Irving JA
- Strefford JC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2579376
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0803494105
---

# Variable breakpoints target PAX5 in patients with dicentric chromosomes: a model for the basis of unbalanced translocations in cancer.
**Authors:** An Q, Wright SL, Konn ZJ, Matheson E, Minto L, Moorman AV, Parker H, Griffiths M, Ross FM, Davies T, Hall AG, Harrison CJ, Irving JA, Strefford JC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0803494105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0803494105)
**PMC:** [PMC2579376](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2579376/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 4;105(44):17050-4. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0803494105. Epub 2008 Oct 28.

Variable breakpoints target PAX5 in patients with dicentric chromosomes: a model 
for the basis of unbalanced translocations in cancer.

An Q(1), Wright SL, Konn ZJ, Matheson E, Minto L, Moorman AV, Parker H, 
Griffiths M, Ross FM, Davies T, Hall AG, Harrison CJ, Irving JA, Strefford JC.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genomics and Leukaemia Research Cytogenetics Groups, Cancer Sciences 
Division, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO16 6YD, United Kingdom.

The search for target genes involved in unbalanced acquired chromosomal 
abnormalities has been largely unsuccessful, because the breakpoints of these 
rearrangements are too variable. Here, we use the example of dicentric 
chromosomes in B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia to show that, 
despite this heterogeneity, single genes are targeted through a variety of 
mechanisms. FISH showed that, although they were heterogeneous, breakpoints on 
9p resulted in the partial or complete deletion of PAX5. Molecular copy number 
counting further delineated the breakpoints and facilitated cloning with 
long-distance inverse PCR. This approach identified 5 fusion gene partners with 
PAX5: LOC392027 (7p12.1), SLCO1B3 (12p12), ASXL1 (20q11.1), KIF3B (20q11.21), 
and C20orf112 (20q11.1). In each predicted fusion protein, the DNA-binding 
paired domain of PAX5 was present. Using quantitative PCR, we demonstrated that 
both the deletion and gene fusion events resulted in the same underexpression of 
PAX5, which extended to the differential expression of the PAX5 target genes, 
EBF1, ALDH1A1, ATP9A, and FLT3. Further molecular analysis showed deletion and 
mutation of the homologous PAX5 allele, providing further support for the key 
role of PAX5. Here, we show that specific gene loci may be the target of 
heterogeneous translocation breakpoints in human cancer, acting through a 
variety of mechanisms. This approach indicates an application for the 
identification of cancer genes in solid tumours, where unbalanced chromosomal 
rearrangements are particularly prevalent and few genes have been identified. It 
can be extrapolated that this strategy will reveal that the same mechanisms 
operate in cancer pathogenesis in general.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0803494105
PMCID: PMC2579376
PMID: 18957548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
