---
pmid: '24344204'
title: TIMMDC1/C3orf1 functions as a membrane-embedded mitochondrial complex I assembly
  factor through association with the MCIA complex.
authors:
- Guarani V
- Paulo J
- Zhai B
- Huttlin EL
- Gygi SP
- Harper JW
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4023825
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01551-13
---

# TIMMDC1/C3orf1 functions as a membrane-embedded mitochondrial complex I assembly factor through association with the MCIA complex.
**Authors:** Guarani V, Paulo J, Zhai B, Huttlin EL, Gygi SP, Harper JW
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01551-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01551-13)
**PMC:** [PMC4023825](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4023825/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Mar;34(5):847-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01551-13. Epub 2013 Dec
 16.

TIMMDC1/C3orf1 functions as a membrane-embedded mitochondrial complex I assembly 
factor through association with the MCIA complex.

Guarani V(1), Paulo J, Zhai B, Huttlin EL, Gygi SP, Harper JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

Complex I (CI) of the electron transport chain, a large membrane-embedded NADH 
dehydrogenase, couples electron transfer to the release of protons into the 
mitochondrial inner membrane space to promote ATP production through ATP 
synthase. In addition to being a central conduit for ATP production, CI activity 
has been linked to neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease. 
CI is built in a stepwise fashion through the actions of several assembly 
factors. We employed interaction proteomics to interrogate the molecular 
associations of 15 core subunits and assembly factors previously linked to human 
CI deficiency, resulting in a network of 101 proteins and 335 interactions 
(edges). TIMMDC1, a predicted 4-pass membrane protein, reciprocally associated 
with multiple members of the MCIA CI assembly factor complex and core CI 
subunits and was localized in the mitochondrial inner membrane, and its 
depletion resulted in reduced CI activity and cellular respiration. Quantitative 
proteomics demonstrated a role for TIMMDC1 in assembly of membrane-embedded and 
soluble arms of the complex. This study defines a new membrane-embedded CI 
assembly factor and provides a resource for further analysis of CI biology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01551-13
PMCID: PMC4023825
PMID: 24344204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
