---
pmid: '9418872'
title: Transformation suppression by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B requires a functional
  SH3 ligand.
authors:
- Liu F
- Sells MA
- Chernoff J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC121485
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.250
---

# Transformation suppression by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B requires a functional SH3 ligand.
**Authors:** Liu F, Sells MA, Chernoff J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.1.250](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.1.250)
**PMC:** [PMC121485](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC121485/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):250-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.250.

Transformation suppression by protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B requires a 
functional SH3 ligand.

Liu F(1), Sells MA, Chernoff J.

Author information:
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

We have recently shown that protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) associates 
with the docking protein p130Cas in 3Y1 rat fibroblasts. This interaction is 
mediated by a proline-rich sequence on PTP1B and the SH3 domain on p130Cas. 
Expression of wild-type PTP1B (WT-PTP1B), but not a catalytically competent, 
proline-to-alanine point mutant that cannot bind p130Cas (PA-PTP1B), causes 
substantial tyrosine dephosphorylation of p130Cas (F. Liu, D. E. Hill, and J. 
Chernoff, J. Biol. Chem. 271:31290-31295, 1996). Here we demonstrate that WT-, 
but not PA-PTP1B, inhibits transformation of rat 3Y1 fibroblasts by v-crk, -src, 
and -ras, but not by v-raf. These effects on transformation correlate with the 
phosphorylation status of p130Cas and two proteins that are associated with 
p130Cas, Paxillin and Fak. Expression of WT-PTP1B reduces formation of 
p130Cas-Crk complexes and inhibits mitogen-activated protein kinase activation 
by Src and Crk. These data show that transformation suppression by PTP1B 
requires a functional SH3 ligand and suggest that p130Cas may represent an 
important physiological target of PTP1B in cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.250
PMCID: PMC121485
PMID: 9418872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
