---
pmid: '25284781'
title: Circulating AIM prevents hepatocellular carcinoma through complement activation.
authors:
- Maehara N
- Arai S
- Mori M
- Iwamura Y
- Kurokawa J
- Kai T
- Kusunoki S
- Taniguchi K
- Ikeda K
- Ohara O
- Yamamura KI
- Miyazaki T
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.058
---

# Circulating AIM prevents hepatocellular carcinoma through complement activation.
**Authors:** Maehara N, Arai S, Mori M, Iwamura Y, Kurokawa J, Kai T, Kusunoki S, Taniguchi K, Ikeda K, Ohara O, Yamamura KI, Miyazaki T
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.058)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.058. Epub 2014 
Oct 2.

Circulating AIM prevents hepatocellular carcinoma through complement activation.

Maehara N(1), Arai S(1), Mori M(1), Iwamura Y(1), Kurokawa J(1), Kai T(1), 
Kusunoki S(1), Taniguchi K(1), Ikeda K(2), Ohara O(3), Yamamura KI(4), Miyazaki 
T(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine for Pathogenesis, Center for Disease 
Biology and Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Yamagata 
997-0052, Japan.
(3)Department of Human Genome Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu, 
Chiba 292-0818, Japan.
(4)Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 
860-0811, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine for Pathogenesis, Center for Disease 
Biology and Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan; Max Planck-The University of Tokyo Center for Integrative 
Inflammology, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address: tm@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a widespread fatal disease and the third most 
common cause of cancer deaths. Here, we show the potent anti-HCC effect of the 
circulating protein AIM. As in adipocytes, AIM is incorporated into normal 
hepatocytes, where it interferes with lipid storage. In contrast, AIM 
accumulates on the HCC cell surface and activates the complement cascade via 
inactivating multiple regulators of complement activation. This response 
provokes necrotic cell death specifically in AIM-bound HCC cells. Accordingly, 
AIM(-/-) mice were highly susceptible to steatosis-associated HCC development, 
whereas no AIM(+/+) mouse developed the disease despite comparable liver 
inflammation and fibrosis in response to a long-term high-fat diet. 
Administration of AIM prevented tumor development in AIM(-/-) mice, and HCC 
induction by diethylnitrosamine was more prominent in AIM(-/-) than wild-type 
mice. These findings could be the basis for novel AIM-based therapeutic 
strategies for HCC.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.058
PMID: 25284781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
