---
pmid: '16083881'
title: Regulation of Nod1 by Hsp90 chaperone complex.
authors:
- Hahn JS
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.07.024
---

# Regulation of Nod1 by Hsp90 chaperone complex.
**Authors:** Hahn JS
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2005.07.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.07.024)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Aug 15;579(20):4513-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.07.024.

Regulation of Nod1 by Hsp90 chaperone complex.

Hahn JS(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 
Seoul 151-744, Republic of Korea.

Nod1 and Nod2 proteins play important roles in mammalian innate immune responses 
as intracellular sensors for bacterial peptidoglycan. Nod1 and Nod2 share 
structural homology with many R proteins involved in plant disease resistance. 
It has been demonstrated that plant Hsp90 and its co-chaperone RAR1 are 
implicated in R-mediated disease resistance. Here the Chp-1 gene encoding a 
mammalian homologue of plant RAR1 was identified as a new target for 
transcriptional activation by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1), a stress-responsive 
HSF isoform. In addition, Nod1 is demonstrated to be a client protein of the 
Hsp90 chaperone complex containing the Chp-1. Chp-1 interacts with the 
tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain of protein phosphatase 5 (PP5) and the 
ATPase domain of Hsp90 via two distinct zinc-binding cysteine and histidine rich 
domains (CHORDs). These findings suggest a common regulatory mechanism involving 
the Hsp90 chaperone complex in R-mediated disease resistance in plants and 
Nod1-mediated innate immune response in mammals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.07.024
PMID: 16083881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
