---
pmid: '24930674'
title: Frequent amplification of ORAOV1 gene in esophageal squamous cell cancer promotes
  an aggressive phenotype via proline metabolism and ROS production.
authors:
- Togashi Y
- Arao T
- Kato H
- Matsumoto K
- Terashima M
- Hayashi H
- de Velasco MA
- Fujita Y
- Kimura H
- Yasuda T
- Shiozaki H
- Nishio K
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4102783
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1561
---

# Frequent amplification of ORAOV1 gene in esophageal squamous cell cancer promotes an aggressive phenotype via proline metabolism and ROS production.
**Authors:** Togashi Y, Arao T, Kato H, Matsumoto K, Terashima M, Hayashi H, de Velasco MA, Fujita Y, Kimura H, Yasuda T, Shiozaki H, Nishio K
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2014)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.1561](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.1561)
**PMC:** [PMC4102783](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4102783/)

## Abstract

1. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):2962-73. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1561.

Frequent amplification of ORAOV1 gene in esophageal squamous cell cancer 
promotes an aggressive phenotype via proline metabolism and ROS production.

Togashi Y(1), Arao T, Kato H, Matsumoto K, Terashima M, Hayashi H, de Velasco 
MA, Fujita Y, Kimura H, Yasuda T, Shiozaki H, Nishio K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, 
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

Chromosomal band 11q13 seems to be one of the most frequently amplified lesions 
in human cancer, including esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC). The oral 
cancer overexpressed 1 (ORAOV1) gene has been identified within this region, but 
its detailed biological function in human ESCC remains largely unclear. In our 
clinical samples of stage III ESCC, ORAOV1 amplification was observed in 49 of 
94 cases (53%). ORAOV1 amplification was significantly associated with a poorly 
differentiated histology and tumors located in the upper or middle esophagus. 
Patients with ORAOV1 amplification tended to have a shorter survival period, 
although the difference was not significant. To investigate the function of 
ORAOV1, we created ORAOV1--overexpressed ESCC cell lines that exhibited 
increased cellular proliferation and colony formation, compared with in vitro 
controls. In vivo, ORAOV1-overexpressed cells exhibited a significantly 
increased tumorigenicity and a significantly larger tumor volume and poorer 
differentiation than controls. The peptide mass fingerprinting technique 
demonstrated that ORAOV1 bound to pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (PYCR), 
which is associated with proline metabolism and reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production. Then, ORAOV1-overexpressed cell lines were resistant to stress 
treatment, which was cancelled by PYCR-knockdown. In addition, the 
ORAOV1-overexpressed cell line had a higher intracellular proline concentration 
and a lower ROS level. Our findings indicate that the ORAOV1 gene is frequently 
amplified in ESCC, enhances tumorigenicity and tumor growth, and is associated 
with a poorly differentiated tumor histology via proline metabolism and ROS 
production. ORAOV1 could be a novel target for the treatment of ESCC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1561
PMCID: PMC4102783
PMID: 24930674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
