---
pmid: '12047556'
title: GBF1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors, is
  localized to the cis-Golgi and involved in membrane association of the COPI coat.
authors:
- Kawamoto K
- Yoshida Y
- Tamaki H
- Torii S
- Shinotsuka C
- Yamashina S
- Nakayama K
journal: Traffic
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.30705.x
---

# GBF1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors, is localized to the cis-Golgi and involved in membrane association of the COPI coat.
**Authors:** Kawamoto K, Yoshida Y, Tamaki H, Torii S, Shinotsuka C, Yamashina S, Nakayama K
**Journal:** Traffic (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.30705.x](https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.30705.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2002 Jul;3(7):483-95. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.30705.x.

GBF1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for ADP-ribosylation factors, is 
localized to the cis-Golgi and involved in membrane association of the COPI 
coat.

Kawamoto K(1), Yoshida Y, Tamaki H, Torii S, Shinotsuka C, Yamashina S, Nakayama 
K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences and Gene Research Center, University of 
Tsukuba, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

Formation of coated carrier vesicles, such as COPI-coated vesicles from the 
cis-Golgi, is triggered by membrane binding of the GTP-bound form of 
ADP-ribosylation factors. This process is blocked by brefeldin A, which is an 
inhibitor of guanine nucleotide exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation factor. 
GBF1 is one of the guanine nucleotide-exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation 
factor and is localized in the Golgi region. In the present study, we have 
determined the detailed subcellular localization of GBF1. Immunofluorescence 
microscopy of cells treated with nocodazole or incubated at 15 degrees C has 
suggested that GBF1 behaves similarly to proteins recycling between the 
cis-Golgi and the endoplasmic reticulum. Immunoelectron microscopy has revealed 
that GBF1 localizes primarily to vesicular and tubular structures apposed to the 
cis-face of Golgi stacks and minor fractions to the Golgi stacks. GBF1 
overexpressed in cells causes recruitment of class I and class II 
ADP-ribosylation factors onto Golgi membranes. Furthermore, overexpressed GBF1 
antagonizes various effects of brefeldin A, such as inhibition of membrane 
recruitment of ADP-ribosylation factors and the COPI coat, and redistribution of 
Golgi-resident and itinerant proteins. These observations indicate that GBF1 is 
involved in the formation of COPI-coated vesicles from the cis-Golgi or the 
pre-Golgi intermediate compartment through activating ADP-ribosylation factors.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0854.2002.30705.x
PMID: 12047556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
