---
pmid: '27616589'
title: PI3Kδ and primary immunodeficiencies.
authors:
- Lucas CL
- Chandra A
- Nejentsev S
- Condliffe AM
- Okkenhaug K
journal: Nat Rev Immunol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5291318
doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.93
---

# PI3Kδ and primary immunodeficiencies.
**Authors:** Lucas CL, Chandra A, Nejentsev S, Condliffe AM, Okkenhaug K
**Journal:** Nat Rev Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nri.2016.93](https://doi.org/10.1038/nri.2016.93)
**PMC:** [PMC5291318](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5291318/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Rev Immunol. 2016 Nov;16(11):702-714. doi: 10.1038/nri.2016.93. Epub 2016 
Sep 12.

PI3Kδ and primary immunodeficiencies.

Lucas CL(1)(2), Chandra A(3)(4), Nejentsev S(4), Condliffe AM(5), Okkenhaug 
K(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section, Laboratory of Immunology, 
and Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(2)Immunobiology Department, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06511, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signalling and Development, Babraham Institute, 
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(5)Department of Infection, Immunity &Cardiovascular Disease, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, UK.

Primary immunodeficiencies are inherited disorders of the immune system, often 
caused by the mutation of genes required for lymphocyte development and 
activation. Recently, several studies have identified gain-of-function mutations 
in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) genes PIK3CD (which encodes p110δ) and 
PIK3R1 (which encodes p85α) that cause a combined immunodeficiency syndrome, 
referred to as activated PI3Kδ syndrome (APDS; also known as p110δ-activating 
mutation causing senescent T cells, lymphadenopathy and immunodeficiency 
(PASLI)). Paradoxically, both loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations 
that affect these genes lead to immunosuppression, albeit via different 
mechanisms. Here, we review the roles of PI3Kδ in adaptive immunity, describe 
the clinical manifestations and mechanisms of disease in APDS and highlight new 
insights into PI3Kδ gleaned from these patients, as well as implications of 
these findings for clinical therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/nri.2016.93
PMCID: PMC5291318
PMID: 27616589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.L.L. collaborates with Novartis. A.C., S.N., 
A.M.C. and K.O. collaborate with and receive research funding from GSK. K.O. has 
received consultancy or speaker fees from Karus Pharmaceutical, Merck, Gilead 
and Incyte.
