---
pmid: '10415025'
title: Direct suppression of TCR-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated
  kinase by leukocyte protein tyrosine phosphatase, a tyrosine-specific phosphatase.
authors:
- Oh-hora M
- Ogata M
- Mori Y
- Adachi M
- Imai K
- Kosugi A
- Hamaoka T
journal: J Immunol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
---

# Direct suppression of TCR-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase by leukocyte protein tyrosine phosphatase, a tyrosine-specific phosphatase.
**Authors:** Oh-hora M, Ogata M, Mori Y, Adachi M, Imai K, Kosugi A, Hamaoka T
**Journal:** J Immunol (1999)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1282-8.

Direct suppression of TCR-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase by leukocyte protein tyrosine phosphatase, a tyrosine-specific 
phosphatase.

Oh-hora M(1), Ogata M, Mori Y, Adachi M, Imai K, Kosugi A, Hamaoka T.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Center, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Leukocyte protein tyrosine phosphatase (LC-PTP)/hemopoietic PTP is a human 
cytoplasmic PTP that is predominantly expressed in the hemopoietic cells. 
Recently, it was reported that hemopoietic PTP inhibited TCR-mediated signal 
transduction. However, the precise mechanism of the inhibition was not 
identified. Here we report that extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is 
the direct target of LC-PTP. LC-PTP dephosphorylated ERK2 in vitro. Expression 
of wild-type LC-PTP in 293T cells suppressed the phosphorylation of ERK2 by a 
mutant MEK1, which was constitutively active regardless of upstream activation 
signals. No suppression of the phosphorylation was observed by LC-PTPCS, a 
catalytically inactive mutant. In Jurkat cells, LC-PTP suppressed the ERK and 
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. LC-PTP and LC-PTPCS made 
complexes with ERK1, ERK2, and p38alpha, but not with the gain-of-function 
sevenmaker ERK2 mutant (D321N). A small deletion (aa 1-46) in the N-terminal 
portion of LC-PTP or Arg to Ala substitutions at aa 41 and 42 resulted in the 
loss of ERK binding activity. These LC-PTP mutants revealed little inhibition of 
the ERK cascade activated by TCR cross-linking. On the other hand, the wild-type 
LC-PTP did not suppress the phosphorylation of sevenmaker ERK2 mutant. Thus, the 
complex formation of LC-PTP with ERK is the essential mechanism for the 
suppression. Taken collectively, these results indicate that LC-PTP suppresses 
mitogen-activated protein kinase directly in vivo.

PMID: 10415025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
