---
pmid: '20637285'
title: Megalin interacts with APP and the intracellular adapter protein FE65 in neurons.
authors:
- Alvira-Botero X
- Pérez-Gonzalez R
- Spuch C
- Vargas T
- Antequera D
- Garzón M
- Bermejo-Pareja F
- Carro E
journal: Mol Cell Neurosci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.005
---

# Megalin interacts with APP and the intracellular adapter protein FE65 in neurons.
**Authors:** Alvira-Botero X, Pérez-Gonzalez R, Spuch C, Vargas T, Antequera D, Garzón M, Bermejo-Pareja F, Carro E
**Journal:** Mol Cell Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.005)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Nov;45(3):306-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.005. Epub
 2010 Jul 14.

Megalin interacts with APP and the intracellular adapter protein FE65 in 
neurons.

Alvira-Botero X(1), Pérez-Gonzalez R, Spuch C, Vargas T, Antequera D, Garzón M, 
Bermejo-Pareja F, Carro E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Research Center, Hospital 12 de Octubre, 28041 
Madrid, Spain.

Increasing evidence has implicated megalin, a low-density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein, in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In 
the brain, megalin is expressed in brain capillaries, ependymal cells and 
choroid plexus, where it participates in the clearance of brain amyloid 
β-peptide (Aβ) complex. Recently, megalin has also been detected in 
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. In this study we demonstrate that megalin is 
widely distributed in neurons throughout the brain. Additionally, given that 
FE65 mediates the interaction between the low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-1 and the amyloid precursor protein (APP) to modulate 
the rate of APP internalization from the cell surface, we hypothesize that 
megalin could also interact with APP in neurons. Our results confirm that 
megalin interacts with APP and FE65, suggesting that these three proteins form a 
tripartite complex. Moreover, our findings imply that megalin may participate in 
neurite branching. Taken together, these results indicate that megalin has an 
important role in Aβ-mediated neurotoxicity, and therefore may be involved in 
the neurodegenerative processes that occur in AD.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.005
PMID: 20637285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
