---
pmid: '8453665'
title: The herbicide sensitivity gene CHL1 of Arabidopsis encodes a nitrate-inducible
  nitrate transporter.
authors:
- Tsay YF
- Schroeder JI
- Feldmann KA
- Crawford NM
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90399-b
---

# The herbicide sensitivity gene CHL1 of Arabidopsis encodes a nitrate-inducible nitrate transporter.
**Authors:** Tsay YF, Schroeder JI, Feldmann KA, Crawford NM
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90399-b](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90399-b)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1993 Mar 12;72(5):705-13. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90399-b.

The herbicide sensitivity gene CHL1 of Arabidopsis encodes a nitrate-inducible 
nitrate transporter.

Tsay YF(1), Schroeder JI, Feldmann KA, Crawford NM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0116.

This paper reports the identification and functional expression of a gene that 
is involved in nitrate uptake in plants, a process essential for the 
assimilation of nitrate and the biological removal of nitrate from the soil 
solution. The CHL1 gene of Arabidopsis, which when mutated confers resistance to 
the herbicide chlorate and a decrease in nitrate uptake, was isolated and found 
to encode a protein with 12 putative membrane-spanning segments. Injection of 
CHL1 mRNA into Xenopus oocytes produces a nitrate- and pH-dependent membrane 
depolarization, inward current, and nitrate uptake. These data show that the 
CHL1 gene encodes an electrogenic nitrate transporter. CHL1 mRNA is found 
predominantly in roots and displays nitrate- and pH-dependent regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90399-b
PMID: 8453665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
