---
pmid: '23981774'
title: 'Characterization of two pathogenic mutations in cystathionine beta-synthase:
  different intracellular locations for wild-type and mutant proteins.'
authors:
- Casique L
- Kabil O
- Banerjee R
- Martinez JC
- De Lucca M
journal: Gene
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3824618
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.021
---

# Characterization of two pathogenic mutations in cystathionine beta-synthase: different intracellular locations for wild-type and mutant proteins.
**Authors:** Casique L, Kabil O, Banerjee R, Martinez JC, De Lucca M
**Journal:** Gene (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.021)
**PMC:** [PMC3824618](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3824618/)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2013 Nov 15;531(1):117-24. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.021. Epub 2013
Aug  24.

Characterization of two pathogenic mutations in cystathionine beta-synthase: 
different intracellular locations for wild-type and mutant proteins.

Casique L(1), Kabil O, Banerjee R, Martinez JC, De Lucca M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Universidad Simón Bolívar, Caracas 1081-A, 
Venezuela; Laboratorio de Estudio Molecular de Enfermedades Hereditarias, 
Fundación IDEA, Caracas 1080-A, Venezuela. Electronic address: 
lcasique@idea.gob.ve.

Cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) is a pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent 
enzyme that catalyzes the condensation of homocysteine with serine to generate 
cystathionine. Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder commonly caused 
by a deficiency of CBS activity. Here, we characterized a novel CBS mutation 
(c.260C>A (p.T87N)) and a previously reported variant (c.700G>A (p.D234N)) found 
in Venezuelan homocystinuric patients, one nonresponsive and one responsive to 
vitamin B6. Both mutant proteins were expressed in vitro in prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cells, finding lower soluble expression in HEK-293 cells (19% T87N 
and 23% D234N) compared to wild-type CBS. Residual activities obtained for the 
mutant proteins were 3.5% T87N and 43% D234N. Gel exclusion chromatography 
demonstrated a tendency of the T87N mutant to aggregate while the distribution 
of the D234N mutant was similar to wild-type enzyme. Using immunofluorescence 
microscopy, an unexpected difference in intracellular localization was observed 
between the wild-type and mutant proteins. While the T87N mutant exhibited a 
punctate appearance, the wild-type protein was homogeneously distributed inside 
the cell. Interestingly, the D234N protein showed both distributions. This study 
demonstrates that the pathogenic CBS mutations generate unstable proteins that 
are unable (T87N) or partially unable (D234N) to assemble into a functional 
enzyme, implying that these mutations might be responsible for the 
homocystinuria phenotype.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.021
PMCID: PMC3824618
PMID: 23981774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
