---
pmid: '7641815'
title: Altering the expression of cell surface beta 1,4-galactosyltransferase modulates
  cell growth.
authors:
- Hinton DA
- Evans SC
- Shur BD
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/excr.1995.1274
---

# Altering the expression of cell surface beta 1,4-galactosyltransferase modulates cell growth.
**Authors:** Hinton DA, Evans SC, Shur BD
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.1995.1274](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.1995.1274)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Aug;219(2):640-9. doi: 10.1006/excr.1995.1274.

Altering the expression of cell surface beta 1,4-galactosyltransferase modulates 
cell growth.

Hinton DA(1), Evans SC, Shur BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

beta 1,4-Galactosyltransferase (GalTase) is unusual among the 
glycosyltransferases in that it is localized both in the Golgi complex and on 
the cell surface. Most studies of surface GalTase function have focused on its 
role in cellular interactions; however, surface GalTase has also been suggested 
to function during cellular proliferation. Consistent with this hypothesis, a 
variety of GalTase-specific perturbants inhibit cell growth in vitro and in 
vivo. However, all of these studies have been limited to the use of exogenous 
reagents to perturb GalTase function. Furthermore, all of these perturbants 
inhibit cell growth, irrespective of whether they stimulate or inhibit GalTase 
enzyme activity. Therefore, it remains unclear whether surface GalTase delivers 
a growth inhibitory or growth stimulatory signal. In this study, we took a more 
direct approach to defining surface GalTase function during growth by examining 
its expression during the cell cycle and by molecularly altering its expression 
in stably transfected cell lines. The expression of GalTase was shown to be cell 
cycle specific, with the cell surface and intracellular GalTase pools displaying 
independent expression patterns. Furthermore, multiple, independent, stably 
transfected cell lines with reduced levels of cytoskeletally associated surface 
GalTase grew faster than control cells, whereas cell lines that over-expressed 
surface GalTase grew slower than controls. These observations directly support 
the concept that surface GalTase delivers a growth inhibitory signal. Evidence 
is presented suggesting that surface GalTase interacts with the epidermal growth 
factor (EGF) receptor, as suggested by others. The activity of the EGF receptor 
was shown to be directly proportional to the growth rate of the various 
GalTase-transfected cell lines. Thus, the expression of surface GalTase directly 
affects cell proliferation rate and may do so by modulating the ability of the 
EGF receptor to transduce EGF-dependent signals.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.1995.1274
PMID: 7641815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
