---
pmid: '24698160'
title: 'Distinct biochemical properties of human serine hydroxymethyltransferase compared
  with the Plasmodium enzyme: implications for selective inhibition.'
authors:
- Pinthong C
- Maenpuen S
- Amornwatcharapong W
- Yuthavong Y
- Leartsakulpanich U
- Chaiyen P
journal: FEBS J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.12803
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Distinct biochemical properties of human serine hydroxymethyltransferase compared with the Plasmodium enzyme: implications for selective inhibition.
**Authors:** Pinthong C, Maenpuen S, Amornwatcharapong W, Yuthavong Y, Leartsakulpanich U, Chaiyen P
**Journal:** FEBS J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.12803](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.12803)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2014 Jun;281(11):2570-83. doi: 10.1111/febs.12803. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

Distinct biochemical properties of human serine hydroxymethyltransferase 
compared with the Plasmodium enzyme: implications for selective inhibition.

Pinthong C(1), Maenpuen S, Amornwatcharapong W, Yuthavong Y, Leartsakulpanich U, 
Chaiyen P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Center of Excellence in Protein Structure and 
Function, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) catalyzes the transfer of a hydroxymethyl 
group from l-serine to tetrahydrofolate to yield glycine and 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate. Our previous investigations have shown that 
SHMTs from Plasmodium spp. (P. falciparum, Pf; P. vivax, Pv) are different from 
the enzyme from rabbit liver in that Plasmodium SHMT can use d-serine as a 
substrate. In this report, the biochemical and biophysical properties of the 
Plasmodium and the human cytosolic form (hcSHMT) enzymes including ligand 
binding and kinetics were investigated. The data indicate that, similar to 
Plasmodium enzymes, hcSHMT can use d-serine as a substrate. However, hcSHMT 
displays many properties that are different from those of the Plasmodium 
enzymes. The molar absorption coefficient of hcSHMT-bound pyridoxal-5'-phosphate 
(PLP) is much greater than PvSHMT-bound or PfSHMT-bound PLP. The binding 
interactions of hcSHMT and Plasmodium SHMT with d-serine are different, as only 
the Plasmodium enzyme undergoes formation of a quinonoid-like species upon 
binding to d-serine. Furthermore, it has been noted that hcSHMT displays strong 
substrate inhibition by tetrahydrofolate (THF) (at THF > 40 μm), compared with 
SHMTs from Plasmodium and other species. The pH-activity profile of hcSHMT shows 
higher activities at lower pH values corresponding to a pKa value of 7.8 ± 0.1. 
Thiosemicarbazide reacts with hcSHMT following a one-step model [k1 of 12 ± 0.6 
m(-1) ·s(-1) and k-1 of (1.0 ± 0.6) × 10(-3) s(-1) ], while the same reaction 
with PfSHMT involves at least three steps. All data indicated that the ligand 
binding environment of SHMT from human and Plasmodium are different, indicating 
that it should be possible to develop species-selective inhibitors in future 
studies.
DATABASE: serine hydroxymethyltransferase, EC 2.1.2.1; 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, EC 1.5.1.5.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12803
PMID: 24698160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
