---
pmid: '21041309'
title: BH3 domains other than Bim and Bid can directly activate Bax/Bak.
authors:
- Du H
- Wolf J
- Schafer B
- Moldoveanu T
- Chipuk JE
- Kuwana T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3013008
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.167148
---

# BH3 domains other than Bim and Bid can directly activate Bax/Bak.
**Authors:** Du H, Wolf J, Schafer B, Moldoveanu T, Chipuk JE, Kuwana T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.167148](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.167148)
**PMC:** [PMC3013008](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3013008/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 7;286(1):491-501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.167148. Epub
2010  Nov 1.

BH3 domains other than Bim and Bid can directly activate Bax/Bak.

Du H(1), Wolf J, Schafer B, Moldoveanu T, Chipuk JE, Kuwana T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Bcl-2 family proteins regulate a critical step in apoptosis referred to as 
mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP). Members of a subgroup of 
the Bcl-2 family, known as the BH3-only proteins, activate pro-apoptotic 
effectors (Bax and Bak) to initiate MOMP. They do so by neutralizing 
pro-survival Bcl-2 proteins and/or directly activating Bax/Bak. Bim and Bid are 
reported to be direct activators; however, here we show that BH3 peptides other 
than Bim and Bid exhibited various degrees of direct activation of the effector 
Bax or Bak, including Bmf and Noxa BH3s. In the absence of potent direct 
activators, such as Bim and Bid, we unmasked novel direct activator BH3 ligands 
capable of inducing effector-mediated cytochrome c release and liposome 
permeabilization, even when both Bcl-xL- and Mcl-1-type anti-apoptotic proteins 
were inhibited. The ability of these weaker direct activator BH3 peptides to 
cause MOMP correlated with that of the corresponding full-length proteins to 
induce apoptosis in the absence of Bim and Bid. We propose that, in certain 
contexts, direct activation by BH3-only proteins other than Bim and Bid may 
significantly contribute to MOMP and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.167148
PMCID: PMC3013008
PMID: 21041309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
