---
pmid: '11886858'
title: The serine/threonine kinase Cmk2 is required for oxidative stress response
  in fission yeast.
authors:
- Sánchez-Piris M
- Posas F
- Alemany V
- Winge I
- Hidalgo E
- Bachs O
- Aligue R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200104200
---

# The serine/threonine kinase Cmk2 is required for oxidative stress response in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Sánchez-Piris M, Posas F, Alemany V, Winge I, Hidalgo E, Bachs O, Aligue R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M200104200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M200104200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17722-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200104200. Epub
2002  Mar 8.

The serine/threonine kinase Cmk2 is required for oxidative stress response in 
fission yeast.

Sánchez-Piris M(1), Posas F, Alemany V, Winge I, Hidalgo E, Bachs O, Aligue R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi 
i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, E-08036 Barcelona, Spain.

Cmk2, a fission yeast Ser/Thr protein kinase homologous to mammalian calmodulin 
kinases, is essential for oxidative stress response. Cells lacking cmk2 gene 
were specifically sensitive to oxidative stress conditions. Upon stress, Cmk2 
was phosphorylated in vivo, and this phosphorylation was dependent on the 
stress-activated MAPK Sty1/Spc1. Co-precipitation assays demonstrated that Cmk2 
binds Sty1. Furthermore, in vivo or in vitro activated Sty1 was able to 
phosphorylate Cmk2, and the phosphorylation occurred at the C-terminal 
regulatory domain at Thr-411. Cell lethality caused by overexpression of Wis1 
MAPK kinase was abolished by deletion of cmk2 or by mutation of Thr-411 of Cmk2. 
Taken together, our data suggest that Cmk2 acts downstream of Sty1 and is an 
essential kinase for oxidative stress responses.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200104200
PMID: 11886858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
