---
pmid: '12140361'
title: Dissection of the c-Kit signaling pathway in mouse primordial germ cells by
  retroviral-mediated gene transfer.
authors:
- De Miguel MP
- Cheng L
- Holland EC
- Federspiel MJ
- Donovan PJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC124938
doi: 10.1073/pnas.122249399
---

# Dissection of the c-Kit signaling pathway in mouse primordial germ cells by retroviral-mediated gene transfer.
**Authors:** De Miguel MP, Cheng L, Holland EC, Federspiel MJ, Donovan PJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.122249399](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.122249399)
**PMC:** [PMC124938](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC124938/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Aug 6;99(16):10458-63. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.122249399. Epub 2002 Jul 24.

Dissection of the c-Kit signaling pathway in mouse primordial germ cells by 
retroviral-mediated gene transfer.

De Miguel MP(1), Cheng L, Holland EC, Federspiel MJ, Donovan PJ.

Author information:
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Bluemle Life Sciences 
Building, Room 706, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Establishment of the mammalian germ line is a prerequisite for fertility of the 
adult animal but we know surprisingly little about the molecular mechanisms 
regulating germ-line development in mammals. Signaling from the c-Kit receptor 
tyrosine kinase is essential for primordial germ cell (PGC) growth both in vivo 
and in vitro. Many downstream effectors of the c-Kit signaling pathway have been 
identified in other cell types but how these molecules control PGC survival and 
proliferation are unknown. Determination of the c-Kit effectors acting in PGCs 
has been hampered by the lack of effective methods to easily manipulate gene 
expression in these cells. We overcame this problem by testing the efficacy of 
retroviral-mediated gene transfer for manipulating gene expression in mammalian 
germ cells. We found that PGCs can be successfully infected with a variety of 
types of retroviruses. We used this method to demonstrate an important role for 
the AKT kinase in regulating PGC growth. Such technology for manipulating gene 
expression in PGCs will allow many of the molecular mechanisms regulating germ 
cell growth, behavior, and differentiation to be comprehensively analyzed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.122249399
PMCID: PMC124938
PMID: 12140361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
