---
pmid: '9181134'
title: '[Cloning of testican/SPOCK in man and mouse. Neuromuscular expression perspectives
  in pathology].'
authors:
- Charbonnier F
- Périn JP
- Roussel G
- Nussbaum JL
- Alliel PM
journal: C R Seances Soc Biol Fil
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
---

# [Cloning of testican/SPOCK in man and mouse. Neuromuscular expression perspectives in pathology].
**Authors:** Charbonnier F, Périn JP, Roussel G, Nussbaum JL, Alliel PM
**Journal:** C R Seances Soc Biol Fil (1997)

## Abstract

1. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil. 1997;191(1):127-33.

[Cloning of testican/SPOCK in man and mouse. Neuromuscular expression 
perspectives in pathology].

[Article in French]

Charbonnier F(1), Périn JP, Roussel G, Nussbaum JL, Alliel PM.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Neurochimie du CNRS, Strasbourg.

We have recently cloned a novel proteoglycan initially identified in human 
testis and hence previously called testican. A close examination of the overall 
protein structure reveals three main regions: four osteonectin/SPARC-like 
domains encompassing the amino-terminal and central part of the deduced protein, 
a Kazal-like motif overlapping the third domain, and the CWCV domain in the 
carboxyl-terminal end region of the protein core. We propose to call it SPOCK, 
the acronym of SPARC/Osteonectin CWCV and Kazal-like domains proteoglycan, 
according to its specific multidomain structure. To get further insight into the 
function, a Northern blot analysis was performed in order to determine the site 
of expression in various adult tissues; a 5.2 kb transcript appeared only but 
strongly in mouse brain. The structure of the murine brain proteoglycan was 
determined through molecular cloning; human and mouse deduced proteins are 
highly homologous with 95% overall amino acid identity. Murine brain serial 
sections hybridized with cDNA and immunological probes revealed identical 
distribution in discrete cerebral regions, such as CA3 hippocampal region and 
cerebellum. Immunoelectron microscopy showed the antigen selectively localized 
in the post-synaptic density of scattered pyramidal neurons and Purkinje cells. 
Structural analysis, a main expression in nervous system and preliminary 
assignment of the human gene in a critical region for neuropathologies, suggest 
that SPOCK may be of importance in neural development and neurodegenerative 
diseases.

PMID: 9181134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
