---
pmid: '21397861'
title: CD44 variant regulates redox status in cancer cells by stabilizing the xCT
  subunit of system xc(-) and thereby promotes tumor growth.
authors:
- Ishimoto T
- Nagano O
- Yae T
- Tamada M
- Motohara T
- Oshima H
- Oshima M
- Ikeda T
- Asaba R
- Yagi H
- Masuko T
- Shimizu T
- Ishikawa T
- Kai K
- Takahashi E
- Imamura Y
- Baba Y
- Ohmura M
- Suematsu M
- Baba H
- Saya H
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.038
---

# CD44 variant regulates redox status in cancer cells by stabilizing the xCT subunit of system xc(-) and thereby promotes tumor growth.
**Authors:** Ishimoto T, Nagano O, Yae T, Tamada M, Motohara T, Oshima H, Oshima M, Ikeda T, Asaba R, Yagi H, Masuko T, Shimizu T, Ishikawa T, Kai K, Takahashi E, Imamura Y, Baba Y, Ohmura M, Suematsu M, Baba H, Saya H
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.038)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2011 Mar 8;19(3):387-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.038.

CD44 variant regulates redox status in cancer cells by stabilizing the xCT 
subunit of system xc(-) and thereby promotes tumor growth.

Ishimoto T(1), Nagano O, Yae T, Tamada M, Motohara T, Oshima H, Oshima M, Ikeda 
T, Asaba R, Yagi H, Masuko T, Shimizu T, Ishikawa T, Kai K, Takahashi E, Imamura 
Y, Baba Y, Ohmura M, Suematsu M, Baba H, Saya H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Regulation, Institute for Advanced Medical Research, School 
of Medicine, Keio University, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, 
Japan.

CD44 is an adhesion molecule expressed in cancer stem-like cells. Here, we show 
that a CD44 variant (CD44v) interacts with xCT, a glutamate-cystine transporter, 
and controls the intracellular level of reduced glutathione (GSH). Human 
gastrointestinal cancer cells with a high level of CD44 expression showed an 
enhanced capacity for GSH synthesis and defense against reactive oxygen species 
(ROS). Ablation of CD44 induced loss of xCT from the cell surface and suppressed 
tumor growth in a transgenic mouse model of gastric cancer. It also induced 
activation of p38(MAPK), a downstream target of ROS, and expression of the gene 
for the cell cycle inhibitor p21(CIP1/WAF1). These findings establish a function 
for CD44v in regulation of ROS defense and tumor growth.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.01.038
PMID: 21397861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
