---
pmid: '14675537'
title: The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation and cell viability in response
  to misfolded protein stress.
authors:
- Kawaguchi Y
- Kovacs JJ
- McLaurin A
- Vance JM
- Ito A
- Yao TP
journal: Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00939-5
---

# The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation and cell viability in response to misfolded protein stress.
**Authors:** Kawaguchi Y, Kovacs JJ, McLaurin A, Vance JM, Ito A, Yao TP
**Journal:** Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00939-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00939-5)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2003 Dec 12;115(6):727-38. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00939-5.

The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation and cell viability in 
response to misfolded protein stress.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Kovacs JJ, McLaurin A, Vance JM, Ito A, Yao TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 
27710, USA.

The efficient clearance of cytotoxic misfolded protein aggregates is critical 
for cell survival. Misfolded protein aggregates are transported and removed from 
the cytoplasm by dynein motors via the microtubule network to a novel organelle 
termed the aggresome where they are processed. However, the means by which 
dynein motors recognize misfolded protein cargo, and the cellular factors that 
regulate aggresome formation, remain unknown. We have discovered that HDAC6, a 
microtubule-associated deacetylase, is a component of the aggresome. We 
demonstrate that HDAC6 has the capacity to bind both polyubiquitinated misfolded 
proteins and dynein motors, thereby acting to recruit misfolded protein cargo to 
dynein motors for transport to aggresomes. Indeed, cells deficient in HDAC6 fail 
to clear misfolded protein aggregates from the cytoplasm, cannot form aggresomes 
properly, and are hypersensitive to the accumulation of misfolded proteins. 
These findings identify HDAC6 as a crucial player in the cellular management of 
misfolded protein-induced stress.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)00939-5
PMID: 14675537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
