---
pmid: '10200548'
title: Alterations in cell death and cell cycle progression in the UV-irradiated epidermis
  of bcl-2-deficient mice.
authors:
- Gillardon F
- Moll I
- Meyer M
- Michaelidis TM
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400455
---

# Alterations in cell death and cell cycle progression in the UV-irradiated epidermis of bcl-2-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Gillardon F, Moll I, Meyer M, Michaelidis TM
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.cdd.4400455](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.cdd.4400455)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 1999 Jan;6(1):55-60. doi: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400455.

Alterations in cell death and cell cycle progression in the UV-irradiated 
epidermis of bcl-2-deficient mice.

Gillardon F(1), Moll I, Meyer M, Michaelidis TM.

Author information:
(1)II. Physiologisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. 
gillardo@ing.boehringer-ingelheim.com

The effect of bcl-2 gene ablation on epidermal cell death induced by UV-B 
irradiation was investigated in mice. Exposure of depilated back skin of 
bcl-2-/- mice to 0.5 J/cm2 UV-B caused a prolonged increase in the number of 
epidermal cells showing nuclear DNA fragmentation compared to wild-type 
littermates. Consistently, skin explants from bcl-2-deficient mice exhibited a 
higher number of sunburn cells per cm epidermis (16.6+/-2.1 vs 7.0+/-1.5) 
following exposure to 0.1 J/cm2 UV-B in vitro. Furthermore, UV irradiation 
failed to increase pre-melanosomes in skin explants from mutant animals, and 
primary menalocyte cultures derived from bcl-2 null mutants were highly 
susceptible to UV-induced cell death compared to cultures from wild-type 
littermates. An accelerated reappearance of proliferating cells, showing nuclear 
immunoreactivity for Ki-67 and c-Fos, was observed in the UV-irradiated 
epidermis of bcl-2-deficient mice. Taken together, these findings suggest that 
effects of UV radiation on epidermal cell death and cell cycle progression are 
influenced by survival-promoting Bcl-2.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cdd.4400455
PMID: 10200548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
