---
pmid: '10678181'
title: Nf1 and Gmcsf interact in myeloid leukemogenesis.
authors:
- Birnbaum RA
- O'Marcaigh A
- Wardak Z
- Zhang YY
- Dranoff G
- Jacks T
- Clapp DW
- Shannon KM
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80415-3
---

# Nf1 and Gmcsf interact in myeloid leukemogenesis.
**Authors:** Birnbaum RA, O'Marcaigh A, Wardak Z, Zhang YY, Dranoff G, Jacks T, Clapp DW, Shannon KM
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80415-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80415-3)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2000 Jan;5(1):189-95. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80415-3.

Nf1 and Gmcsf interact in myeloid leukemogenesis.

Birnbaum RA(1), O'Marcaigh A, Wardak Z, Zhang YY, Dranoff G, Jacks T, Clapp DW, 
Shannon KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0519, 
USA.

The NF1 tumor suppressor gene encodes neurofibromin, a GTPase-activating protein 
(GAP) for p21ras (Ras). Children with NF1 are predisposed to juvenile 
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Some heterozygous Nf1 mutant mice develop a 
similar myeloproliferative disorder (MPD), and adoptive transfer of 
Nf1-deficient fetal liver cells consistently induces this MPD. Human JMML and 
murine Nf1-deficient cells are hypersensitive to granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in methylcellulose cultures. We generated 
hematopoietic cells deficient in both Nf1 and Gmcsf to test whether GM-CSF is 
required to drive excessive proliferation of Nf1-/- cells in vivo. Here we show 
that GM-CSF play a central role in establishing and maintaining the MPD and that 
recipients engrafted with Nf1-/- Gmcsf-/- hematopoietic cells are hypersensitive 
to exogenous GM-CSF.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80415-3
PMID: 10678181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
