---
reference_id: PMID:24529379
title: Spatial control of the TSC complex integrates insulin and nutrient regulation of mTORC1 at the lysosome.
authors:
- Menon S
- Dibble CC
- Talbott G
- Hoxhaj G
- Valvezan AJ
- Takahashi H
- Cantley LC
- Manning BD
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatial control of the TSC complex integrates insulin and nutrient regulation of mTORC1 at the lysosome.
**Authors:** Menon S, Dibble CC, Talbott G, Hoxhaj G, Valvezan AJ, Takahashi H, Cantley LC, Manning BD
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.049)

## Content

1. Cell. 2014 Feb 13;156(4):771-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.049.

Spatial control of the TSC complex integrates insulin and nutrient regulation of
mTORC1 at the lysosome.

Menon S(1), Dibble CC(2), Talbott G(1), Hoxhaj G(1), Valvezan AJ(1), Takahashi
H(3), Cantley LC(4), Manning BD(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School and Division of Signal
Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Electronic address: ccdibble@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(3)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School and Division of Signal
Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School and Division of Signal
Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and Complex Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: bmanning@hsph.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2014 Feb 13;156(4):627-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.057.

mTORC1 promotes cell growth in response to nutrients and growth factors. Insulin
activates mTORC1 through the PI3K-Akt pathway, which inhibits the
TSC1-TSC2-TBC1D7 complex (the TSC complex) to turn on Rheb, an essential
activator of mTORC1. However, the mechanistic basis of how this
pathway integrates with nutrient-sensing pathways is unknown. We demonstrate
that insulin stimulates acute dissociation of the TSC complex from the lysosomal
surface, where subpopulations of Rheb and mTORC1 reside. The TSC complex
associates with the lysosome in a Rheb-dependent manner, and its dissociation in
response to insulin requires Akt-mediated TSC2 phosphorylation. Loss of the PTEN
tumor suppressor results in constitutive activation of mTORC1 through the
Akt-dependent dissociation of the TSC complex from the lysosome. These findings
provide a unifying mechanism by which independent pathways affecting the spatial
recruitment of mTORC1 and the TSC complex to Rheb at the lysosomal surface serve
to integrate diverse growth signals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.049
PMCID: PMC4030681
PMID: 24529379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]