---
pmid: '15965644'
title: The Q283P amino-acid change in HFE leads to structural and functional consequences
  similar to those described for the mutated 282Y HFE protein.
authors:
- Ka C
- Le Gac G
- Dupradeau FY
- Rochette J
- Férec C
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-1307-y
---

# The Q283P amino-acid change in HFE leads to structural and functional consequences similar to those described for the mutated 282Y HFE protein.
**Authors:** Ka C, Le Gac G, Dupradeau FY, Rochette J, Férec C
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-005-1307-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-005-1307-y)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;117(5):467-75. doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-1307-y. Epub 2005
Jun  18.

The Q283P amino-acid change in HFE leads to structural and functional 
consequences similar to those described for the mutated 282Y HFE protein.

Ka C(1), Le Gac G, Dupradeau FY, Rochette J, Férec C.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U613, Brest, France.

In Caucasians, 4-35% of hemochromatosis patients carry at least one chromosome 
without a common HFE mutation (i.e. C282Y, H63D and S65C). Several studies have 
now shown that iron overload phenotypes in such patients can be associated with 
uncommon HFE mutations. We previously supported implication of the C282Y/Q283P 
compound heterozygous genotype in hemochromatosis phenotypes and, based on 
molecular dynamics simulations, proposed that the Q283P substitution prevents 
normal folding of the HFE alpha3-domain. In the current work, we have used HeLa 
cells carrying wild-type or Q283P-mutant HFE cDNA under the control of a 
tetracycline-sensitive promoter to functionally characterise the Q283P mutation. 
Experiments using cells over-expressing wild-type HFE confirm the existence of 
beta2microglobulin(beta2m)/HFE and HFE/transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) 
interactions, as well as the capacity of HFE to reduce transferrin-mediated iron 
uptake. In contrast, neither beta2m/HFE nor HFE/TfR1 complex formation was 
detected in cells over-expressing the mutated form of HFE. Moreover, the 283P 
HFE protein was found to have a very limited effect on the major cellular iron 
uptake pathway. Combined, our results indicate that the Q283P mutation leads to 
structural and functional consequences similar to those described for the main 
hereditary hemochromatosis mutation. As a consequence, our study has 
implications for the screening of hemochromatosis patients that have one or two 
copies of HFE which lack the main mutations. It also highlights that protein 
structure prediction methods could be more generally used to better interpret 
relationships between rare genotypes and molecular diagnosis of a human 
inherited disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-005-1307-y
PMID: 15965644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
