---
pmid: '21596751'
title: 'Endorepellin, the angiostatic module of perlecan, interacts with both the
  α2β1 integrin and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2): a dual
  receptor antagonism.'
authors:
- Goyal A
- Pal N
- Concannon M
- Paul M
- Doran M
- Poluzzi C
- Sekiguchi K
- Whitelock JM
- Neill T
- Iozzo RV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3138248
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243626
---

# Endorepellin, the angiostatic module of perlecan, interacts with both the α2β1 integrin and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2): a dual receptor antagonism.
**Authors:** Goyal A, Pal N, Concannon M, Paul M, Doran M, Poluzzi C, Sekiguchi K, Whitelock JM, Neill T, Iozzo RV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.243626](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.243626)
**PMC:** [PMC3138248](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3138248/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 22;286(29):25947-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243626. Epub 
2011 May 19.

Endorepellin, the angiostatic module of perlecan, interacts with both the α2β1 
integrin and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2): a dual 
receptor antagonism.

Goyal A(1), Pal N, Concannon M, Paul M, Doran M, Poluzzi C, Sekiguchi K, 
Whitelock JM, Neill T, Iozzo RV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Endorepellin, the C-terminal module of perlecan, negatively regulates 
angiogenesis counter to its proangiogenic parental molecule. Endorepellin (the 
C-terminal domain V of perlecan) binds the α2β1 integrin on endothelial cells 
and triggers a signaling cascade that leads to disruption of the actin 
cytoskeleton. Here, we show that both perlecan and endorepellin bind directly 
and with high affinity to both VEGF receptors 1 and 2, in a region that differs 
from VEGFA-binding site. In both human and porcine endothelial cells, this 
interaction evokes a physical down-regulation of both the α2β1 integrin and 
VEGFR2, with concurrent activation of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 and 
downstream attenuation of VEGFA transcription. We demonstrate that endorepellin 
requires both the α2β1 integrin and VEGFR2 for its angiostatic activity. 
Endothelial cells that express α2β1 integrin but lack VEGFR2, do not respond to 
endorepellin treatment. Thus, we provide a new paradigm for the activity of an 
antiangiogenic protein and mechanistically explain the specificity of 
endorepellin for endothelial cells, the only cells that simultaneously express 
both receptors. We hypothesize that a mechanism such as dual receptor antagonism 
could operate for other angiostatic fragments.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243626
PMCID: PMC3138248
PMID: 21596751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Endorepellin, the C-terminal module of perlecan, negatively regulates angiogenesis counter to its proangiogenic parental molecule. Endorepellin (the C-terminal domain V of perlecan) binds the α2β1 integrin on endothelial cells and triggers a signaling cascade that leads to disruption of the actin cytoskeleton. Here, we show that both perlecan and endorepellin bind directly and with high affinity to both VEGF receptors 1 and 2, in a region that differs from VEGFA-binding site. In both human and porcine endothelial cells, this interaction evokes a physical down-regulation of both the α2β1 integrin and VEGFR2, with concurrent activation of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 and downstream attenuation of VEGFA transcription. We demonstrate that endorepellin requires both the α2β1 integrin and VEGFR2 for its angiostatic activity. Endothelial cells that express α2β1 integrin but lack VEGFR2, do not respond to endorepellin treatment. Thus, we provide a new paradigm for the activity of an antiangiogenic protein and mechanistically explain the specificity of endorepellin for endothelial cells, the only cells that simultaneously express both receptors. We hypothesize that a mechanism such as dual receptor antagonism could operate for other angiostatic fragments.

Introduction

Angiogenesis is regulated by opposing biological activities of stimulation and inhibition initiated by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 4 ( 1 , 2 ) and processed forms of matrix proteins such as thrombospondin, endostatin, and endorepellin ( 3 ). Most of these activities are mediated by VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2), which is located at strategic domains of the endothelial plasma membrane. This specialized topology facilitates rapid and efficient signal transduction through receptor homodimerization and association with co-receptors leading to recruitment of downstream signaling molecules ( 4 ). A central mechanism for modulating cellular responses to VEGFA occurs via activation of various integrin receptors ( 5 ), which, by functionally coupling with VEGFR2, regulate developmental and pathological angiogenesis ( 6 ). For example, endothelial cell binding to vitronectin through αvβ3 integrin positively regulates VEGFR2 ( 7 , 8 ), whereas expression of active αvβ3 induces VEGF secretion thereby stimulating tumor growth and angiogenesis ( 9 ). Moreover, activated αvβ3 co-localizes with VEGFR2 on tumor endothelial cells ( 10 ) and angiogenesis in transgenic mice expressing a phosphorylation-defective β3 integrin is impaired due to an inability of β3 integrin to form a functional bipartite complex with VEGFR2 ( 11 ). These results demonstrate a functional interplay between αvβ3 integrin and VEGFR2 that leads to enhancement of ligand-induced activity of this receptor tyrosine kinase upon integrin engagement ( 12 ).

Several members of the β1 integrin family have also been involved in regulating angiogenesis and VEGFR2 activity ( 13 – 16 ). For instance, α9β1 integrin binds VEGFA and cooperates with VEGFR2 in promoting angiogenesis ( 17 , 18 ). In contrast, α1β1 integrin induces T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase that dephosphorylates and silences VEGFR2 ( 19 ) as well as caveolin-1 ( 20 ). A functional interaction between β1 integrins and VEGFR2 plays a role in the pathogenesis of infantile hemangiomas ( 21 ) and is required for matrix-bound VEGFA signaling in endothelial cells ( 22 ). Notably, VEGFR2 associates with two thrombospondin receptors, namely CD36 and β1 integrin, and activation of VEGFR2 by VEGFA is suppressed by antiangiogenic domains of thrombospondin ( 23 ).

Genetic ablation studies have revealed specialized functions for several cell-associated heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) that depend on their ability to coordinate functional interactions between VEGFs and their cognate receptors ( 24 ). The current view is that cell surface HSPGs potentiate the duration and magnitude of VEGFA signaling through VEGFR2, the main receptor of vascular endothelial cells, and these activities have been corroborated by studies focused on vasculogenesis and tumor angiogenesis ( 25 , 26 ). Less is known about the secreted HSPGs such as perlecan, which was originally shown to bind endothelial cell surface via β1 and β3 integrins ( 27 ). In addition to being a key component of basement membranes ( 28 ) and cell surfaces ( 29 , 30 ), perlecan modulates several biological processes by regulating the activity of growth factors and receptors through high affinity interactions via its N-terminal HS or its modular protein core ( 31 – 33 ). Perlecan ( 34 ), acts as an early-response gene that is transcriptionally induced by TGFβ1 ( 35 , 36 ) and cyclic mechanical strain ( 37 ) but repressed by interferon-γ ( 38 ). Deregulated perlecan expression plays a role in cancer progression ( 39 – 42 ), lipid uptake ( 43 ), and vascular injury and thrombosis ( 44 – 47 ).

Under homeostasis, perlecan binds VEGFA via its HS chains ( 48 ) where it is released by heparanase ( 49 ) and presented to VEGFR2 for signaling. Indeed, endothelial HS regulates VEGF-induced vascular permeability ( 50 ). Notably, VEGFA induces perlecan synthesis via activation of VEGFR2 in microvascular endothelial cells ( 51 ), indicating a positive feedback loop regulating VEGFA and perlecan biosynthesis. In contrast, sustained VEGFA blockade causes a marked up-regulation of perlecan in hepatoblastoma xenografts and sustained VEGFR2 activation ( 52 ). In agreement with these findings, perlecan knockdown attenuates the proliferative response to both VEGFA and FGF2 ( 53 – 55 ). However, in fibrosarcoma xenografts, suppression of perlecan favors tumor growth and invasion ( 56 ), suggesting that these biological responses are cell context-specific.

We have recently discovered that endorepellin, a C-terminal angiostatic fragment of perlecan, binds α2β1 integrin ( 57 – 60 ) and induces the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1, which inactivates several receptor tyrosine kinases, including VEGFR2 ( 61 ). We further discovered that perlecan and α2β1 integrin are directly involved in vertebrate embryonic angiogenesis ( 62 , 63 ), and attenuation of perlecan expression leads to an abnormal accumulation and localization of VEGFA ( 64 ). These data suggest that perlecan might be directly involved in modulating the VEGFA/VEGFR2 signaling axis. In this work, we discovered that perlecan binds with high affinity to both VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 via the C-terminal domain V/endorepellin. The concerted interaction of endorepellin, α2β1 integrin, and VEGFR2 leads to a transcriptional repression of VEGFA production, thereby contributing to the antiangiogenic activity of endorepellin. Our work provides a new paradigm for antiangiogenic fragments derived from large precursors, that is “a dual receptor” antagonism. We predict that a similar bioactivity could be operational for other processed forms of angiostatic matrix molecules.

DISCUSSION

About 24 years ago, Yurchenco and co-workers ( 77 ) described the macromolecular architecture of perlecan protein core as a “flexible tandem array of globular domains” and speculated that, in analogy to other modular proteins such as fibronectin, each perlecan domain would prove in time to have its own function. The multiple functions of one of the perlecan protein core domains certainly confirm this prediction. The fact that perlecan domain V/endorepellin binds with high affinity not only cell surface receptors but also proteins involved in cancer and angiogenesis such as FGF7 ( 84 ), FGF-binding protein ( 85 ), endostatin ( 57 ), extracellular matrix protein 1 ( 86 ), and progranulin ( 71 ), point to an important biological role for this multimodular proteoglycan ( 87 , 88 ). In the present study, we discovered that perlecan binds to VEGFR2 via its C-terminal domain V/endorepellin and can counteract the bioactivity of VEGFA through a portion of its protein core opposite to where the proangiogenic HS chains are located. Thus, we provide evidence for a bivalent activity of a basement membrane and pericellular HSPG that could act in a concerted manner to affect the α2β1 integrin receptor and VEGFR2, which are both key players in angiogenesis. A current working model ( Fig. 8 ) summarizes our present findings. Endorepellin could act as an allosteric inhibitor of VEGFR2 by binding to a region different than VEGFA, which is known to bind Ig 2–3 . This binding likely occurs via the two proximal LG1 and LG2 domains, whereas LG3 wound bind to the α2β1 integrin. This dual receptor binding leads to rapid internalization of both receptors and degradation. On the other hand, endorepellin activates the phosphatase SHP-1, which in turn would dephosphorylate key tyrosine residues in the VEGFR2, thereby blocking prosurvival and proangiogenic downstream signaling pathways. Moreover, this dual antagonistic activity of endorepellin in attenuating both α2β1 integrin and VEGFR2 causes a transcriptional repression of VEGF gene transcription leading to reduced VEGFA mRNA and protein production and reduced VEGFA secretion by endothelial cells. The activity of endorepellin is analogous to that of TIMP-2, which also involves a SHP-1-dependent mechanism of heterologous receptor inactivation. Specifically, TIMP-2 binds to the α3β1 integrin and induces SHP-1, which in turn dephosphorylates several receptor tyrosine kinases, including VEGFR2 and FGFR1, via a mechanism that is independent of its antiprotease activity ( 89 – 91 ).

Abrogation of the Hspg2 gene in both mice ( 92 ) and zebrafish ( 62 ) causes abnormal vessel formation, particularly evident in the latter animal model where the intersegmental vessels, produced by angiogenic sprouting from the dorsal aorta, are blunted and nonfunctional. The similar phenotypes between the perlecan morphants and those with knockdown of Vegfa ( 93 ) and the α2β1 integrin ( 63 ) as well as the overlapping vascular pathology observed between the perlecan and the Plc γ 1 morphants ( 94 ), a major downstream target of VEGFR2, indicate that perlecan is a key upstream component of the VEGFA/VEGFR2 signaling pathway. We discovered previously that perlecan knockdown causes a paradoxical increase in total VEGFA protein with abnormal deposits of VEGFA often away from normal vascular patterning and that the perlecan morphants could be partially rescued by microinjections of human recombinant VEGFA ( 64 ). Consistent with this hypothesis, combined administration of perlecan and VEGFA to HUVECs enhances VEGFR2 phosphorylation at Tyr-951 ( 64 ). Similarly, a soluble form of perlecan domain I harboring HS chains enhances VEGFA activity on VEGFR2 phosphorylation at Tyr-951 and downstream Akt activation ( 95 ). Collectively, these findings support a dual role for perlecan as a regulator of “proper” VEGFA localization and as a mediator of signaling through VEGFR2. Our current results support the novel hypothesis that perlecan and endorepellin evoke the recruitment of a larger signaling complex encompassing at least two transmembrane receptors and several intracellular binding partners, including, among others, SHP-1. This key tyrosine phosphatase is constitutively associated with the α2 integrin subunit in HUVECs ( 61 ) and with VEGFR2 in HUVECs and PAE-VEGFR2 cells ( 82 , 96 ). Thus, SHP-1 could function as the intracellular proximal bridge between the two receptors. It is known that SHP-1 needs steric activation to remove the autoinhibiting SH-2 domain from its active site as well as the activating phosphorylation site ( 97 ). Endorepellin binding to the integrin-VEGFR2 complex could evoke this steric change through conformational changes in the integrin, whereas VEGFR2 could promote Tyr phosphorylation through its intracellular kinase domain.

In the present study, we provide detailed analysis of endorepellin binding to VEGFR1 and VEGFR2. Molar excess of VEGFA or heparin do not appreciably displace endorepellin from either receptor, indicating that binding of endorepellin to VEGFR1/2 is located in a region of the receptor ectodomain that does not overlap with VEGFA binding and that the endorepellin-VEGFR1/2 interaction is not due to electrostatic interactions. These results are important because it has been shown previously that the soluble ectodomain of VEGFR2, similar in structure to that used here, binds heparin ( 98 ) via a short stretch of basic amino acid residues located between Ig 6 and Ig 7 ( 99 ). Moreover, a highly basic decapeptide derived from this stretch inhibits VEGFA binding to VEGFR2 in the presence of heparin, suggesting a specific interaction rather than competition for VEGFR2 ( 99 ). As VEGFA binds to Ig 2–3 of VEGFR1 ( 100 ), then endorepellin might bind to Ig 4–7 . However, the lack of displacement by heparin suggests that endorepellin might bind between Ig 4 and Ig 5. Notably, structural studies have confirmed that VEGFA by binding to Ig 2–3 of VEGFR2 causes receptor dimerization and promotes further interaction via the membrane-proximal Ig 7 ( 101 ), which has been recently to be critical for receptor dimerization/activation and signaling ( 102 ). Thus, endorepellin could potentially inhibit VEGFR2 dimerization as recently shown for antibodies targeting Ig 4–7 ( 103 , 104 ).

Another important finding of this report is that the terminal globular domain of endorepellin, LG3, previously shown to directly interact with the α2 I domain of the α2β1 integrin ( 58 , 73 ), does not bind to either VEGFR1 or -2. This result suggests that endorepellin could simultaneously bind to α2β1 integrin via LG3 and VEGFR2 via LG1–LG2 moieties ( Fig. 8 ). Thus, our results provide a plausible explanation for the selective bioactivity of endorepellin for endothelial cells as only these cells express both the α2β1 integrin receptor and VEGFR2. This is a reasonable explanation for our previous in vitro and in vivo results, which have shown that cells expressing α2β1 even at high levels, such as fibroblasts, HT1080 fibrosarcoma, or A431 squamous carcinoma cells, do not respond to endorepellin both in migration assays and in disruption of the actin cytoskeleton ( 57 , 58 , 105 ).

It is notable that, as for the case of other angiogenic integrins, genetic ablation of α2 integrin subunit leads to an enhanced angiogenesis in both tumor xenograft development ( 73 , 106 ) and wound healing ( 107 , 108 ). This anomalous phenotype could be explained in part by our previous and current findings. The lack of α2β1 integrin in mice is associated with lower levels and activity of SHP-1, which requires the intracellular domain of the α2 integrin subunit to be properly anchored in endothelial cells and liver ( 61 ). This would lead to a protracted hyperactivation state for various receptor tyrosine kinases involved in prosurvival and proangiogenic activities. This is true for melanoma tumor xenografts grown in mice lacking the α2β1 integrin. Consistent with this hypothesis, mice lacking the α2β1 integrin and harboring syngeneic melanoma tumor xenografts exhibit an increase in tumor angiogenesis and a concurrent up-regulation of VEGFR1 in the tumor endothelium ( 106 ). Moreover, lack of the α2β1 integrin could be also important because the endogenous circulating endorepellin would not be able to interact with its primary functional receptor. Indeed, endorepellin and its C-terminal LG3 fragments have been found in many body fluids, including blood, urine, and amniotic fluid ( 88 ). Endorepellin is secreted by preapoptotic endothelial cells via cathepsin L ( 109 ), whereas LG3 is found in the secretome of various tumor cells likely generated by BMP-1 ( 74 , 110 ). Finally, low circulating levels of LG3 in breast cancer patients have been correlated with poor prognosis ( 111 ).

In conclusion, we provide a new paradigm for the activity of an antiangiogenic protein by demonstrating that endorepellin requires two receptors for its angiostatic activity, namely the α2β1 integrin and VEGFR2. As perlecan and endorepellin have been present for >500 million years of evolution, we speculate that a mechanism such as “dual receptor antagonism,” could be operational for other members of the extracellular matrix or blood derivatives that are specifically acting on endothelial cell homeostasis. Moreover, our findings support endorepellin as a novel antiangiogenic modality that could supplement established therapies in clinical use or in preclinical stages.
