---
pmid: '16844784'
title: Dissecting virulence pathways of Mycobacterium tuberculosis through protein-protein
  association.
authors:
- Singh A
- Mai D
- Kumar A
- Steyn AJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1544089
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0602817103
---

# Dissecting virulence pathways of Mycobacterium tuberculosis through protein-protein association.
**Authors:** Singh A, Mai D, Kumar A, Steyn AJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0602817103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0602817103)
**PMC:** [PMC1544089](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1544089/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 25;103(30):11346-51. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0602817103. Epub 2006 Jul 14.

Dissecting virulence pathways of Mycobacterium tuberculosis through 
protein-protein association.

Singh A(1), Mai D, Kumar A, Steyn AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

The sudden increase in information derived from the completed Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb) genome sequences has revealed the need for approaches capable 
of converting raw genome sequence data into functional information. To date, an 
experimental system for studying protein-protein association in mycobacteria is 
not available. We have developed a simple system, termed mycobacterial protein 
fragment complementation (M-PFC), that is based upon the functional 
reconstitution of two small murine dihydrofolate reductase domains independently 
fused to two interacting proteins. Using M-PFC, we have successfully 
demonstrated dimerization of yeast GCN4, interaction between Mtb KdpD and KdpE, 
and association between Esat-6 and Cfp-10. We established the association 
between the sensor kinase, DevS, and response regulator, DevR, thereby 
demonstrating the potential of M-PFC to study protein associations in the 
mycobacterial membrane. To validate our system, we screened an Mtb library for 
proteins that associate with the secreted antigen Cfp-10 and consistently 
identified Esat-6 in our screens. Additional proteins that specifically 
associate with Cfp-10 include Rv0686 and Rv2151c (FtsQ), a component and 
substrate, respectively, of the evolutionary conserved signal recognition 
pathway; and Rv3596c (ClpC1), an AAA-ATPase chaperone involved in protein 
translocation and quality control. Our results provide empirical evidence that 
directly links the Mtb specialized secretion pathway with the evolutionary 
conserved signal recognition and SecA/SecYEG pathways, suggesting they share 
secretory components. We anticipate that M-PFC will be a major contributor to 
the systematic assembly of mycobacterial protein interaction maps that will lead 
to the development of better strategies for the control of tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0602817103
PMCID: PMC1544089
PMID: 16844784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.
