---
pmid: '9789005'
title: Folding in vivo of a newly translated yeast cytosolic enzyme is mediated by
  the SSA class of cytosolic yeast Hsp70 proteins.
authors:
- Kim S
- Schilke B
- Craig EA
- Horwich AL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23633
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.12860
---

# Folding in vivo of a newly translated yeast cytosolic enzyme is mediated by the SSA class of cytosolic yeast Hsp70 proteins.
**Authors:** Kim S, Schilke B, Craig EA, Horwich AL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.22.12860](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.22.12860)
**PMC:** [PMC23633](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23633/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 27;95(22):12860-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.22.12860.

Folding in vivo of a newly translated yeast cytosolic enzyme is mediated by the 
SSA class of cytosolic yeast Hsp70 proteins.

Kim S(1), Schilke B, Craig EA, Horwich AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, Boyer Center, 295 
Congress Avenue, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

The nature of chaperone action in the eukaryotic cytosol that assists newly 
translated cytosolic proteins to reach the native state has remained poorly 
defined. Actin, tubulin, and Galpha transducin are assisted by the cytosolic 
chaperonin, CCT, but many other proteins, for example, ornithine 
transcarbamoylase (OTC), a cytosolic homotrimeric enzyme of yeast, do not 
require CCT action. Here, we observe that yeast cytosolic OTC is assisted to its 
native state by the SSA class of yeast cytosolic Hsp70 proteins. In vitro, 
refolding of OTC diluted from denaturant was assisted by crude yeast cytosol and 
ATP and found to be directed by SSA1/2. In vivo, when OTC was induced in a 
temperature-sensitive SSA-deficient strain, it exhibited reduced specific 
activity, and nonnative subunits were detected in the soluble fraction. These 
findings indicate that, in vivo, the Hsp70 system assists in folding at least 
some newly translated cytosolic enzymes, most likely functioning in a 
posttranslational manner.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.12860
PMCID: PMC23633
PMID: 9789005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
