---
pmid: '15292202'
title: Heparanase uptake is mediated by cell membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
authors:
- Gingis-Velitski S
- Zetser A
- Kaplan V
- Ben-Zaken O
- Cohen E
- Levy-Adam F
- Bashenko Y
- Flugelman MY
- Vlodavsky I
- Ilan N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402131200
---

# Heparanase uptake is mediated by cell membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
**Authors:** Gingis-Velitski S, Zetser A, Kaplan V, Ben-Zaken O, Cohen E, Levy-Adam F, Bashenko Y, Flugelman MY, Vlodavsky I, Ilan N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M402131200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M402131200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 15;279(42):44084-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402131200. Epub 
2004 Jul 29.

Heparanase uptake is mediated by cell membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans.

Gingis-Velitski S(1), Zetser A, Kaplan V, Ben-Zaken O, Cohen E, Levy-Adam F, 
Bashenko Y, Flugelman MY, Vlodavsky I, Ilan N.

Author information:
(1)Cancer and Vascular Biology Research Center, Bruce Rappaport Faculty of 
Medicine, Technion, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Heparanase is a mammalian endoglycosidase that degrades heparan sulfate (HS) at 
specific intrachain sites, an activity that is strongly implicated in cell 
dissemination associated with metastasis and inflammation. In addition to its 
structural role in extracellular matrix assembly and integrity, HS sequesters a 
multitude of polypeptides that reside in the extracellular matrix as a 
reservoir. A variety of growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, and enzymes can 
be released by heparanase activity and profoundly affect cell and tissue 
function. Thus, heparanase bioavailability, accessibility, and activity should 
be kept tightly regulated. We provide evidence that HS is not only a substrate 
for, but also a regulator of, heparanase. Addition of heparin or xylosides to 
cell cultures resulted in a pronounced accumulation of, heparanase in the 
culture medium, whereas sodium chlorate had no such effect. Moreover, cellular 
uptake of heparanase was markedly reduced in HS-deficient CHO-745 mutant cells, 
heparan sulfate proteoglycan-deficient HT-29 colon cancer cells, and 
heparinase-treated cells. We also studied the heparanase biosynthetic route and 
found that the half-life of the active enzyme is approximately 30 h. This and 
previous localization studies suggest that heparanase resides in the 
endosomal/lysosomal compartment for a relatively long period of time and is 
likely to play a role in the normal turnover of HS. Co-localization studies and 
cell fractionation following heparanase addition have identified syndecan family 
members as candidate molecules responsible for heparanase uptake, providing an 
efficient mechanism that limits extracellular accumulation and function of 
heparanase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402131200
PMID: 15292202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
