---
pmid: '18534984'
title: Hhat is a palmitoylacyltransferase with specificity for N-palmitoylation of
  Sonic Hedgehog.
authors:
- Buglino JA
- Resh MD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2494920
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803901200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Hhat is a palmitoylacyltransferase with specificity for N-palmitoylation of Sonic Hedgehog.
**Authors:** Buglino JA, Resh MD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803901200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803901200)
**PMC:** [PMC2494920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2494920/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 8;283(32):22076-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803901200. Epub
2008  Jun 4.

Hhat is a palmitoylacyltransferase with specificity for N-palmitoylation of 
Sonic Hedgehog.

Buglino JA(1), Resh MD.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York 10065, USA.

Palmitoylation of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is critical for effective long- and 
short-range signaling. Genetic screens uncovered a potential 
palmitoylacyltransferase (PAT) for Shh, Hhat, but the molecular mechanism of Shh 
palmitoylation remains unclear. Here, we have developed and exploited an in 
vitro Shh palmitoylation assay to purify Hhat to homogeneity. We provide direct 
biochemical evidence that Hhat is a PAT with specificity for attaching palmitate 
via amide linkage to the N-terminal cysteine of Shh. Other palmitoylated 
proteins (e.g. PSD95 and Wnt) are not substrates for Hhat, and Porcupine, a 
putative Wnt PAT, does not palmitoylate Shh. Neither autocleavage nor 
cholesterol modification is required for Shh palmitoylation. Both the Shh 
precursor and mature protein are N-palmitoylated by Hhat, and the reaction 
occurs during passage through the secretory pathway. This study establishes Hhat 
as a bona fide Shh PAT and serves as a model for understanding how secreted 
morphogens are modified by distinct PATs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803901200
PMCID: PMC2494920
PMID: 18534984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
