---
pmid: '16595740'
title: Thermoprotection of synaptic transmission in a Drosophila heat shock factor
  mutant is accompanied by increased expression of Hsp83 and DnaJ-1.
authors:
- Neal SJ
- Karunanithi S
- Best A
- So AK
- Tanguay RM
- Atwood HL
- Westwood JT
journal: Physiol Genomics
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00195.2005
---

# Thermoprotection of synaptic transmission in a Drosophila heat shock factor mutant is accompanied by increased expression of Hsp83 and DnaJ-1.
**Authors:** Neal SJ, Karunanithi S, Best A, So AK, Tanguay RM, Atwood HL, Westwood JT
**Journal:** Physiol Genomics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1152/physiolgenomics.00195.2005](https://doi.org/10.1152/physiolgenomics.00195.2005)

## Abstract

1. Physiol Genomics. 2006 May 16;25(3):493-501. doi: 
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00195.2005. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Thermoprotection of synaptic transmission in a Drosophila heat shock factor 
mutant is accompanied by increased expression of Hsp83 and DnaJ-1.

Neal SJ(1), Karunanithi S, Best A, So AK, Tanguay RM, Atwood HL, Westwood JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Toronto, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.

In Drosophila larvae, acquired synaptic thermotolerance after heat shock has 
previously been shown to correlate with the induction of heat shock proteins 
(Hsps) including HSP70. We tested the hypothesis that synaptic thermotolerance 
would be significantly diminished in a temperature-sensitive strain (Drosophila 
heat shock factor mutant hsf4), which has been reported not to be able to 
produce inducible Hsps in response to heat shock. Contrary to our hypothesis, 
considerable thermoprotection was still observed at hsf4 larval synapses after 
heat shock. To investigate the cause of this thermoprotection, we conducted DNA 
microarray experiments to identify heat-induced transcript changes in these 
organisms. Transcripts of the hsp83, dnaJ-1 (hsp40), and 
glutathione-S-transferase gstE1 genes were significantly upregulated in hsf4 
larvae after heat shock. In addition, increases in the levels of Hsp83 and 
DnaJ-1 proteins but not in the inducible form of Hsp70 were detected by Western 
blot analysis. The mode of heat shock administration differentially affected the 
relative transcript and translational changes for these chaperones. These 
results indicate that the compensatory upregulation of constitutively expressed 
Hsps, in the absence of the synthesis of the major inducible Hsp, Hsp70, could 
still provide substantial thermoprotection to both synapses and the whole 
organism.

DOI: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00195.2005
PMID: 16595740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
