---
pmid: '18026683'
title: Evolution of vertebrate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenases.
authors:
- Yuasa HJ
- Takubo M
- Takahashi A
- Hasegawa T
- Noma H
- Suzuki T
journal: J Mol Evol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00239-007-9049-1
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Evolution of vertebrate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenases.
**Authors:** Yuasa HJ, Takubo M, Takahashi A, Hasegawa T, Noma H, Suzuki T
**Journal:** J Mol Evol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00239-007-9049-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00239-007-9049-1)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Evol. 2007 Dec;65(6):705-14. doi: 10.1007/s00239-007-9049-1. Epub 2007
Nov  17.

Evolution of vertebrate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenases.

Yuasa HJ(1), Takubo M, Takahashi A, Hasegawa T, Noma H, Suzuki T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Applied Science, Faculty of 
Science, National University Corporation Kochi University, Kochi 780-8520, 
Japan. julie@kochi-u.ac.jp

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) are 
tryptophan-degrading enzymes that catalyze the same reaction, the first step in 
tryptophan catabolism via the kynurenine pathway. TDO is widely distributed 
among life-forms, being found not only in eukaryotes but also in bacteria. In 
contrast, IDO has been found only in mammals and yeast to date. However, recent 
genome and EST projects have identified IDO homologues in non-mammals and found 
an IDO paralogue that is expressed in mice. In this study, we cloned the frog 
and fish IDO homologues and the mouse IDO paralogue, and characterized their 
enzymatic properties using recombinants. The IDOs of lower vertebrates and the 
mouse IDO paralogue had IDO activity but had 500-1000 times higher K(m) values 
and very low enzyme efficiency compared with mammalian IDOs. It appears that 
L-Trp is not a true substrate for these enzymes in vivo, although their actual 
function is unknown. On the phylogenetic tree, these low-activity IDOs, which we 
have named "proto-IDOs," formed a cluster that was distinct from the mammalian 
IDO cluster. The IDO and proto-IDO genes are present tandemly on the chromosomes 
of mammals, including the marsupial opossum, whereas only the proto-IDO gene is 
observed in chicken and fish genomes. These results suggest that (mammalian) 
IDOs arose from proto-IDOs by gene duplication that occurred before the 
divergence of marsupial and eutherian (placental) mammals in mammalian 
evolutionary history.

DOI: 10.1007/s00239-007-9049-1
PMID: 18026683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
