---
pmid: '11297510'
title: Ablation of NF1 function in neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral
  cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain.
authors:
- Zhu Y
- Romero MI
- Ghosh P
- Ye Z
- Charnay P
- Rushing EJ
- Marth JD
- Parada LF
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC312666
doi: 10.1101/gad.862101
---

# Ablation of NF1 function in neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain.
**Authors:** Zhu Y, Romero MI, Ghosh P, Ye Z, Charnay P, Rushing EJ, Marth JD, Parada LF
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.862101](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.862101)
**PMC:** [PMC312666](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC312666/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 1;15(7):859-76. doi: 10.1101/gad.862101.

Ablation of NF1 function in neurons induces abnormal development of cerebral 
cortex and reactive gliosis in the brain.

Zhu Y(1), Romero MI, Ghosh P, Ye Z, Charnay P, Rushing EJ, Marth JD, Parada LF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9133, USA.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a prevalent genetic disorder that affects 
growth properties of neural-crest-derived cell populations. In addition, 
approximately one-half of NF1 patients exhibit learning disabilities. To 
characterize NF1 function both in vitro and in vivo, we circumvent the embryonic 
lethality of NF1 null mouse embryos by generating a conditional mutation in the 
NF1 gene using Cre/loxP technology. Introduction of a Synapsin I promoter driven 
Cre transgenic mouse strain into the conditional NF1 background has ablated NF1 
function in most differentiated neuronal populations. These mice have abnormal 
development of the cerebral cortex, which suggests that NF1 has an indispensable 
role in this aspect of CNS development. Furthermore, although they are tumor 
free, these mice display extensive astrogliosis in the absence of conspicuous 
neurodegeneration or microgliosis. These results indicate that NF1-deficient 
neurons are capable of inducing reactive astrogliosis via a non-cell autonomous 
mechanism.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.862101
PMCID: PMC312666
PMID: 11297510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
