---
pmid: '12420306'
title: Sorting specificity of spermatogenic cell specific region of mouse hexokinase-s
  (mHk1-s).
authors:
- Nakamura N
- Komiyama M
- Fujioka M
- Mori C
journal: Mol Reprod Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/mrd.10215
---

# Sorting specificity of spermatogenic cell specific region of mouse hexokinase-s (mHk1-s).
**Authors:** Nakamura N, Komiyama M, Fujioka M, Mori C
**Journal:** Mol Reprod Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mrd.10215](https://doi.org/10.1002/mrd.10215)

## Abstract

1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2003 Jan;64(1):113-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.10215.

Sorting specificity of spermatogenic cell specific region of mouse hexokinase-s 
(mHk1-s).

Nakamura N(1), Komiyama M, Fujioka M, Mori C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya University, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Hexokinase is the first enzyme involved in the glycolysis process that produces 
glucose phosphorylate. Our previous study reported on our cloning of mouse Hk1-s 
(mHk1-s) cDNA, which were expressed only in testis cells, and noted that this 
cDNA has a spermatogenic cell-specific region (SSR) that replaces the porin 
binding domain (PBD) in the Hk1of somatic cells. Although we know that PBD binds 
to the outer membrane of a mitochondrion, the role of the SSR is not yet 
understood. To investigate the intracellular localization of SSR, we constructed 
expression vectors with the epitope tag (GFP-, HA-), subcloned SSR, or PBD cDNA. 
We transfected these vectors in mouse fibroblast, NIH3T3 cells, after which we 
observed the localization of the SSR and PBD in the NIH3T3 cells. Our current 
study using the immunocytochemical method revealed that PBD is concentrated 
around the mitochondrion. However, the SSR could not be ascribed to the 
mitochondrion, ER, or nuclear colocalization. Moreover, subcellular 
fractionation analysis showed that PBD was detected in the mitochondrial 
fraction, and that SSR was detected in the cytosolic fraction. Our findings 
suggest that PBD of Hk1 targets mitochondrion, but the SSR of mHk1-s targets 
some specific organellae.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.10215
PMID: 12420306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
