---
pmid: '16289032'
title: Identification of human and rat FAD-AMP lyase (cyclic FMN forming) as ATP-dependent
  dihydroxyacetone kinases.
authors:
- Cabezas A
- Costas MJ
- Pinto RM
- Couto A
- Cameselle JC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.142
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of human and rat FAD-AMP lyase (cyclic FMN forming) as ATP-dependent dihydroxyacetone kinases.
**Authors:** Cabezas A, Costas MJ, Pinto RM, Couto A, Cameselle JC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.142](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.142)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1682-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.142. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Identification of human and rat FAD-AMP lyase (cyclic FMN forming) as 
ATP-dependent dihydroxyacetone kinases.

Cabezas A(1), Costas MJ, Pinto RM, Couto A, Cameselle JC.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad 
de Extremadura, 06080 Badajoz, Spain.

Rat liver FAD-AMP lyase or FMN cyclase is the only known enzymatic source of the 
unusual flavin nucleotide riboflavin 4',5'-cyclic phosphate. To determine its 
molecular identity, a peptide-mass fingerprint of the purified rat enzyme was 
obtained. It pointed to highly related, mammalian hypothetical proteins 
putatively classified as dihydroxyacetone (Dha) kinases due to weaker homologies 
to biochemically proven Dha kinases of plants, yeasts, and bacteria. The human 
protein LOC26007 cDNA was used to design PCR primers. The product amplified from 
human brain cDNA was cloned, sequenced (GenBank Accession No. ), and found to 
differ from protein LOC26007 cDNA by three SNPs. Its heterologous expression 
yielded a protein active both as FMN cyclase and ATP-dependent Dha kinase, each 
activity being inhibited by the substrate(s) of the other. Cyclase and kinase 
activities copurified from rat liver extracts. Evidence supports that a single 
protein sustains both activities, probably in a single active center. Putative 
Dha kinases from other mammals are likely to be FMN cyclases too. Future work 
will profit from the availability of the structure of Citrobacter freundii Dha 
kinase, which contains substrate-interacting residues conserved in human Dha 
kinase/FMN cyclase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.142
PMID: 16289032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
