---
pmid: '9168471'
title: 'Identification of detergent-resistant plasma membrane microdomains in dictyostelium:
  enrichment of signal transduction proteins.'
authors:
- Xiao Z
- Devreotes PN
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC276134
doi: 10.1091/mbc.8.5.855
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of detergent-resistant plasma membrane microdomains in dictyostelium: enrichment of signal transduction proteins.
**Authors:** Xiao Z, Devreotes PN
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.8.5.855](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.8.5.855)
**PMC:** [PMC276134](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC276134/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 1997 May;8(5):855-69. doi: 10.1091/mbc.8.5.855.

Identification of detergent-resistant plasma membrane microdomains in 
dictyostelium: enrichment of signal transduction proteins.

Xiao Z(1), Devreotes PN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

Unlike most other cellular proteins, the chemoattractant receptor, cAR1, of 
Dictyostelium is resistant to extraction by the zwitterionic detergent, CHAPS. 
We exploited this property to isolate a subcellular fraction highly enriched in 
cAR1 by flotation of CHAPS lysates of cells in sucrose density gradients. 
Immunogold electron microscopy studies revealed a homogeneous preparation of 
membrane bilayer sheets. This preparation, designated CHAPS-insoluble floating 
fraction (CHIEF), also contained a defined set of 20 other proteins and a single 
uncharged lipid. Cell surface biotinylation and preembedding immunoelectron 
microscopy both confirmed the plasma membrane origin of this preparation. The 
cell surface phosphodiesterase (PDE) and a downstream effector of cAR1, 
adenylate cyclase (ACA), were specifically localized in these structures, 
whereas the cell adhesion molecule gp80, most of the major cell surface membrane 
proteins, cytoskeletal components, the actin-binding integral membrane protein 
ponticulin, and G-protein alpha- and beta-subunits were absent. Overall, CHIFF 
represents about 3-5% of cell externally exposed membrane proteins. All of these 
results indicate that CHIFF is derived from specialized microdomains of the 
plasma membrane. The method of isolation is analogous to that of caveolae. 
However, we were unable to detect distinct caveolae-like structures on the cell 
surface associated with cAR1, which showed a diffuse staining profile. The 
discovery of CHIFF facilitates the purification of cAR1 and related signaling 
proteins and the biochemical characterization of receptor-mediated processes 
such as G-protein activation and desensitization. It also has important 
implications for the "fluid mosaic" model of the plasma membrane structures.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.8.5.855
PMCID: PMC276134
PMID: 9168471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Unlike most other cellular proteins, the chemoattractant receptor, cAR1, of Dictyostelium is resistant to extraction by the zwitterionic detergent, CHAPS. We exploited this property to isolate a subcellular fraction highly enriched in cAR1 by flotation of CHAPS lysates of cells in sucrose density gradients. Immunogold electron microscopy studies revealed a homogeneous preparation of membrane bilayer sheets. This preparation, designated CHAPS-insoluble floating fraction (CHIEF), also contained a defined set of 20 other proteins and a single uncharged lipid. Cell surface biotinylation and preembedding immunoelectron microscopy both confirmed the plasma membrane origin of this preparation. The cell surface phosphodiesterase (PDE) and a downstream effector of cAR1, adenylate cyclase (ACA), were specifically localized in these structures, whereas the cell adhesion molecule gp80, most of the major cell surface membrane proteins, cytoskeletal components, the actin-binding integral membrane protein ponticulin, and G-protein alpha- and beta-subunits were absent. Overall, CHIFF represents about 3-5% of cell externally exposed membrane proteins. All of these results indicate that CHIFF is derived from specialized microdomains of the plasma membrane. The method of isolation is analogous to that of caveolae. However, we were unable to detect distinct caveolae-like structures on the cell surface associated with cAR1, which showed a diffuse staining profile. The discovery of CHIFF facilitates the purification of cAR1 and related signaling proteins and the biochemical characterization of receptor-mediated processes such as G-protein activation and desensitization. It also has important implications for the "fluid mosaic" model of the plasma membrane structures.
