---
pmid: '17520695'
title: AFAP-110 is required for actin stress fiber formation and cell adhesion in
  MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
authors:
- Dorfleutner A
- Stehlik C
- Zhang J
- Gallick GE
- Flynn DC
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcp.21143
---

# AFAP-110 is required for actin stress fiber formation and cell adhesion in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.
**Authors:** Dorfleutner A, Stehlik C, Zhang J, Gallick GE, Flynn DC
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.21143](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.21143)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Dec;213(3):740-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21143.

AFAP-110 is required for actin stress fiber formation and cell adhesion in 
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Dorfleutner A(1), Stehlik C, Zhang J, Gallick GE, Flynn DC.

Author information:
(1)The Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and the Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology and Cell Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia 
26505-9300, USA.

Regulation of actin organization and dynamics is a highly complex process that 
involves a number of actin-binding proteins, including capping, branching, 
severing, sequestering, and cross-linking proteins. The actin-binding and 
cross-linking protein AFAP-110 is expressed in normal myoepithelial cells. 
Screening of different breast epithelial cell lines revealed high expression 
levels of AFAP-110 in the human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and 
MDA-MB-435. Knockdown of AFAP-110 expression in MDA-MB-231 cells does not result 
in any changes in cell proliferation but did result in a loss of actin stress 
fiber cross-linking and decreased adhesion to fibronectin. An inducible 
knockdown approach confirms that MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells require AFAP-110 
expression for stress fiber formation and adhesion. Thus, AFAP-110 may provide 
cytoskeletal tension through stress fiber formation, which is required for focal 
adhesion formation. Indeed, we could not detect any focal contacts or focal 
adhesions in AFAP-110 knockdown cells after adhesion to fibronectin. Although 
expression levels of crucial focal adhesion components were not influenced by 
AFAP-110 expression levels, treatment of AFAP-110 knockdown cells with LPA did 
not result in induction of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions. In summary, 
AFAP-110 plays an important role in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell adhesion 
possibly by regulating stress filament cross-linking which would promote focal 
adhesion formation.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21143
PMID: 17520695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
