---
reference_id: PMID:36346907
title: "Comparison of Kill Switch Toxins in Plant-Beneficial Pseudomonas fluorescens Reveals Drivers of Lethality, Stability, and Escape."
authors:
- Halvorsen TM
- Ricci DP
- Park DM
- Jiao Y
- Yung MC
journal: ACS Synth Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Kill Switch Toxins in Plant-Beneficial Pseudomonas fluorescens Reveals Drivers of Lethality, Stability, and Escape.
**Authors:** Halvorsen TM, Ricci DP, Park DM, Jiao Y, Yung MC
**Journal:** ACS Synth Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acssynbio.2c00386](https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.2c00386)

## Content

1. ACS Synth Biol. 2022 Nov 18;11(11):3785-3796. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00386. 
Epub 2022 Nov 8.

Comparison of Kill Switch Toxins in Plant-Beneficial Pseudomonas fluorescens 
Reveals Drivers of Lethality, Stability, and Escape.

Halvorsen TM(1), Ricci DP(1), Park DM(1), Jiao Y(1), Yung MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Biosciences and Biotechnology 
Division, Livermore, California 94550, United States.

Kill switches provide a biocontainment strategy in which unwanted growth of an 
engineered microorganism is prevented by expression of a toxin gene. A major 
challenge in kill switch engineering is balancing evolutionary stability with 
robust cell killing activity in application relevant host strains. Understanding 
host-specific containment dynamics and modes of failure helps to develop potent 
yet stable kill switches. To guide the design of robust kill switches in the 
agriculturally relevant strain Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25, we present a 
comparison of lethality, stability, and genetic escape of eight different toxic 
effectors in the presence of their cognate inactivators (i.e., toxin-antitoxin 
modules, polymorphic exotoxin-immunity systems, restriction 
endonuclease-methyltransferase pair). We find that cell killing capacity and 
evolutionary stability are inversely correlated and dependent on the level of 
protection provided by the inactivator gene. Decreasing the proteolytic 
stability of the inactivator protein can increase cell killing capacity, but at 
the cost of long-term circuit stability. By comparing toxins within the same 
genetic context, we determine that modes of genetic escape increase with circuit 
complexity and are driven by toxin activity, the protective capacity of the 
inactivator, and the presence of mutation-prone sequences within the circuit. 
Collectively, the results of our study reveal that circuit complexity, toxin 
choice, inactivator stability, and DNA sequence design are powerful drivers of 
kill switch stability and valuable targets for optimization of biocontainment 
systems.

DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.2c00386
PMID: 36346907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]