---
pmid: '21245381'
title: Neuropilin-1 signaling through p130Cas tyrosine phosphorylation is essential
  for growth factor-dependent migration of glioma and endothelial cells.
authors:
- Evans IM
- Yamaji M
- Britton G
- Pellet-Many C
- Lockie C
- Zachary IC
- Frankel P
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3067908
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00903-10
---

# Neuropilin-1 signaling through p130Cas tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for growth factor-dependent migration of glioma and endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Evans IM, Yamaji M, Britton G, Pellet-Many C, Lockie C, Zachary IC, Frankel P
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00903-10](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00903-10)
**PMC:** [PMC3067908](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3067908/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;31(6):1174-85. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00903-10. Epub 2011
Jan  18.

Neuropilin-1 signaling through p130Cas tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for 
growth factor-dependent migration of glioma and endothelial cells.

Evans IM(1), Yamaji M, Britton G, Pellet-Many C, Lockie C, Zachary IC, Frankel 
P.

Author information:
(1)UCL Division of Medicine, 5 University Street, London WC1E 6JJ, United 
Kingdom.

Neuropilin-1 (NRP1) is a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
and plays an important role in mediating cell motility. However, the NRP1 
signaling pathways important for cell motility are poorly understood. Here we 
report that p130(Cas) tyrosine phosphorylation is stimulated by hepatocyte 
growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor in U87MG glioma cells and VEGF 
in endothelial cells and is dependent on NRP1 via its intracellular domain. In 
endothelial cells, NRP1 silencing reduced, but did not prevent, VEGF receptor 2 
(VEGFR2) phosphorylation, while expression of a mutant form of NRP1 lacking the 
intracellular domain (NRP1ΔC) did not affect receptor phosphorylation in U87MG 
cells or human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In HUVECs, NRP1 was 
also required for VEGF-induced phosphorylation of proline-rich tyrosine kinase 
2, which was necessary for p130(Cas) phosphorylation. Importantly, knockdown of 
NRP1 or p130(Cas) or expression of either NRP1ΔC or a 
non-tyrosine-phosphorylatable substrate domain mutant protein (p130(Cas15F)) was 
sufficient to inhibit growth factor-mediated migration of glioma and endothelial 
cells. These data demonstrate for the first time the importance of the NRP1 
intracellular domain in mediating a specific signaling pathway downstream of 
several receptor tyrosine kinases and identify a critical role for a novel 
NRP1-p130(Cas) pathway in the regulation of chemotaxis.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00903-10
PMCID: PMC3067908
PMID: 21245381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
