---
pmid: '9053548'
title: Immunocytochemical localization of peroxisomal proteins in human liver and
  kidney.
authors:
- Espeel M
- Van Limbergen G
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF00711436
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Immunocytochemical localization of peroxisomal proteins in human liver and kidney.
**Authors:** Espeel M, Van Limbergen G
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00711436](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00711436)

## Abstract

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 1995;18 Suppl 1:135-54. doi: 10.1007/BF00711436.

Immunocytochemical localization of peroxisomal proteins in human liver and 
kidney.

Espeel M(1), Van Limbergen G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology and Histology, University of Gent, 
Beligium.

The sample preparation and immunocytochemical methods for investigating the 
presence and subcellular localization of peroxisomal proteins (catalase, the 
three beta-oxidation enzymes, alanine : glyoxylate aminotransferase and a 
peroxisomal membrane protein) in human liver biopsies are described. We present 
a protocol for immunolabelling on ultrathin and semithin sections from the same 
tissue block, with protein A-colloidal gold as a reporter system. For this 
purpose, the tissue is embedded in Unicryl, a hydrophilic acrylic resin that is 
cured by ultraviolet illumination at 2 degrees C. The limitations and 
possibilities of the methods are discussed together with methodological 
problems. Cryostat sections of prefixed material should be used for the 
visualization by light microscopy of cytoplasmic catalase. It is emphasized that 
immunolabelling for catalase in formalin-fixed archival liver samples and in 
liver autopsy tissue (in the latter also for the peroxisomal beta-oxidation 
enzymes) permits visualization of peroxisomes; this can be helpful in diagnosing 
an index case retrospectively.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00711436
PMID: 9053548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
