---
pmid: '25339672'
title: Human IgA Fc receptor FcαRI (CD89) triggers different forms of neutrophil death
  depending on the inflammatory microenvironment.
authors:
- Wehrli M
- Cortinas-Elizondo F
- Hlushchuk R
- Daudel F
- Villiger PM
- Miescher S
- Zuercher AW
- Djonov V
- Simon HU
- von Gunten S
journal: J Immunol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400028
---

# Human IgA Fc receptor FcαRI (CD89) triggers different forms of neutrophil death depending on the inflammatory microenvironment.
**Authors:** Wehrli M, Cortinas-Elizondo F, Hlushchuk R, Daudel F, Villiger PM, Miescher S, Zuercher AW, Djonov V, Simon HU, von Gunten S
**Journal:** J Immunol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1400028](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1400028)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5649-59. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400028. Epub
2014  Oct 22.

Human IgA Fc receptor FcαRI (CD89) triggers different forms of neutrophil death 
depending on the inflammatory microenvironment.

Wehrli M(1), Cortinas-Elizondo F(1), Hlushchuk R(2), Daudel F(3), Villiger 
PM(4), Miescher S(5), Zuercher AW(5), Djonov V(2), Simon HU(1), von Gunten S(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland;
(2)Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland;
(3)Intensive Care Unit, Spital Netz Bern, CH-3004 Bern, Switzerland;
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology, and Allergology, University 
Hospital Bern, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland; and.
(5)Research and Development, CSL Behring, CH-3014 Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Bern, CH-3010 Bern, Switzerland; 
stephan.vongunten@pki.unibe.ch.

FcαRI (CD89), the human Fc receptor for IgA, is highly expressed on neutrophil 
granulocytes. In this study, we show that FcαRI induces different forms of 
neutrophil death, depending on the inflammatory microenvironment. The 
susceptibility of inflammatory neutrophils from sepsis or rheumatoid arthritis 
toward death induced by specific mAb, or soluble IgA at high concentrations, was 
enhanced. Although unstimulated cells experienced apoptosis following anti-FcαRI 
mAb stimulation, preactivation with cytokines or TLR agonists in vitro enhanced 
FcαRI-mediated death by additional recruitment of caspase-independent pathways, 
but this required PI3K class IA and MAPK signaling. Transmission electron 
microscopy of FcαRI-stimulated cells revealed cytoplasmic changes with 
vacuolization and mitochondrial swelling, nuclear condensation, and sustained 
plasma membrane. Coculture experiments with macrophages revealed 
anti-inflammatory effects of the partially caspase-independent death of primed 
cells following FcαRI engagement. Our data suggest that FcαRI has the ability to 
regulate neutrophil viability and to induce different forms of neutrophils 
depending on the inflammatory microenvironment and specific characteristics of 
the ligand-receptor interactions. Furthermore, these findings have potential 
implications for FcαRI-targeted strategies to treat neutrophil-associated 
inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400028
PMID: 25339672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
