---
pmid: '7851882'
title: 'Human mitochondrial HMG CoA synthase: liver cDNA and partial genomic cloning,
  chromosome mapping to 1p12-p13, and possible role in vertebrate evolution.'
authors:
- Boukaftane Y
- Duncan A
- Wang S
- Labuda D
- Robert MF
- Sarrazin J
- Schappert K
- Mitchell GA
journal: Genomics
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1542
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human mitochondrial HMG CoA synthase: liver cDNA and partial genomic cloning, chromosome mapping to 1p12-p13, and possible role in vertebrate evolution.
**Authors:** Boukaftane Y, Duncan A, Wang S, Labuda D, Robert MF, Sarrazin J, Schappert K, Mitchell GA
**Journal:** Genomics (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1994.1542](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1994.1542)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1994 Oct;23(3):552-9. doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1542.

Human mitochondrial HMG CoA synthase: liver cDNA and partial genomic cloning, 
chromosome mapping to 1p12-p13, and possible role in vertebrate evolution.

Boukaftane Y(1), Duncan A, Wang S, Labuda D, Robert MF, Sarrazin J, Schappert K, 
Mitchell GA.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, Québec, 
Canada.

Mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase (mHS) is the first enzyme 
of ketogenesis, whereas the cytoplasmic HS isozyme (cHS) mediates an early step 
in cholesterol synthesis. We here report the sequence of human and mouse liver 
mHS cDNAs, the sequence of a HS-like cDNA from Caenorhabditis elegans, the 
structure of a partial human mHS genomic clone, and the mapping of the human mHS 
gene to chromosome 1p12-p13. The nucleotide sequence of the human mHS cDNA 
encodes a mature mHS peptide of 471 residues, with a mean amino acid identity of 
66.5% with cHS from mammals and chicken. Comparative analysis of all known mHS 
and cHS protein and DNA sequences shows a high degree of conservation near the 
N-terminus that decreases progressively toward the C-terminus and suggests that 
the two isozymes arose from a common ancestor gene 400-900 million years ago. 
Comparison of the gene structure of mHS and cHS is also consistent with a recent 
duplication event. We hypothesize that the physiologic result of the HS gene 
duplication was the appearance of HS within the mitochondria around the time of 
emergence of early vertebrates, which linked preexisting pathways of beta 
oxidation and leucine catabolism and created the HMG CoA pathway of ketogenesis, 
thus providing a lipid-derived energy source for the vertebrate brain.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1994.1542
PMID: 7851882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
