---
pmid: '21109225'
title: Whole-exome-sequencing-based discovery of human FADD deficiency.
authors:
- Bolze A
- Byun M
- McDonald D
- Morgan NV
- Abhyankar A
- Premkumar L
- Puel A
- Bacon CM
- Rieux-Laucat F
- Pang K
- Britland A
- Abel L
- Cant A
- Maher ER
- Riedl SJ
- Hambleton S
- Casanova JL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2997374
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.028
---

# Whole-exome-sequencing-based discovery of human FADD deficiency.
**Authors:** Bolze A, Byun M, McDonald D, Morgan NV, Abhyankar A, Premkumar L, Puel A, Bacon CM, Rieux-Laucat F, Pang K, Britland A, Abel L, Cant A, Maher ER, Riedl SJ, Hambleton S, Casanova JL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.028)
**PMC:** [PMC2997374](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2997374/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Dec 10;87(6):873-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.028.
Epub  2010 Nov 25.

Whole-exome-sequencing-based discovery of human FADD deficiency.

Bolze A(1), Byun M, McDonald D, Morgan NV, Abhyankar A, Premkumar L, Puel A, 
Bacon CM, Rieux-Laucat F, Pang K, Britland A, Abel L, Cant A, Maher ER, Riedl 
SJ, Hambleton S, Casanova JL.

Author information:
(1)The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Germline mutations in FASL and FAS impair Fas-dependent apoptosis and cause 
recessively or dominantly inherited autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome 
(ALPS). Patients with ALPS typically present with no other clinical phenotype. 
We investigated a large, consanguineous, multiplex kindred in which biological 
features of ALPS were found in the context of severe bacterial and viral 
disease, recurrent hepatopathy and encephalopathy, and cardiac malformations. By 
a combination of genome-wide linkage and whole-exome sequencing, we identified a 
homozygous missense mutation in FADD, encoding the Fas-associated death domain 
protein (FADD), in the patients. This FADD mutation decreases steady-state 
protein levels and impairs Fas-dependent apoptosis in vitro, accounting for 
biological ALPS phenotypes in vivo. It also impairs Fas-independent signaling 
pathways. The observed bacterial infections result partly from functional 
hyposplenism, and viral infections result from impaired interferon immunity. We 
describe here a complex clinical disorder, its genetic basis, and some of the 
key mechanisms underlying its pathogenesis. Our findings highlight the key role 
of FADD in Fas-dependent and Fas-independent signaling pathways in humans.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.028
PMCID: PMC2997374
PMID: 21109225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
