---
pmid: '20398213'
title: The Rpd3L HDAC complex is essential for the heat stress response in yeast.
authors:
- Ruiz-Roig C
- Viéitez C
- Posas F
- de Nadal E
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x
---

# The Rpd3L HDAC complex is essential for the heat stress response in yeast.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Roig C, Viéitez C, Posas F, de Nadal E
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2010 May;76(4):1049-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x. 
Epub 2010 Apr 14.

The Rpd3L HDAC complex is essential for the heat stress response in yeast.

Ruiz-Roig C(1), Viéitez C, Posas F, de Nadal E.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Unit, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

To ensure cell survival and growth during temperature increase, eukaryotic 
organisms respond with transcriptional activation that results in accumulation 
of proteins that protect against damage and facilitate recovery. To define the 
global cellular adaptation response to heat stress, we performed a systematic 
genetic screen that yielded 277 yeast genes required for growth at high 
temperature. Of these, the Rpd3 histone deacetylase complex was enriched. Global 
gene expression analysis showed that Rpd3 partially regulated gene expression 
upon heat shock. The Hsf1 and Msn2/4 transcription factors are the main 
regulators of gene activation in response to heat stress. RPD3-deficient cells 
had impaired activation of Msn2/4-dependent genes, while activation of genes 
controlled by Hsf1 was deacetylase-independent. Rpd3 bound to heat 
stress-dependent promoters through the Msn2/4 transcription factors, allowing 
entry of RNA Pol II and activation of transcription upon stress. Finally, we 
found that the large, but not the small Rpd3 complex regulated cell adaptation 
in response to heat stress.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07167.x
PMID: 20398213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
