---
pmid: '11459848'
title: Structural characterization of human recombinant and bone-derived bone sialoprotein.
  Functional implications for cell attachment and hydroxyapatite binding.
authors:
- Wuttke M
- Müller S
- Nitsche DP
- Paulsson M
- Hanisch FG
- Maurer P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105689200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural characterization of human recombinant and bone-derived bone sialoprotein. Functional implications for cell attachment and hydroxyapatite binding.
**Authors:** Wuttke M, Müller S, Nitsche DP, Paulsson M, Hanisch FG, Maurer P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105689200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105689200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 28;276(39):36839-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105689200. Epub 
2001 Jul 17.

Structural characterization of human recombinant and bone-derived bone 
sialoprotein. Functional implications for cell attachment and hydroxyapatite 
binding.

Wuttke M(1), Müller S, Nitsche DP, Paulsson M, Hanisch FG, Maurer P.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry II, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, 
D-50931 Cologne, Germany.

Human bone sialoprotein (BSP) comprises 15% of the total noncollagenous proteins 
in bone and is thought to be involved in bone mineralization and remodeling. 
Recent data suggest a role for BSP in breast cancer and the development of bone 
metastases. We have produced full-length recombinant BSP in a human cell line 
and purified the protein from human bone retaining the native structure with 
proper folding and post-translational modifications. Mass spectrometry of 
bone-derived BSP revealed an average mass of 49 kDa and for recombinant BSP 57 
kDa. The post-translational modifications contribute 30-40%. Carbohydrate 
analysis revealed 10 different complex-type N-glycans on both proteins and eight 
different O-glycans on recombinant BSP, four of those were found on bone-derived 
BSP. We could identify eight threonines modified by O-glycans, leaving the C 
terminus of the protein free of glycans. The recombinant protein showed similar 
secondary structures as bone-derived BSP. BSP was visualized in electron 
microscopy as a globule linked to a thread-like structure. The affinity for 
hydroxyapatite was higher for bone-derived BSP than for recombinant BSP. Cell 
adhesion assays showed that the binding of BSP to cells can be reversibly 
diminished by denaturation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105689200
PMID: 11459848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
