---
pmid: '3170585'
title: Isolation and complete sequence of a functional human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
  dehydrogenase gene.
authors:
- Ercolani L
- Florence B
- Denaro M
- Alexander M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
---

# Isolation and complete sequence of a functional human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene.
**Authors:** Ercolani L, Florence B, Denaro M, Alexander M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1988)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1988 Oct 25;263(30):15335-41.

Isolation and complete sequence of a functional human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase gene.

Ercolani L(1), Florence B, Denaro M, Alexander M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114.

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.2.12) (GAPDH) mRNA levels, 
protein, and enzymatic activity increase in 3T3-F442A adipocytes after exposure 
to physiological concentrations of insulin (Alexander, M., Curtis, G., Avruch, 
J., and Goodman, H. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 11978-11985). In order to 
understand the mechanism of this regulation, we have isolated and sequenced 5.4 
kilobase pairs of a 12-kilobase pair human genomic clone encoding a functional 
GAPDH gene. The gene consists of 9 exons and 8 introns with eukaryotic signals 
necessary for the transcription and translation of GAPDH mRNA. The exon sequence 
confirms previously published cDNA sequences for human GAPDH in muscle, liver, 
and erythrocytes. The organization of the human and the unique chicken GAPDH 
genes is strikingly similar. Although chicken exons VIII-XI have been fused into 
human exon 8, introns which separate exons encoding the NAD binding, catalytic, 
and helical domains of the GAPDH protein have been retained. Stable transfection 
of rodent cells with the intact human GAPDH gene resulted in the expression of a 
correctly initiated human GAPDH mRNA and an enzymatically active human GAPDH 
polypeptide. Thus, the gene contains a functional promoter and intact coding 
sequences. Although many processed GAPDH pseudogenes and GAPDH-like sequences 
are present in the human genome, Southern blot analysis of human genomic DNA 
using a probe derived from the 3'-untranslated region of the GAPDH gene detected 
only two genes, a 10-copy processed pseudogene and a single copy of the isolated 
gene. In contrast, a probe derived from an intron segment of the isolated gene 
detected only a single copy of the GAPDH gene. Collectively, these findings 
strongly suggest that the human genome encodes a single functional GAPDH gene.

PMID: 3170585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
