---
pmid: '23623386'
title: Mutations in ERCC4, encoding the DNA-repair endonuclease XPF, cause Fanconi
  anemia.
authors:
- Bogliolo M
- Schuster B
- Stoepker C
- Derkunt B
- Su Y
- Raams A
- Trujillo JP
- Minguillón J
- Ramírez MJ
- Pujol R
- Casado JA
- Baños R
- Rio P
- Knies K
- Zúñiga S
- Benítez J
- Bueren JA
- Jaspers NG
- Schärer OD
- de Winter JP
- Schindler D
- Surrallés J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3644630
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.002
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in ERCC4, encoding the DNA-repair endonuclease XPF, cause Fanconi anemia.
**Authors:** Bogliolo M, Schuster B, Stoepker C, Derkunt B, Su Y, Raams A, Trujillo JP, Minguillón J, Ramírez MJ, Pujol R, Casado JA, Baños R, Rio P, Knies K, Zúñiga S, Benítez J, Bueren JA, Jaspers NG, Schärer OD, de Winter JP, Schindler D, Surrallés J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.002)
**PMC:** [PMC3644630](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3644630/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 May 2;92(5):800-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.002. Epub 
2013 Apr 25.

Mutations in ERCC4, encoding the DNA-repair endonuclease XPF, cause Fanconi 
anemia.

Bogliolo M(1), Schuster B, Stoepker C, Derkunt B, Su Y, Raams A, Trujillo JP, 
Minguillón J, Ramírez MJ, Pujol R, Casado JA, Baños R, Rio P, Knies K, Zúñiga S, 
Benítez J, Bueren JA, Jaspers NG, Schärer OD, de Winter JP, Schindler D, 
Surrallés J.

Author information:
(1)Genome Instability and DNA Repair Group, Department of Genetics and 
Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genomic instability disorder characterized by 
progressive bone marrow failure and predisposition to cancer. FA-associated gene 
products are involved in the repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). 
Fifteen FA-associated genes have been identified, but the genetic basis in some 
individuals still remains unresolved. Here, we used whole-exome and Sanger 
sequencing on DNA of unclassified FA individuals and discovered biallelic 
germline mutations in ERCC4 (XPF), a structure-specific nuclease-encoding gene 
previously connected to xeroderma pigmentosum and segmental XFE progeroid 
syndrome. Genetic reversion and wild-type ERCC4 cDNA complemented the phenotype 
of the FA cell lines, providing genetic evidence that mutations in ERCC4 cause 
this FA subtype. Further biochemical and functional analysis demonstrated that 
the identified FA-causing ERCC4 mutations strongly disrupt the function of XPF 
in DNA ICL repair without severely compromising nucleotide excision repair. Our 
data show that depending on the type of ERCC4 mutation and the resulting balance 
between both DNA repair activities, individuals present with one of the three 
clinically distinct disorders, highlighting the multifunctional nature of the 
XPF endonuclease in genome stability and human disease.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.04.002
PMCID: PMC3644630
PMID: 23623386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genomic instability disorder characterized by progressive bone marrow failure and predisposition to cancer. FA-associated gene products are involved in the repair of DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). Fifteen FA-associated genes have been identified, but the genetic basis in some individuals still remains unresolved. Here, we used whole-exome and Sanger sequencing on DNA of unclassified FA individuals and discovered biallelic germline mutations in ERCC4 ( XPF ), a structure-specific nuclease-encoding gene previously connected to xeroderma pigmentosum and segmental XFE progeroid syndrome. Genetic reversion and wild-type ERCC4 cDNA complemented the phenotype of the FA cell lines, providing genetic evidence that mutations in ERCC4 cause this FA subtype. Further biochemical and functional analysis demonstrated that the identified FA-causing ERCC4 mutations strongly disrupt the function of XPF in DNA ICL repair without severely compromising nucleotide excision repair. Our data show that depending on the type of ERCC4 mutation and the resulting balance between both DNA repair activities, individuals present with one of the three clinically distinct disorders, highlighting the multifunctional nature of the XPF endonuclease in genome stability and human disease.
