---
pmid: '11080160'
title: The structural basis for the recognition of acetylated histone H4 by the bromodomain
  of histone acetyltransferase gcn5p.
authors:
- Owen DJ
- Ornaghi P
- Yang JC
- Lowe N
- Evans PR
- Ballario P
- Neuhaus D
- Filetici P
- Travers AA
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC305837
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.22.6141
---

# The structural basis for the recognition of acetylated histone H4 by the bromodomain of histone acetyltransferase gcn5p.
**Authors:** Owen DJ, Ornaghi P, Yang JC, Lowe N, Evans PR, Ballario P, Neuhaus D, Filetici P, Travers AA
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.22.6141](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.22.6141)
**PMC:** [PMC305837](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC305837/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 15;19(22):6141-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.22.6141.

The structural basis for the recognition of acetylated histone H4 by the 
bromodomain of histone acetyltransferase gcn5p.

Owen DJ(1), Ornaghi P, Yang JC, Lowe N, Evans PR, Ballario P, Neuhaus D, 
Filetici P, Travers AA.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK and 
Centro di studio per gli Acidi Nucleici, CNR, c/o Dipartimento di Genetica e 
Biologia Molecolare, Università 'La Sapienza', P.le A.Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy.

The bromodomain is an approximately 110 amino acid module found in histone 
acetyltransferases and the ATPase component of certain nucleosome remodelling 
complexes. We report the crystal structure at 1.9 A resolution of the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Gcn5p bromodomain complexed with a peptide 
corresponding to residues 15-29 of histone H4 acetylated at the zeta-N of lysine 
16. We show that this bromodomain preferentially binds to peptides containing an 
N:-acetyl lysine residue. Only residues 16-19 of the acetylated peptide interact 
with the bromodomain. The primary interaction is the N:-acetyl lysine binding in 
a cleft with the specificity provided by the interaction of the amide nitrogen 
of a conserved asparagine with the oxygen of the acetyl carbonyl group. A 
network of water-mediated H-bonds with protein main chain carbonyl groups at the 
base of the cleft contributes to the binding. Additional side chain binding 
occurs on a shallow depression that is hydrophobic at one end and can 
accommodate charge interactions at the other. These findings suggest that the 
Gcn5p bromodomain may discriminate between different acetylated lysine residues 
depending on the context in which they are displayed.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.22.6141
PMCID: PMC305837
PMID: 11080160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
