---
pmid: '12878160'
title: VIPL, a VIP36-like membrane protein with a putative function in the export
  of glycoproteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Neve EP
- Svensson K
- Fuxe J
- Pettersson RF
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00161-7
---

# VIPL, a VIP36-like membrane protein with a putative function in the export of glycoproteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Neve EP, Svensson K, Fuxe J, Pettersson RF
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00161-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00161-7)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Aug 1;288(1):70-83. doi: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00161-7.

VIPL, a VIP36-like membrane protein with a putative function in the export of 
glycoproteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.

Neve EP(1), Svensson K, Fuxe J, Pettersson RF.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Stockholm Branch, Karolinska 
Institutet, Box 240, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Subsets of glycoproteins are thought to require lectin-like membrane receptors 
for efficient export out of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). To identify new 
members related to two previously characterized intracellular lectins 
ERGIC-53/p58 and VIP36, we carried out an extensive database search using the 
conserved carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) as a search string. A gene, more 
closely related to VIP36 than to ERGIC-53/p58, and hence called VIPL 
(VIP36-Like), was identified. VIPL has been conserved through evolution from 
zebra fish to man. The 2.4-kb VIPL mRNA was widely expressed to varying levels 
in different tissues. Using an antiserum prepared against the CRD, the 32-kDa 
VIPL protein was detected in various cell lines. The single N-linked glycan of 
VIPL remained endoglycosidase H-sensitive during a 2-h pulse-chase, even when 
the protein was overexpressed or mutated to allow export to the plasma membrane. 
VIPL localized primarily to the ER and partly to the Golgi complex. Like VIP36, 
the cytoplasmic tail of VIPL terminates in the sequence KRFY, a motif 
characteristic for proteins recycling between the ER and ERGIC/cis-Golgi. 
Mutating the retrograde transport signal KR to AA resulted in transport of VIPL 
to the cell surface. Finally, knock-down of VIPL mRNA using siRNA significantly 
slowed down the secretion of two glycoproteins (M(R) 35 and 250 kDa) to the 
medium, suggesting that VIPL may also function as an ER export receptor.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-4827(03)00161-7
PMID: 12878160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
