---
pmid: '12668730'
title: Sorting nexin 4 and amphiphysin 2, a new partnership between endocytosis and
  intracellular trafficking.
authors:
- Leprince C
- Le Scolan E
- Meunier B
- Fraisier V
- Brandon N
- De Gunzburg J
- Camonis J
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00403
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sorting nexin 4 and amphiphysin 2, a new partnership between endocytosis and intracellular trafficking.
**Authors:** Leprince C, Le Scolan E, Meunier B, Fraisier V, Brandon N, De Gunzburg J, Camonis J
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00403](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00403)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2003 May 15;116(Pt 10):1937-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00403. Epub 2003 
Mar 26.

Sorting nexin 4 and amphiphysin 2, a new partnership between endocytosis and 
intracellular trafficking.

Leprince C(1), Le Scolan E, Meunier B, Fraisier V, Brandon N, De Gunzburg J, 
Camonis J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U528, Institut Curie Section de Recherche, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris 
Cedex 05, France. Corinne.Leprince@curie.fr

Endocytosis is a regulated physiological process by which membrane receptors and 
their extracellular ligands are internalized. After internalization, they enter 
the endosomal trafficking pathway for sorting and processing. Amphiphysins 
consist of a family of proteins conserved throughout evolution that are crucial 
elements of the endocytosis machinery in mammalian cells. They act as adaptors 
for a series of proteins important for the endocytic process, such as dynamin. 
In order to improve our knowledge of amphiphysin function, we performed a 
two-hybrid screen with the N-terminal part of murine amphiphysin 2 (residues 
1-304). One of the interacting clones corresponded to sorting nexin 4 (SNX4), a 
member of the SNX family of proteins which are suspected to regulate vesicular 
trafficking. This interaction was confirmed in vivo by co-immunoprecipitation. 
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that amphiphysin 2 might bind 
reticulo-vesicular structures present throughout the cell body and be associated 
with SNX4 on these structures. In an endocytosis assay, overexpressed C-terminal 
or full-length SNX4 was able to inhibit transferrin receptor endocytosis as 
efficiently as the SH3 domain of amphiphysin 2. At lower levels of expression, 
SNX4 colocalized with transferrin-containing vesicles, some of which were also 
positive for amphiphysin 2. These results indicate that SNX4 may be part of the 
endocytic machinery or, alternatively, that SNX4 may associate with key elements 
of endocytosis such as amphiphysin 2 and sequester them when overexpressed. The 
presence of amphiphysin 2 on intracellular vesicles and its interplay with SNX4, 
which is likely to take part in intracellular trafficking, suggest that 
amphiphysin 2 is not only a regulator of the early steps of endocytosis. It 
could also play a role at the surface of the endocytic vesicle that has just 
been formed and of the future endosomes, in order to regulate intracellular 
trafficking.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00403
PMID: 12668730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
