---
pmid: '27993971'
title: The CD9, CD81, and CD151 EC2 domains bind to the classical RGD-binding site
  of integrin αvβ3.
authors:
- Yu J
- Lee CY
- Changou CA
- Cedano-Prieto DM
- Takada YK
- Takada Y
journal: Biochem J
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20160998
---

# The CD9, CD81, and CD151 EC2 domains bind to the classical RGD-binding site of integrin αvβ3.
**Authors:** Yu J, Lee CY, Changou CA, Cedano-Prieto DM, Takada YK, Takada Y
**Journal:** Biochem J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BCJ20160998](https://doi.org/10.1042/BCJ20160998)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2017 Feb 15;474(4):589-596. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20160998. Epub 2016 Dec
 19.

The CD9, CD81, and CD151 EC2 domains bind to the classical RGD-binding site of 
integrin αvβ3.

Yu J(1)(2), Lee CY(2), Changou CA(2)(3)(4), Cedano-Prieto DM(1), Takada 
YK(1)(2), Takada Y(5)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, U.S.A.
(2)Ph.D. Program for Translational Medicine, College of Medical Sciences and 
Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical 
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Core Facility, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA 95817, U.S.A. 
ytakada@ucdavis.edu ytakada@tmu.edu.tw.

Tetraspanins play important roles in normal (e.g. cell adhesion, motility, 
activation, and proliferation) and pathological conditions (e.g. metastasis and 
viral infection). Tetraspanins interact with integrins and regulate integrin 
functions, but the specifics of tetraspanin-integrin interactions are unclear. 
Using co-immunoprecipitation with integrins as a sole method to detect 
interaction between integrins and full-length tetraspanins, it has been proposed 
that the variable region (helices D and E) of the extracellular-2 (EC2) domain 
of tetraspanins laterally associates with a non-ligand-binding site of 
integrins. We describe that, using adhesion assays, the EC2 domain of CD81, CD9, 
and CD151 bound to integrin αvβ3, and this binding was suppressed by cRGDfV, a 
specific inhibitor of αvβ3, and antibody 7E3, which is mapped to the 
ligand-binding site of β3. We also present evidence that the specificity loop of 
β3 directly bound to the EC2 domains. This suggests that the EC2 domains 
specifically bind to the classical ligand-binding site of αvβ3. αvβ3 was a more 
effective receptor for the EC2 domains than the previously known tetraspanin 
receptors α3β1, α4β1, and α6β1. Docking simulation predicted that the helices A 
and B of CD81 EC2 bind to the RGD-binding site of αvβ3. Substituting Lys 
residues at positions 116 and 144/148 of CD81 EC2 in the predicted 
integrin-binding interface reduced the binding of CD81 EC2 to αvβ3, consistent 
with the docking model. These findings suggest that, in contrast with previous 
models, the ligand-binding site of integrin αvβ3, a new tetraspanin receptor, 
binds to the constant region (helices A and B) of the EC2 domain.

© 2017 The Author(s); published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20160998
PMID: 27993971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
