---
pmid: '23051622'
title: ESCRT-III CHMP2A and CHMP3 form variable helical polymers in vitro and act
  synergistically during HIV-1 budding.
authors:
- Effantin G
- Dordor A
- Sandrin V
- Martinelli N
- Sundquist WI
- Schoehn G
- Weissenhorn W
journal: Cell Microbiol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3783020
doi: 10.1111/cmi.12041
---

# ESCRT-III CHMP2A and CHMP3 form variable helical polymers in vitro and act synergistically during HIV-1 budding.
**Authors:** Effantin G, Dordor A, Sandrin V, Martinelli N, Sundquist WI, Schoehn G, Weissenhorn W
**Journal:** Cell Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cmi.12041](https://doi.org/10.1111/cmi.12041)
**PMC:** [PMC3783020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3783020/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Feb;15(2):213-26. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12041. Epub 2012 Nov
6.

ESCRT-III CHMP2A and CHMP3 form variable helical polymers in vitro and act 
synergistically during HIV-1 budding.

Effantin G(1), Dordor A, Sandrin V, Martinelli N, Sundquist WI, Schoehn G, 
Weissenhorn W.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Virus Host Cell Interactions, UMI 3265, Université Joseph 
Fourier-EMBL-CNRS, 6 rue Jules Horowitz, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

The endosomal sorting complex required for transport-III (ESCRT-III) proteins 
are essential for budding of some enveloped viruses, for the formation of 
intraluminal vesicles at the endosome and for the abscission step of 
cytokinesis. ESCRT-III proteins form polymers that constrict membrane tubes, 
leading to fission. We have used electron cryomicroscopy to determine the 
molecular organization of pleiomorphic ESCRT-III CHMP2A-CHMP3 polymers. The 
three-dimensional reconstruction at 22 Å resolution reveals a helical 
organization of filaments of CHMP molecules organized in a head-to-tail fashion. 
Protease susceptibility experiments indicate that polymerization is achieved via 
conformational changes that increase the protomer stability. Combinatorial siRNA 
knockdown experiments indicate that CHMP3 contributes synergistically to HIV-1 
budding, and the CHMP3 contribution is ~ 10-fold more pronounced in concert with 
CHMP2A than with CHMP2B. This is consistent with surface plasmon resonance 
affinity measurements that suggest sequential CHMP4B-CHMP3-CHMP2A recruitment 
while showing that both CHMP2A and CHMP2B interact with CHMP4B, in agreement 
with their redundant functions in HIV-1 budding. Our data thus indicate that the 
CHMP2A-CHMP3 polymer observed in vitro contributes to HIV-1 budding by 
assembling on CHMP4B polymers.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12041
PMCID: PMC3783020
PMID: 23051622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
