---
pmid: '17588722'
title: Htid-1, the human homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster l(2)tid tumor suppressor,
  defines a novel physiological role of APC.
authors:
- Kurzik-Dumke U
- Czaja J
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.008
---

# Htid-1, the human homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster l(2)tid tumor suppressor, defines a novel physiological role of APC.
**Authors:** Kurzik-Dumke U, Czaja J
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.008)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2007 Sep;19(9):1973-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.008. Epub 
2007 Jun 2.

Htid-1, the human homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster l(2)tid tumor 
suppressor, defines a novel physiological role of APC.

Kurzik-Dumke U(1), Czaja J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, Laboratory for Comparative 
Tumor Biology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacher Strasse 63, 55131 
Mainz, Germany. kurzik@uni-mainz.de

Htid-1, the human counterpart of the Drosophila tumor suppressor gene 
lethal(2)tumorous imaginal discs (l(2)tid) encodes three splice forms translated 
into three cytosolic - Tid50, Tid48 and Tid46 - and three mitochondrial - Tid43, 
Tid40 and Tid38 - proteins. Here we provide evidence for the association of the 
endogenous Tid50/Tid48 proteins with the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor 
suppressor in normal colon epithelium, colorectal cancer cells and mouse NIH3T3 
fibroblasts. Using the Glutathione S-transferase binding assay we show that the 
N-terminal region including the Armadillo domain (ARM) of APC is sufficient to 
bind the Tid molecules. Using immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy we 
show that the two molecular partners complex at defined areas of the cells with 
further proteins such as Hsp70, Hsc70, Actin, Dvl and Axin. Our data implicate 
that the formation of the complex is not associated with APC's involvement in 
beta-Catenin degradation. Furthermore, though it is linked to Actin it is 
neither associated with regulation of Actin cytoskeleton due to APC's binding to 
Asef nor to Tid's binding to Ras-GAP. We suggest that the novel complex acts in 
maintaining APC's availability for its distinct roles in the Wnt signaling 
important for the cell to take the right decision, either to switch the cascade 
OFF or ON, thus, to regulate the onset of proliferation of the cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2007.05.008
PMID: 17588722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
