---
pmid: '21172653'
title: The dependence receptor UNC5H2/B triggers apoptosis via PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation
  of DAP kinase.
authors:
- Guenebeaud C
- Goldschneider D
- Castets M
- Guix C
- Chazot G
- Delloye-Bourgeois C
- Eisenberg-Lerner A
- Shohat G
- Zhang M
- Laudet V
- Kimchi A
- Bernet A
- Mehlen P
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.021
---

# The dependence receptor UNC5H2/B triggers apoptosis via PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation of DAP kinase.
**Authors:** Guenebeaud C, Goldschneider D, Castets M, Guix C, Chazot G, Delloye-Bourgeois C, Eisenberg-Lerner A, Shohat G, Zhang M, Laudet V, Kimchi A, Bernet A, Mehlen P
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.021)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2010 Dec 22;40(6):863-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.021.

The dependence receptor UNC5H2/B triggers apoptosis via PP2A-mediated 
dephosphorylation of DAP kinase.

Guenebeaud C(1), Goldschneider D, Castets M, Guix C, Chazot G, Delloye-Bourgeois 
C, Eisenberg-Lerner A, Shohat G, Zhang M, Laudet V, Kimchi A, Bernet A, Mehlen 
P.

Author information:
(1)Apoptosis, Cancer and Development Laboratory-Equipe Labellisée "La Ligue," 
CNRS UMR5238, Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, 69008 Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Dec 22;40(6):851-3. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.12.015.

The UNC5H dependence receptors promote apoptosis in the absence of their ligand, 
netrin-1, and this is important for neuronal and vascular development and for 
limitation of cancer progression. UNC5H2 (also called UNC5B) triggers cell death 
through the activation of the serine-threonine protein kinase DAPk. While 
performing a siRNA screen to identify genes implicated in UNC5H-induced 
apoptosis, we identified the structural subunit PR65β of the holoenzyme protein 
phosphatase 2A (PP2A). We show that UNC5H2/B recruits a protein complex that 
includes PR65β and DAPk and retains PP2A activity. PP2A activity is required for 
UNC5H2/B-induced apoptosis, since it activates DAPk by triggering its 
dephosphorylation. Moreover, netrin-1 binding to UNC5H2/B prevents this effect 
through interaction of the PP2A inhibitor CIP2A to UNC5H2/B. Thus we show here 
that, in the absence of netrin-1, recruitment of PP2A to UNC5H2/B allows the 
activation of DAPk via a PP2A-mediated dephosphorylation and that this mechanism 
is involved in angiogenesis regulation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.11.021
PMID: 21172653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
