---
pmid: '14609951'
title: Chromatin-mediated regulation of nucleolar structure and RNA Pol I localization
  by TOR.
authors:
- Tsang CK
- Bertram PG
- Ai W
- Drenan R
- Zheng XF
journal: EMBO J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC275436
doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdg578
---

# Chromatin-mediated regulation of nucleolar structure and RNA Pol I localization by TOR.
**Authors:** Tsang CK, Bertram PG, Ai W, Drenan R, Zheng XF
**Journal:** EMBO J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/cdg578](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdg578)
**PMC:** [PMC275436](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC275436/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2003 Nov 17;22(22):6045-56. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdg578.

Chromatin-mediated regulation of nucleolar structure and RNA Pol I localization 
by TOR.

Tsang CK(1), Bertram PG, Ai W, Drenan R, Zheng XF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The target of rapamycin (TOR) protein is a conserved regulator of ribosome 
biogenesis, an important process for cell growth and proliferation. However, how 
TOR is involved remains poorly understood. In this study, we find that rapamycin 
and nutrient starvation, conditions inhibiting TOR, lead to significant 
nucleolar size reduction in both yeast and mammalian cells. In yeast, this 
morphological change is accompanied by release of RNA polymerase I (Pol I) from 
the nucleolus and inhibition of ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription. We also 
present evidence that TOR regulates association of Rpd3-Sin3 histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) with rDNA chromatin, leading to site-specific deacetylation of histone 
H4. Moreover, histone H4 hypoacetylation mutations cause nucleolar size 
reduction and Pol I delocalization, while rpd3Delta and histone H4 
hyperacetylation mutations block the nucleolar changes as a result of TOR 
inhibition. Taken together, our results suggest a chromatin-mediated mechanism 
by which TOR modulates nucleolar structure, RNA Pol I localization and rRNA gene 
expression in response to nutrient availability.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdg578
PMCID: PMC275436
PMID: 14609951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
