---
pmid: '19538249'
title: 'The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a perspective on potential roles in the immune
  system.'
authors:
- Stevens EA
- Mezrich JD
- Bradfield CA
journal: Immunology
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2712099
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03054.x
---

# The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a perspective on potential roles in the immune system.
**Authors:** Stevens EA, Mezrich JD, Bradfield CA
**Journal:** Immunology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03054.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03054.x)
**PMC:** [PMC2712099](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2712099/)

## Abstract

1. Immunology. 2009 Jul;127(3):299-311. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03054.x.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: a perspective on potential roles in the immune 
system.

Stevens EA(1), Mezrich JD, Bradfield CA.

Author information:
(1)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 
53706-1599, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a protein best known for its role in 
mediating toxicity. Over 30 years of research has uncovered additional roles for 
the AHR in xenobiotic metabolism and normal vascular development. Activation of 
the AHR has long been known to cause immunotoxicity, including thymic 
involution. Recent data suggesting a role for the AHR in regulatory T-cell 
(Treg) and T-helper 17 (Th17) cell development have only added to the excitement 
about this biology. In this review, we will attempt to illustrate what is 
currently known about AHR biology in the hope that data from fields as diverse 
as evolutionary biology and pharmacology will help elucidate the mechanism by 
which AHR modifies immune responses. We also will discuss the complexities of 
AHR pharmacology and genetics that may influence future studies of AHR in the 
immune system.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03054.x
PMCID: PMC2712099
PMID: 19538249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
