---
pmid: '19536135'
title: Cep72 regulates the localization of key centrosomal proteins and proper bipolar
  spindle formation.
authors:
- Oshimori N
- Li X
- Ohsugi M
- Yamamoto T
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2718283
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.161
---

# Cep72 regulates the localization of key centrosomal proteins and proper bipolar spindle formation.
**Authors:** Oshimori N, Li X, Ohsugi M, Yamamoto T
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.161](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.161)
**PMC:** [PMC2718283](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2718283/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Jul 22;28(14):2066-76. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.161. Epub 2009 Jun
 18.

Cep72 regulates the localization of key centrosomal proteins and proper bipolar 
spindle formation.

Oshimori N(1), Li X, Ohsugi M, Yamamoto T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Cancer Biology, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Microtubule-nucleation activity and structural integrity of the centrosome are 
critical for various cellular functions. The gamma-tubulin ring complexes 
(gammaTuRCs) localizing to the pericentriolar matrix (PCM) of the centrosome are 
major sites of microtubule nucleation. The PCM is thought to be created by two 
cognate large coiled-coil proteins, pericentrin/kendrin and CG-NAP/AKAP450, and 
its stabilization by Kizuna is essential for bipolar spindle formation. However, 
the mechanisms by which these proteins are recruited and organized into a proper 
structure with microtubule-organizing activity are poorly understood. Here we 
identify a centrosomal protein Cep72 as a Kizuna-interacting protein. 
Interestingly, Cep72 is essential for the localization of CG-NAP and Kizuna. 
Cep72 is also involved in gammaTuRC recruitment to the centrosome and CG-NAP 
confers the microtubule-nucleation activity on the gammaTuRCs. During mitosis, 
Cep72-mediated microtubule organization is important for converging spindle 
microtubules to the centrosomes, which is needed for chromosome alignment and 
tension generation between kinetochores. Our findings show that Cep72 is the key 
protein essential for maintaining microtubule-organizing activity and structural 
integrity of the centrosome.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.161
PMCID: PMC2718283
PMID: 19536135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
