---
pmid: '16260607'
title: CRMP-2 is involved in kinesin-1-dependent transport of the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex
  and axon formation.
authors:
- Kawano Y
- Yoshimura T
- Tsuboi D
- Kawabata S
- Kaneko-Kawano T
- Shirataki H
- Takenawa T
- Kaibuchi K
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1280248
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.22.9920-9935.2005
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# CRMP-2 is involved in kinesin-1-dependent transport of the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex and axon formation.
**Authors:** Kawano Y, Yoshimura T, Tsuboi D, Kawabata S, Kaneko-Kawano T, Shirataki H, Takenawa T, Kaibuchi K
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.22.9920-9935.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.22.9920-9935.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1280248](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1280248/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(22):9920-35. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.22.9920-9935.2005.

CRMP-2 is involved in kinesin-1-dependent transport of the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex 
and axon formation.

Kawano Y(1), Yoshimura T, Tsuboi D, Kawabata S, Kaneko-Kawano T, Shirataki H, 
Takenawa T, Kaibuchi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya 
University, 65 Tsurumai, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

A neuron has two types of highly polarized cell processes, the single axon and 
multiple dendrites. One of the fundamental questions of neurobiology is how 
neurons acquire such specific and polarized morphologies. During neuronal 
development, various actin-binding proteins regulate dynamics of actin 
cytoskeleton in the growth cones of developing axons. The regulation of actin 
cytoskeleton in the growth cones is thought to be involved in axon outgrowth and 
axon-dendrite specification. However, it is largely unknown which actin-binding 
proteins are involved in axon-dendrite specification and how they are 
transported into the developing axons. We have previously reported that 
collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP-2) plays a critical role in axon 
outgrowth and axon-dendrite specification (N. Inagaki, K. Chihara, N. Arimura, 
C. Menager, Y. Kawano, N. Matsuo, T. Nishimura, M. Amano, and K. Kaibuchi, Nat. 
Neurosci. 4:781-782, 2001). Here, we found that CRMP-2 interacted with the 
specifically Rac1-associated protein 1 (Sra-1)/WASP family verprolin-homologous 
protein 1 (WAVE1) complex, which is a regulator of actin cytoskeleton. The 
knockdown of Sra-1 and WAVE1 by RNA interference canceled CRMP-2-induced axon 
outgrowth and multiple-axon formation in cultured hippocampal neurons. We also 
found that CRMP-2 interacted with the light chain of kinesin-1 and linked 
kinesin-1 to the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex. The knockdown of CRMP-2 and kinesin-1 
delocalized Sra-1 and WAVE1 from the growth cones of axons. These results 
suggest that CRMP-2 transports the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex to axons in a 
kinesin-1-dependent manner and thereby regulates axon outgrowth and formation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.22.9920-9935.2005
PMCID: PMC1280248
PMID: 16260607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A neuron has two types of highly polarized cell processes, the single axon and multiple dendrites. One of the fundamental questions of neurobiology is how neurons acquire such specific and polarized morphologies. During neuronal development, various actin-binding proteins regulate dynamics of actin cytoskeleton in the growth cones of developing axons. The regulation of actin cytoskeleton in the growth cones is thought to be involved in axon outgrowth and axon-dendrite specification. However, it is largely unknown which actin-binding proteins are involved in axon-dendrite specification and how they are transported into the developing axons. We have previously reported that collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP-2) plays a critical role in axon outgrowth and axon-dendrite specification (N. Inagaki, K. Chihara, N. Arimura, C. Menager, Y. Kawano, N. Matsuo, T. Nishimura, M. Amano, and K. Kaibuchi, Nat. Neurosci. 4: 781-782, 2001). Here, we found that CRMP-2 interacted with the specifically Rac1-associated protein 1 (Sra-1)/WASP family verprolin-homologous protein 1 (WAVE1) complex, which is a regulator of actin cytoskeleton. The knockdown of Sra-1 and WAVE1 by RNA interference canceled CRMP-2-induced axon outgrowth and multiple-axon formation in cultured hippocampal neurons. We also found that CRMP-2 interacted with the light chain of kinesin-1 and linked kinesin-1 to the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex. The knockdown of CRMP-2 and kinesin-1 delocalized Sra-1 and WAVE1 from the growth cones of axons. These results suggest that CRMP-2 transports the Sra-1/WAVE1 complex to axons in a kinesin-1-dependent manner and thereby regulates axon outgrowth and formation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

cDNAs encoding human CRMP-2, Sra-1, and WAVE1 were obtained as described previously ( 1 , 31 , 38 ). pCAGGS vector was provided by M. Nakafuku (Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH). Anti-CRMP-2 monoclonal antibody (C4G) was provided by Y. Ihara (Tokyo University, Tokyo, Japan) ( 20 ). Anti-Numb polyclonal antibody (92425) was provided by H. Okano (Keio University, Tokyo, Japan). Anti-CRMP-2 polyclonal, anti-Sra-1, and anti-WAVE1 polyclonal antibodies were obtained as described previously ( 23 , 31 , 38 ). Anti-WAVE1 monoclonal (Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY), anti-myc polyclonal, anti-Rho GDI (A-14, A-20; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA), antiactin, and anti-Tau-1 monoclonal antibodies (Chemicon, Temecula, CA) as well as anti-myc monoclonal (9E10) antibody and tetramethyl rhodamine isocyanate-phalloidin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) were purchased. A rabbit polyclonal antibody against KLC 1 was generated by using glutathione S -transferase (GST)-KLC 1 wild type (WT) as an antigen ( 30 ). Other materials and chemicals were obtained from commercial sources.
