---
pmid: '7918629'
title: Primary structure and expression of a human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase.
authors:
- Kalmar GB
- Kay RJ
- LaChance AC
- Cornell RB
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0167-4781(94)90056-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Primary structure and expression of a human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase.
**Authors:** Kalmar GB, Kay RJ, LaChance AC, Cornell RB
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0167-4781(94)90056-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-4781(94)90056-6)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Oct 18;1219(2):328-34. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4781(94)90056-6.

Primary structure and expression of a human CTP:phosphocholine 
cytidylyltransferase.

Kalmar GB(1), Kay RJ, LaChance AC, Cornell RB.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, BC, Canada.

Human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT) cDNAs were isolated by PCR 
amplification of a human erythroleukemic K562 cell library. Initially two 
degenerate oligonucleotide primers derived from the sequence of the rat liver CT 
cDNA were used to amplify a centrally located 230 bp fragment. Subsequently 
overlapping 5' and 3' fragments were amplified, each using one human CT primer 
and one vector-specific primer. Two cDNAs encoding the entire translated domain 
were also amplified. The human CT (HCT) has close homology at the nucleotide and 
amino acid level with other mammalian CTs (from rat liver, mouse testis or mouse 
B6SutA hemopoietic cells and Chinese hamster ovary). The region which deviates 
most from the rat liver CT sequence is near the C-terminus, where 7 changes are 
clustered within 34 residues (345-359), of the putative phosphorylation domain. 
The region of the proposed catalytic domain (residues 75-235) is 100% identical 
with the rat liver sequence. Significant homology was observed between the 
proposed catalytic domain of CT and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae MUQ1 gene 
product, and between the proposed amphipathic alpha-helical membrane binding 
domains of CT and soybean oleosin, a phospholipid-binding protein. There are 
several shared characteristics of these amphipathic helices. An approx. 42,000 
Da protein was over-expressed in COS cells using a pAX142 expression vector 
containing one of the full-length HCT cDNA clones. The specific activity of the 
HCT in COS cell homogenates was the same as that of analogously expressed rat 
liver CT. The activity of HCT was lipid dependent. The soluble form was 
activated 3 to 4-fold by anionic phospholipids and by oleic acid or 
diacylglycerol-containing PC vesicles.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4781(94)90056-6
PMID: 7918629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
