---
pmid: '12239590'
title: Significance of heme oxygenase in prolactin-mediated cell proliferation and
  angiogenesis in human endothelial cells.
authors:
- Malaguarnera L
- Pilastro MR
- Quan S
- Ghattas MH
- Yang L
- Mezentsev AV
- Kushida T
- Abraham NG
- Kappas A
journal: Int J Mol Med
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Significance of heme oxygenase in prolactin-mediated cell proliferation and angiogenesis in human endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Malaguarnera L, Pilastro MR, Quan S, Ghattas MH, Yang L, Mezentsev AV, Kushida T, Abraham NG, Kappas A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Med (2002)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Oct;10(4):433-40.

Significance of heme oxygenase in prolactin-mediated cell proliferation and 
angiogenesis in human endothelial cells.

Malaguarnera L(1), Pilastro MR, Quan S, Ghattas MH, Yang L, Mezentsev AV, 
Kushida T, Abraham NG, Kappas A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, 
USA.

Our objectives were to determine whether heme oxygenase-1 is a second messenger 
for prolactin-mediated angiogenesis. Endothelial cell proliferation and 
angiogenesis assay demonstrated that cell number and capillary formation were 
increased by prolactin (10 and 25 ng/ml). Both protein synthesis and mRNA 
analysis confirmed that HO-1 expression was induced by prolactin in cultured 
endothelial cells and occurred in a concentration-dependent manner. Endothelial 
cells transduced with retrovirus-mediated delivery of HO-1 gene in sense and 
antisense orientation were used to further determine whether HO-1 overexpression 
or underexpression modulated prolactin-mediated endothelial cell proliferation 
and angiogenesis. Incubation of human microvessel endothelial cells transduced 
with HO-1 in sense orientation resulted in enhancement of prolactin-mediated 
increase in endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis, whereas inhibition 
of HO-1 by transduction of HO-1 in antisense orientation prevented prolactin 
increase in endothelial cell proliferation. Similarly, addition of stannic 
mesoporphyrin, the inhibitor of HO activity, prevented PRL-mediated increase in 
endothelial cell proliferation. Our results demonstrated for the first time, 
that prolactin-mediated angiogenesis and cell proliferation was dependent on 
HO-1 gene expression.

PMID: 12239590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
