---
pmid: '8399344'
title: 'Ether lipid synthesis: purification and identification of alkyl dihydroxyacetone
  phosphate synthase from guinea-pig liver.'
authors:
- Zomer AW
- de Weerd WF
- Langeveld J
- van den Bosch H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0005-2760(93)90070-p
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Ether lipid synthesis: purification and identification of alkyl dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase from guinea-pig liver.
**Authors:** Zomer AW, de Weerd WF, Langeveld J, van den Bosch H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0005-2760(93)90070-p](https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-2760(93)90070-p)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Oct 13;1170(2):189-96. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2760(93)90070-p.

Ether lipid synthesis: purification and identification of alkyl dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate synthase from guinea-pig liver.

Zomer AW(1), de Weerd WF, Langeveld J, van den Bosch H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid Enzymology, Utrecht University, The 
Netherlands.

Alkyl-dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase, the second enzyme involved in ether 
phospholipid biosynthesis from dihydroxyacetone phosphate and responsible for 
glycero-ether bond formation, has been purified from guinea-pig liver. 
Alkyl-dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase was solubilized from a membrane 
fraction prepared from an enriched peroxisome fraction with Triton X-100 and 
potassium chloride. The solubilized enzyme was further purified by 
chromatography on QAE-Sephadex, Matrex Red, Phosphocellulose and Concanavalin A. 
Upon sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
alkyl-dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase appears as a 65 kDa band. 
Chromatofocusing revealed an isoelectric point of pH 5.9 for the enzyme. The pH 
optimum of alkyl-dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase was found to be between pH 
7 and 8 in a 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer. The specific activity of the 
enzyme was estimated to be at least 350 nmol.min-1.mg-1, corresponding to a 
purification of at least 13,000-fold.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2760(93)90070-p
PMID: 8399344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
