---
pmid: '17148612'
title: A system for quantifying dynamic protein interactions defines a role for Herceptin
  in modulating ErbB2 interactions.
authors:
- Wehrman TS
- Raab WJ
- Casipit CL
- Doyonnas R
- Pomerantz JH
- Blau HM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1748177
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0605218103
---

# A system for quantifying dynamic protein interactions defines a role for Herceptin in modulating ErbB2 interactions.
**Authors:** Wehrman TS, Raab WJ, Casipit CL, Doyonnas R, Pomerantz JH, Blau HM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0605218103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0605218103)
**PMC:** [PMC1748177](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1748177/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 12;103(50):19063-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0605218103. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

A system for quantifying dynamic protein interactions defines a role for 
Herceptin in modulating ErbB2 interactions.

Wehrman TS(1), Raab WJ, Casipit CL, Doyonnas R, Pomerantz JH, Blau HM.

Author information:
(1)Baxter Laboratory in Genetic Pharmacology, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5175, 
USA.

The orphan receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 is activated by each of the EGFR 
family members upon ligand binding. However, difficulties monitoring the dynamic 
interactions of the membrane receptors have hindered the elucidation of the 
mechanism of ErbB2 activation. We have engineered a system to monitor 
protein-protein interactions in intact mammalian cells such that different sets 
of protein interactions can be quantitatively compared. Application of this 
system to the interactions of the EGFR family showed that ErbB2 interacts stably 
with the EGFR and ErbB3, but fails to spontaneously homooligomerize. The widely 
used anti-cancer antibody Herceptin was found to effectively inhibit the 
interaction of the EGFR and ErbB2 but not to interfere with the interaction of 
ErbB2-ErbB3. Treatment of cells expressing EGFR and ErbB2 with Herceptin results 
in increased EGFR homooligomerization in the presence of EGF and a subsequent 
rapid internalization and down-regulation of the EGFR. In summary, the protein 
interaction system described here enabled the characterization of ErbB2 
interactions within the biological context of the plasma membrane and provides 
insight into the mechanism of Herceptin action on cells overexpressing ErbB2.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0605218103
PMCID: PMC1748177
PMID: 17148612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: H.M.B. is a 
major stockholder in a company that might have a gain or loss financially 
through publication of this paper. T.S.W. and H.M.B. are inventors of the 
technology described in this article; a patent is pending.

## Full Text

Abstract

The orphan receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 is activated by each of the EGFR family members upon ligand binding. However, difficulties monitoring the dynamic interactions of the membrane receptors have hindered the elucidation of the mechanism of ErbB2 activation. We have engineered a system to monitor protein–protein interactions in intact mammalian cells such that different sets of protein interactions can be quantitatively compared. Application of this system to the interactions of the EGFR family showed that ErbB2 interacts stably with the EGFR and ErbB3, but fails to spontaneously homooligomerize. The widely used anti-cancer antibody Herceptin was found to effectively inhibit the interaction of the EGFR and ErbB2 but not to interfere with the interaction of ErbB2–ErbB3. Treatment of cells expressing EGFR and ErbB2 with Herceptin results in increased EGFR homooligomerization in the presence of EGF and a subsequent rapid internalization and down-regulation of the EGFR. In summary, the protein interaction system described here enabled the characterization of ErbB2 interactions within the biological context of the plasma membrane and provides insight into the mechanism of Herceptin action on cells overexpressing ErbB2.

Discussion

The development of a method for monitoring dynamic receptor interactions in an intact membrane was pivotal to the study of the combinatorial interactions of the ErbB family members. This assay measures the interaction of proteins as a function of the enzyme activity generated upon induced proximity of the β-gal enzyme fragments to which they are fused. By controlling the expression levels of each fragment, the entire profile of receptor interactions could be compared across cell lines expressing different receptor combinations. The assay is sensitive, quantitative, inducible, and reversible. Although applied to ErbB family interactions in this study, the protein interaction detection system described here is readily adaptable to other protein interactions of interest.

The ability to quantitatively study receptors in the physiological context of the plasma membrane forms an important bridge between structural analysis of the purified extracellular domains of the ErbB family of proteins and the indirect measurement of their interaction provided by phosphorylation analysis. The capacity of structural or biochemical analysis to predict and characterize protein interactions within the two-dimensional constraints of the plasma membrane is limited. The strong, specific, and inducible signal obtained by using the β-gal complementation system makes a detailed characterization of these processes possible. Much of the data presented in this work echo what is currently known about the interactions of the EGFR, ErbB2, and ErbB3, providing validation of previous work. However, the protein interaction system described here has made it possible to extend this knowledge, generating novel information about these reactions.

Our results show that in the context of the plasma membrane ErbB2 efficiently interacts with the EGFR and ErbB3, whereas ErbB3 and the EGFR do not form stable oligomers. Further, our results indicate that the basal level of ErbB2 homooligomerization is similar to its basal heterooligomerization level. An important caveat of extrapolation of the interaction data obtained here is our use of truncated receptors which does not take into account the contribution of the intracellular domain on oligomerization. We chose to use the simplest system possible to clearly delineate the contribution of the extracellular and transmembrane domains to the interaction of ErbB2 with the EGFR and ErbB3.

Although Herceptin has been used clinically for more than a decade, there has been no clear characterization of its effect on ErbB family dimerization. We show here that Herceptin primarily impacts ErbB2–EGFR heterodimer levels, not ErbB2–ErbB3. As a result, Herceptin exposure should inhibit signaling by ( i ) disruption of ErbB2–EGFR heterodimers and ( ii ) reduction of total EGFR expression on the cell surface. Herceptin directly blocks the first, leading to an increase in EGFR homodimerization, followed by rapid internalization and ultimately a reduction in EGFR levels. Together, the findings in this study suggest a mechanism by which Herceptin inhibits ErbB receptor signaling and therefore tumor cell growth: targeting the ErbB2–EGFR heterodimer.

Importantly, the in vitro findings reported here correlate well with the recently reported ErbB2 receptor expression profiles of tumor samples from responders and nonresponders to Herceptin. In patients whose tumors overexpress ErbB2, a response to Herceptin treatment is correlated with coexpression of the EGFR and its ligand, as opposed to ErbB3 ( 41 , 42 ). Thus, the data in this study suggest a basis for predicting a response and selecting patients who are likely to benefit from Herceptin therapy.
