---
pmid: '14645241'
title: Interactions between activating signal cointegrator-2 and the tumor suppressor
  retinoblastoma in androgen receptor transactivation.
authors:
- Goo YH
- Na SY
- Zhang H
- Xu J
- Hong S
- Cheong J
- Lee SK
- Lee JW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312563200
---

# Interactions between activating signal cointegrator-2 and the tumor suppressor retinoblastoma in androgen receptor transactivation.
**Authors:** Goo YH, Na SY, Zhang H, Xu J, Hong S, Cheong J, Lee SK, Lee JW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312563200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312563200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):7131-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312563200. Epub 2003
 Nov 25.

Interactions between activating signal cointegrator-2 and the tumor suppressor 
retinoblastoma in androgen receptor transactivation.

Goo YH(1), Na SY, Zhang H, Xu J, Hong S, Cheong J, Lee SK, Lee JW.

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Activating signal cointegrator-2 (ASC-2), a cancer-amplified transcription 
coactivator of nuclear receptors and numerous other transcription factors, was 
previously shown to contain two LXXLL motifs, each of which interacts with a 
distinct set of nuclear receptors. In this work, we showed that ASC-2 has an 
indirect, separate binding site for androgen receptor (AR). Interestingly, this 
region overlapped with the direct interaction interfaces with the tumor 
suppressor retinoblastoma (Rb). Although ASC-2 alone stimulated AR 
transactivation in cotransfections of HeLa cells, ectopic expression of Rb 
effected ASC-2 to act as a transcription coactivator of AR in Rb-null Saos2 
cells. These results, along with the previous report in which AR was shown to 
directly interact with Rb (Yeh, S., Miyamoto, H., Nishimura, K., Kang, H., 
Ludlow, J., Hsiao, P., Wang, C., Su, C., and Chang C. (1998) Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 248, 361-367), suggest that the AR-ASC-2 interactions in vivo may 
involve Rb. Thus, ASC-2 appears to contain at least three distinct nuclear 
receptor interaction domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312563200
PMID: 14645241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
