---
pmid: '12933806'
title: Novel membrane protein containing glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase motif
  is transiently expressed during osteoblast differentiation.
authors:
- Yanaka N
- Imai Y
- Kawai E
- Akatsuka H
- Wakimoto K
- Nogusa Y
- Kato N
- Chiba H
- Kotani E
- Omori K
- Sakurai N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302867200
---

# Novel membrane protein containing glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase motif is transiently expressed during osteoblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Yanaka N, Imai Y, Kawai E, Akatsuka H, Wakimoto K, Nogusa Y, Kato N, Chiba H, Kotani E, Omori K, Sakurai N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M302867200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M302867200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43595-602. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302867200. Epub 
2003 Aug 20.

Novel membrane protein containing glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase motif 
is transiently expressed during osteoblast differentiation.

Yanaka N(1), Imai Y, Kawai E, Akatsuka H, Wakimoto K, Nogusa Y, Kato N, Chiba H, 
Kotani E, Omori K, Sakurai N.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., 16-89, Kashima 
3-chome, Yodogawa-ku, Osaka 532-8505, Japan.

Osteoblast maturation is a multistep series of events characterized by an 
integrated cascade of gene expression that are accompanied by specific 
phenotypic alterations. To find new osteoblast-related genes we cloned 
differentially expressed cDNAs characteristic of specific differentiation stages 
in the mouse osteoblast-like MC3T3-E1 cells by a differential display method. We 
identified a novel cDNA encoding a putative glycerophosphodiester 
phosphodiesterase, GDE3, which specifically was expressed at the stage of matrix 
maturation. Interestingly, the deduced amino acid sequence contains 539 amino 
acids including seven putative transmembrane domains and a glycerophosphodiester 
phosphodiesterase region in one of the extracellular loops. Northern blot 
analysis revealed that GDE3 was also expressed in spleen as well as primary 
calvarial osteoblasts and femur. We next transfected HEK293T cells with GDE3 
with green fluorescent protein fused to the C terminus. The green fluorescent 
protein-fused protein accumulated at the cell periphery, and the transfected 
cells overexpressing the protein changed from a spread form to rounded form with 
disappearance of actin filaments. Immunofluorescence staining with GDE3 antibody 
and phalloidin in MC3T3-E1 cells indicated that endogenous GDE3 might be 
co-localized with the actin cytoskeleton. To identify a role for GDE3 in 
osteoblast differentiation, MC3T3-E1 cells stably expressing the full-length 
protein were constructed. Expression of GDE3 showed morphological changes, 
resulting in dramatic increases in alkaline phosphatase activity and calcium 
deposit. These results suggest that GDE3 might be a novel seven-transmembrane 
protein with a GP-PDE-like extracellular motif expressed during the osteoblast 
differentiation that dramatically accelerates the program of osteoblast 
differentiation and is involved in the morphological change of cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M302867200
PMID: 12933806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
