---
pmid: '10648609'
title: Novel WD-repeat protein Mip1p facilitates function of the meiotic regulator
  Mei2p in fission yeast.
authors:
- Shinozaki-Yabana S
- Watanabe Y
- Yamamoto M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC85253
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.4.1234-1242.2000
---

# Novel WD-repeat protein Mip1p facilitates function of the meiotic regulator Mei2p in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Shinozaki-Yabana S, Watanabe Y, Yamamoto M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.4.1234-1242.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.4.1234-1242.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85253](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85253/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Feb;20(4):1234-42. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.4.1234-1242.2000.

Novel WD-repeat protein Mip1p facilitates function of the meiotic regulator 
Mei2p in fission yeast.

Shinozaki-Yabana S(1), Watanabe Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

In fission yeast, the onset of meiosis is triggered by activation of the 
RNA-binding protein Mei2p. We screened for a high-copy-number suppressor of the 
ectopic meiosis induced by expression of an active form of Mei2p. Consequently 
we isolated a truncated form of a novel gene, named mip1, from a fission yeast 
genomic library. The mip1 gene encoded a protein of 1,313 amino acids which 
carried a WD-repeat motif in the C-terminal region and was apparently conserved 
among eukaryotes. Mip1p was cytoplasmic, and two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation 
analyses demonstrated that Mip1p was bound to Mei2p in vivo. Genetic evidence 
indicated that wild-type Mip1p was required for the function of Mei2p to induce 
meiosis and that the truncated form of it (Mip1-15p) dominantly interfered with 
Mei2p. Mip1p appeared to be involved also in conjugation, associating with 
Ste11p, which is a key transcription factor for sexual development. Furthermore, 
Mip1p was essential for cell growth, to which neither Mei2p nor Ste11p is 
relevant. These results suggest that Mip1p assists functional expression of a 
number of proteins required for proliferation and sexual development in fission 
yeast.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.4.1234-1242.2000
PMCID: PMC85253
PMID: 10648609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In fission yeast, the onset of meiosis is triggered by activation of the RNA-binding protein Mei2p. We screened for a high-copy-number suppressor of the ectopic meiosis induced by expression of an active form of Mei2p. Consequently we isolated a truncated form of a novel gene, named mip1 , from a fission yeast genomic library. The mip1 gene encoded a protein of 1,313 amino acids which carried a WD-repeat motif in the C-terminal region and was apparently conserved among eukaryotes. Mip1p was cytoplasmic, and two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that Mip1p was bound to Mei2p in vivo. Genetic evidence indicated that wild-type Mip1p was required for the function of Mei2p to induce meiosis and that the truncated form of it (Mip1-15p) dominantly interfered with Mei2p. Mip1p appeared to be involved also in conjugation, associating with Ste11p, which is a key transcription factor for sexual development. Furthermore, Mip1p was essential for cell growth, to which neither Mei2p nor Ste11p is relevant. These results suggest that Mip1p assists functional expression of a number of proteins required for proliferation and sexual development in fission yeast.

DISCUSSION

We have identified a novel WD-repeat protein, Mip1p, which interacts with the meiotic regulator Mei2p in fission yeast. In the screening for high-copy-number suppressors of ectopic meiosis induced by active Mei2p, we isolated a truncated form of mip1 missing the N-terminal region of the ORF. This mip1-15 allele inhibited meiotic differentiation if overexpressed. However, we concluded that wild-type Mip1p plays a positive role in meiotic differentiation for the following reasons: (i) unlike mip1-15 , overexpression of wild-type mip1 does not interfere with meiosis; (ii) reduction of the mip1 gene dosage by half in a diploid cell lowered the frequency of meiotic entry; and (iii) the negative effect of mip1-15 on mei2 -driven meiosis can be alleviated by overproduction of Mei2-SATAp in the presence of wild-type mip1 but not in its absence.

Two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that Mip1p interacts physically with Mei2p in vivo. Thus, Mip1p may bind and assist Mei2p in the process of its activation or function, thereby facilitating meiotic entry. The N-terminal truncation in Mip1-15p likely converted this protein into a dominant negative form inhibiting Mei2p function. This model is consistent with the observation that Mip1-15p but not Mip1p causes abnormal aggregation of Mei2p in the cell. In addition, Mip1-15p was bound to Mei2p more tightly than Mip1p, and the meiotic defect caused by Mip1-15p was alleviated by elevated expression of Mei2p from a plasmid.

We presently have no firm picture about the molecular function of Mip1p, but the following discussion may be noteworthy. Although interaction of wild-type Mip1p with Mei2p was demonstrated, this interaction appeared to be relatively weak, suggesting that Mip1p may interact with Mei2p transiently rather than permanently. Results of the three-hybrid analysis indicate that Mip1p interacts with unphosphorylated Mei2p but not with Mei2p phosphorylated by Pat1p. This may mean that Mip1p interacts with Mei2p when the protein is produced de novo in the cytoplasm, prior to its phosphorylation by Pat1p. If this is the case, Mip1p may assist protein folding of nascent Mei2p and/or a subsequent crucial step for Mei2p activation. The period of their interaction will be very short, and once Mei2p is phosphorylated by Pat1p, Mip1p may dissociate from it. This scenario is consistent with the idea that Mip1p is a kind of molecular chaperon, acting to assist protein folding and subsequent processing required for the proper function of the target protein.

In addition to Mei2p, a crucial transcription factor for sexual development, Ste11p, is associated with Mip1p in vivo. Coimmunoprecipitation demonstrated that Ste11p interacts weakly with Mip1p but more strongly with Mip1-15p. Mip1-15p, but not Mip1p, inhibited conjugation if overexpressed. Furthermore, cells expressing mip1-15 did not conjugate in the absence of wild-type mip1 allele but became proficient in mating if mip1 + was present, indicating that mip1 + plays a positive role in conjugation. Thus, the relationship of Mip1p with Ste11p appears very similar to the relationship of Mip1p with Mei2p, suggesting that Mip1p participates in conjugation through the interaction with Ste11p. It is interesting that Mip1p can recognize and regulate two totally different proteins, Mei2p and Ste11p, the former an RNA-binding protein and the latter a high-mobility-group transcription factor. A common feature of these two proteins is their possession of conserved phosphorylation motifs by Pat1p kinase, which are relevant to their nuclear localization ( 9 , 24 , 29 ). We have demonstrated that the interaction of Mip1p with Mei2p depends on the phosphorylation state of the motifs. Thus, these motifs themselves may be the sites of interaction with Mip1p.

As discussed above, Mip1p plays a crucial role for sexual development by interacting with Mei2p and Ste11p, which are key factors for meiosis and conjugation. However, they are not the only targets of Mip1p in the cell. Gene disruption of mip1 indicated that the function of mip1 is essential for cell proliferation. Neither Mei2p nor Ste11p is the target molecule interacting with Mip1p during mitotic proliferation, because these proteins are dispensable for asexual growth ( 21 , 23 ). Therefore, there must be another target(s) of Mip1p required for mitotic cell growth. A notable feature of the truncated mip1-15 allele is that it dominantly inhibits meiosis and conjugation if overexpressed but does not interfere with, and even to some extent supports, mitotic growth. It is hence presumable that Mip1p functions in somewhat different modes in mitotic growth and in sexual development.

It is particularly intriguing that Mip1p is evolutionarily conserved among eukaryotes. Several Mip1p homologues have been identified in other organisms by genome sequencing projects, but none of them have been analyzed for function. The present work with fission yeast is the first example of a functional analysis of this family. Given that Mip1p is required for cell growth as well as sexual development and therefore is likely to interact with several proteins in fission yeast, its molecular function is probably ubiquitous and fundamental. We propose that fission yeast Mip1p plays a critical role in the cytoplasm in assisting a certain class of proteins to express their function. Although more extensive analysis is required to elucidate the precise molecular function of Mip1p, this report provides an important basis for further studies of this conserved WD-repeat protein family.
