---
pmid: '11452004'
title: AP-3 mediates tyrosinase but not TRP-1 trafficking in human melanocytes.
authors:
- Huizing M
- Sarangarajan R
- Strovel E
- Zhao Y
- Gahl WA
- Boissy RE
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC55657
doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.7.2075
---

# AP-3 mediates tyrosinase but not TRP-1 trafficking in human melanocytes.
**Authors:** Huizing M, Sarangarajan R, Strovel E, Zhao Y, Gahl WA, Boissy RE
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.12.7.2075](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.12.7.2075)
**PMC:** [PMC55657](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC55657/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2001 Jul;12(7):2075-85. doi: 10.1091/mbc.12.7.2075.

AP-3 mediates tyrosinase but not TRP-1 trafficking in human melanocytes.

Huizing M(1), Sarangarajan R, Strovel E, Zhao Y, Gahl WA, Boissy RE.

Author information:
(1)Section on Human Biochemical Genetics, Heritable Disorders Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 2 (HPS-2) have mutations in the 
beta 3A subunit of adaptor complex-3 (AP-3) and functional deficiency of this 
complex. AP-3 serves as a coat protein in the formation of new vesicles, 
including, apparently, the platelet's dense body and the melanocyte's 
melanosome. We used HPS-2 melanocytes in culture to determine the role of AP-3 
in the trafficking of the melanogenic proteins tyrosinase and tyrosinase-related 
protein-1 (TRP-1). TRP-1 displayed a typical melanosomal pattern in both normal 
and HPS-2 melanocytes. In contrast, tyrosinase exhibited a melanosomal (i.e., 
perinuclear and dendritic) pattern in normal cells but only a perinuclear 
pattern in the HPS-2 melanocytes. In addition, tyrosinase exhibited a normal 
pattern of expression in HPS-2 melanocytes transfected with a cDNA encoding the 
beta 3A subunit of the AP-3 complex. This suggests a role for AP-3 in the normal 
trafficking of tyrosinase to premelanosomes, consistent with the presence of a 
dileucine recognition signal in the C-terminal portion of the tyrosinase 
molecule. In the AP-3-deficient cells, tyrosinase was also present in structures 
resembling late endosomes or multivesicular bodies; these vesicles contained 
exvaginations devoid of tyrosinase. This suggests that, under normal 
circumstances, AP-3 may act on multivesicular bodies to form 
tyrosinase-containing vesicles destined to fuse with premelanosomes. Finally, 
our studies demonstrate that tyrosinase and TRP-1 use different mechanisms to 
reach their premelanosomal destination.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.12.7.2075
PMCID: PMC55657
PMID: 11452004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
