---
pmid: '31324722'
title: Inhibition of calpain 1 restores plasma membrane stability to pharmacologically
  rescued Phe508del-CFTR variant.
authors:
- Matos AM
- Pinto FR
- Barros P
- Amaral MD
- Pepperkok R
- Matos P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6737230
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008738
---

# Inhibition of calpain 1 restores plasma membrane stability to pharmacologically rescued Phe508del-CFTR variant.
**Authors:** Matos AM, Pinto FR, Barros P, Amaral MD, Pepperkok R, Matos P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.008738](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.008738)
**PMC:** [PMC6737230](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6737230/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Sep 6;294(36):13396-13410. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008738.
Epub  2019 Jul 19.

Inhibition of calpain 1 restores plasma membrane stability to pharmacologically 
rescued Phe508del-CFTR variant.

Matos AM(1), Pinto FR(2), Barros P(1), Amaral MD(2), Pepperkok R(3), Matos P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, 
1649-016 Lisboa, Portugal; University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, 
BioISI-Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(2)University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, BioISI-Biosystems & Integrative 
Sciences Institute, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.
(3)Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit and Advanced Light Microscopy Facility, 
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, 
1649-016 Lisboa, Portugal; University of Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, 
BioISI-Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal. 
Electronic address: paulo.matos@insa.min-saude.pt.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a chloride channel 
normally expressed at the surface of epithelial cells. The most frequent 
mutation, resulting in Phe-508 deletion, causes CFTR misfolding and its 
premature degradation. Low temperature or pharmacological correctors can partly 
rescue the Phe508del-CFTR processing defect and enhance trafficking of this 
channel variant to the plasma membrane (PM). Nevertheless, the rescued channels 
have an increased endocytosis rate, being quickly removed from the PM by the 
peripheral protein quality-control pathway. We previously reported that rescued 
Phe508del-CFTR (rPhe508del) can be retained at the cell surface by stimulating 
signaling pathways that coax the adaptor molecule ezrin (EZR) to tether 
rPhe508del-Na+/H+-exchange regulatory factor-1 complexes to the actin 
cytoskeleton, thereby averting the rapid internalization of this channel 
variant. However, the molecular basis for why rPhe508del fails to recruit active 
EZR to the PM remains elusive. Here, using a proteomics approach, we 
characterized and compared the core components of wt-CFTR- or 
rPhe508del-containing macromolecular complexes at the surface of human bronchial 
epithelial cells. We identified calpain 1 (CAPN1) as an exclusive rPhe508del 
interactor that prevents active EZR recruitment, impairs rPhe508del anchoring to 
actin, and reduces its stability in the PM. We show that either CAPN1 
down-regulation or its chemical inhibition dramatically improves the functional 
rescue of Phe508del-CFTR in airway cells. These observations suggest that CAPN1 
constitutes an appealing target for pharmacological intervention, as part of CF 
combination therapies restoring Phe508del-CFTR function.

© 2019 Matos et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.008738
PMCID: PMC6737230
PMID: 31324722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a chloride channel normally expressed at the surface of epithelial cells. The most frequent mutation, resulting in Phe-508 deletion, causes CFTR misfolding and its premature degradation. Low temperature or pharmacological correctors can partly rescue the Phe508del-CFTR processing defect and enhance trafficking of this channel variant to the plasma membrane (PM). Nevertheless, the rescued channels have an increased endocytosis rate, being quickly removed from the PM by the peripheral protein quality-control pathway. We previously reported that rescued Phe508del-CFTR (rPhe508del) can be retained at the cell surface by stimulating signaling pathways that coax the adaptor molecule ezrin (EZR) to tether rPhe508del-Na + /H + -exchange regulatory factor-1 complexes to the actin cytoskeleton, thereby averting the rapid internalization of this channel variant. However, the molecular basis for why rPhe508del fails to recruit active EZR to the PM remains elusive. Here, using a proteomics approach, we characterized and compared the core components of wt-CFTR– or rPhe508del-containing macromolecular complexes at the surface of human bronchial epithelial cells. We identified calpain 1 (CAPN1) as an exclusive rPhe508del interactor that prevents active EZR recruitment, impairs rPhe508del anchoring to actin, and reduces its stability in the PM. We show that either CAPN1 down-regulation or its chemical inhibition dramatically improves the functional rescue of Phe508del-CFTR in airway cells. These observations suggest that CAPN1 constitutes an appealing target for pharmacological intervention, as part of CF combination therapies restoring Phe508del-CFTR function.

Introduction

The cystic fibrosis (CF) 2 transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a multispanning cAMP-regulated chloride channel primarily localized to the apical membrane of polarized epithelial cells ( 1 ). Mutations in the CFTR gene cause the complex inherited disorder CF ( 1 , 2 ). The most common CFTR mutation is the deletion of phenylalanine 508 (Phe508del), with ∼85% of all CF patients having at least one copy of the Phe508del mutant (Welcome to CFTR2 website, https://www.cftr2.org/ ) 3 ( 4 ). This mutation is mainly characterized by protein misfolding and premature degradation by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) quality control, preventing the mutant protein from trafficking to the cell surface ( 5 – 7 ). Although Phe508del ER retention is not complete, the very small fraction of channels that reach the cell surface possesses only partial activity because of a gating defect ( 5 , 8 , 9 ) and show a severely decreased plasma membrane (PM) half-life, because of accelerated endocytosis and lysosomal degradation ( 10 , 11 ).

At present, there are two approved corrector drugs that target the molecular defects in Phe508del ( 12 – 14 ). The first to be used in the clinic is the drug Orkambi®, which combines “corrector” VX-809 (lumacaftor) and “potentiator” VX-770 (ivacaftor). VX-809 is an extensively characterized pharmacological chaperone that promotes folding of Phe508del-CFTR during its biogenesis and processing in the ER ( 16 – 19 ), whereas VX-770 increases CFTR channel open probability ( 20 ). Although beneficial, results from clinical trials with this combination therapy have shown only modest efficacy in restoring Phe508del-CFTR function in patients ( 21 – 26 ). Not significantly different are results with the combination drug Symdeko®/Symkevi® (corrector VX-661/tezacaftor with potentiator VX-770/ivacaftor) ( 25 – 27 ). Given the complexity of Phe508del-CFTR protein defects ( 6 , 18 ), part of the incomplete effectiveness of the existing combination therapies is likely to derive from an inability to retain sufficient CFTR levels at the apical surface of epithelial cells. Indeed, we and others have shown that the PM stability of chemical chaperone-rPhe508del-CFTR is still dramatically inferior to that of WT (wt)-CFTR, because of its targeting by the peripheral protein quality control and its deficient anchoring to the actin cytoskeleton ( 10 , 28 , 29 ). Notwithstanding, and despite the potential for greater clinical effectiveness of newer investigational corrector combinations ( 30 , 31 ), there are no therapeutic strategies specifically designed to target the decreased PM stability of chemically rPhe508del-CFTR.

Previously, we demonstrated that the anchoring of rescued channels to the actin cytoskeleton can be enhanced by promoting the PDZ-mediated interaction of Phe508del-CFTR with the Na + /H + exchange regulatory factor-1 (NHERF1) and the actin-binding adaptor protein ezrin (EZR) ( 28 , 29 ). We have also shown that the mechanism behind this PM stabilization lies on a conformational change in NHERF1, triggered by EZR activation through RAC1 signaling, which is then able to bind and stabilize misfolded CFTR at the PM ( 29 ). This strongly indicated that the protein interactions of wt- and rPhe508del-CFTR at the cell surface can constitute major determinants of CFTR stability and retention at the PM.

Over the last years, a growing number of proteins have been reported to interact with PM CFTR, possibly participating in the assembly of large macromolecular complexes ( 32 , 33 ). Most interactions occur through the N terminus, the regulatory domain, or the C-terminal tail of CFTR, either directly or mediated through various PDZ domain-containing proteins ( 32 , 34 , 35 ). These dynamic interactions impact on channel function, as well as on its processing and localization within cells ( 32 , 33 ). Furthermore, it has been established that mutant and nonmutant CFTR show considerable differences in their whole cell interactomes, and thus these differential protein interactions may contribute to the defects observed in Phe508del-CFTR processing and function ( 36 ). Hence, although several CFTR interactor partners are known ( 33 , 36 , 37 ), there is no study describing specifically CFTR's particular interactome at the PM, whether differences between wt- and pharmacologically rescued Phe508del-CFTR occur ( 38 ), and how these differences could contribute to the defective function and stability of the rescued mutant channels.

Here we propose to address these questions by identifying the core components of the CFTR PM molecular complexes in human airway cells expressing wt- or Phe508del-CFTR. For this, we developed an immunoprecipitation (IP) method that selectively captures the CFTR-containing macromolecular complexes at the PM. Our data reveal significant differences between the PM interactors of wt and rPhe508del-CFTR and allowed us to identify calpain 1 (CAPN1) protease as a key player in reducing Phe508del-CFTR actin anchoring and PM stability, thus contributing to the decreased cell surface retention of this rescued mutated channel.

Discussion

So far, several studies have identified numerous CFTR interactor proteins with essential roles in the processing, localization, and function of the channel ( 32 – 36 , 53 , 54 ). Nonetheless, the present work is the first to globally characterize CFTR interactors specifically occurring at the PM. Previous studies have shown that several interactions between CFTR and its binding partners are mediated through the scaffolding protein NHERF1, which seems to be a central protein in the assembly of the CFTR-containing macromolecular complexes at the surface of airway cells ( 33 , 55 , 56 ). EZR is also a key component of these complexes, mediating the tethering of NHERF1-bound CFTR proteins at the PM to the actin cytoskeleton, thus stabilizing the channel at the cell surface by blocking its endocytosis ( 57 – 59 ). Moreover, we also showed previously that the low cell surface stability of chemically rescued Phe508del-CFTR was, at least in part, caused by an impaired recruitment of EZR to rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 complexes at the PM, preventing their anchoring to actin and thus leading to their rapid internalization ( 28 ). Moreover, we and others showed that overexpression of constitutively active EZR coaxed the retention of rPhe508del-CFTR at the PM ( 29 , 60 ), by causing a conformational change in NHERF1 that displaced CHIP E3-ubiquitin ligase, and thus prevented CFTR ubiquitination and internalization ( 29 ). This led us to hypothesize that EZR overexpression was somehow circumventing a mechanistic restrain that prevented its association with rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 complexes in normal conditions. We therefore reasoned that it would be highly likely that, similarly to CHIP, additional proteins should interact specifically with rPhe508del- but not with wt-CFTR, preventing EZR binding and causing rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 destabilization at the PM. This hypothesis guided us to develop an assay to selectively IP and characterize CFTR-containing complexes from the PM. Notably, the whole CFTR interactome described by Pankow et al. ( 36 ) contained roughly one-third of the interactors identified by our PM-directed analysis. This is consistent with a compartment-specific enrichment of our data set, supporting the selectivity of the experimental approach used here. Our hypothesis also guided the bioinformatic analysis of the gathered data, allowing us to converge our MS data set from a network of 532 putative interactors to a subnetwork of 22 core proteins with a high probability to interact directly with rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 complexes at the PM. Among these high confidence-scoring proteins, CAPN1 stood out as a potentially druggable candidate, because chemical inhibitors for this protein were already described. Of note, this does not exclude that several other relevant regulators of CFTR PM stability may exist among the many identified interactors, leaving an open door for further studies of these additional candidate proteins.

Notwithstanding, we showed here that CAPN1, a ubiquitous cytoskeleton- and PM-associated Ca 2+ -dependent cysteine protease ( 43 ), is present within the PM complex assembled around rPhe508del-CFTR, but not around wt-CFTR proteins. Moreover, we demonstrated that chemical inhibition of CAPN1 with ALLM promotes the PM stabilization of VX-809–rPhe508del-CFTR in bronchial epithelial cells, leading to a near 4-fold increase in the functional restoration of CFTR-mediated ion transport. Although ALLM has a higher specificity to inhibit CAPN1 over other calpains, it is also an effective inhibitor of cathepsins, a group of lysosome-associated proteases ( 51 ). Because degradation of rPhe508del-CFTR internalized from the PM was described to occur mainly at the lysosome compartment ( 41 ), we cannot exclude a partial contribution of cathepsin inhibition to the increased PM levels of rPhe508del-CFTR upon ALLM treatment. Indeed, whereas siRNA-mediated CAPN1 knockdown produced a similar effect to ALLM treatment regarding PM abundance, stability, and functional rescue of Phe508del-CFTR, the overall magnitude of the effect was lower under siRNA than that achieved with the chemical inhibitor. Previous studies in PBMCs of patients homozygous for Phe508del-CFTR showed that elevated levels of intracellular Ca 2+ led to an unbalance in the calpain/calpastatin system, resulting in a constitutive CAPN1 activation caused by a decrease in their specific inhibitory regulators, leading to a reduction of mature CFTR in PBMCs ( 44 ). These authors also showed that CAPN1 activity could compromise CFTR function by targeting CFTR–NHERF1 complexes at the PM and that total EZR protein levels were lower in the PBMC of CF patients ( 44 ). Although the expression of CFTR in PBMCs is still subject to controversy ( 61 , 62 ), Ca 2+ was also found elevated in epithelial airway cells of CF patients ( 63 – 66 ), suggesting a similar up-regulation of CAPN1 activity in these cells. Moreover, whereas the authors did not fully elucidate the mechanism of PM CFTR destabilization in PBMCs ( 44 ), here we show that knockdown of CAPN1 stabilizes Phe508del-CFTR by promoting the association of endogenous EZR with the CFTR–NHERF1 complex at the PM. This result is consistent with our previous findings showing that it is possible to coax the anchoring and PM retention of chemically rescued Phe508del-CFTR by promoting the activation and association of EZR to CFTR–NHERF1 complexes at the PM, by increasing endogenous RAC1 signaling through the stimulation of airway epithelial cells with HGF ( 28 , 42 ). The binding of activated EZR induces a conformational change in NHERF1 exposing a second PDZ domain for CFTR binding, which stabilizes the rescued channel at the cell surface, leading to a 3-fold increase in the functional restoration achieved by corrector drugs, such as VX-809 ( 28 , 29 , 42 ). An equivalent extent of functional recovery was observed with CAPN1 inhibition, either by siRNA-mediated knockdown or by chemical inhibition with ALLM. These findings indicate that the proteolytic activity of CAPN1 is required for the destabilization of rPhe508del-CFTR at the PM. Consistently, EZR is among the known CAPN1 substrates, and remarkably, it is the only member of the ezrin–radixin–moesin (ERM) family to be cleaved by this protease in vitro ( 67 ). This supports an important function for CAPN1 in the regulation of EZR-mediated anchoring of PM proteins, namely CFTR.

All the gathered evidence led us to propose the following model ( Fig. 8 ): elevated Ca 2+ intracellular levels coupled to the recruitment of CAPN1 to rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 PM complexes lead to the hydrolysis and displacement of EZR from the complex, preventing its activation by endogenous signaling events (such as those mediated by RAC1 ( 28 )) and thus avoiding NHERF1 opening and the anchoring of rPhe508del-CFTR to the actin cytoskeleton. These events lead to the accelerated internalization and degradation of rescued channels, as described by us and others ( 19 , 28 , 29 ). Inhibition of CAPN1 allows the activation and binding of EZR to rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 complexes at the PM, promoting the retention and thus stabilization of rescued channels at the cell surface.

Taken together, our results indicate that association of CAPN1 to the cell surface rPhe508del-CFTR–NHERF1 complexes plays an important role in reducing the half-life of rPhe508del-CFTR at the PM and that its pharmacological inhibition has a potentially relevant therapeutic application in combination therapies with other modulator drugs, namely correctors and potentiators. It should be noted that even though there are no CAPN1 inhibitors currently progressing into clinical trials, important advances are being made in their development, and several preclinical studies demonstrated their potential therapeutic value ( 68 , 69 ). In accordance, further in vivo studies will now be required to evaluate the therapeutic applicability of CAPN1 inhibition for the benefit of people with CF disease.
