---
pmid: '11717165'
title: The complete gene sequence of titin, expression of an unusual approximately
  700-kDa titin isoform, and its interaction with obscurin identify a novel Z-line
  to I-band linking system.
authors:
- Bang ML
- Centner T
- Fornoff F
- Geach AJ
- Gotthardt M
- McNabb M
- Witt CC
- Labeit D
- Gregorio CC
- Granzier H
- Labeit S
journal: Circ Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/hh2301.100981
---

# The complete gene sequence of titin, expression of an unusual approximately 700-kDa titin isoform, and its interaction with obscurin identify a novel Z-line to I-band linking system.
**Authors:** Bang ML, Centner T, Fornoff F, Geach AJ, Gotthardt M, McNabb M, Witt CC, Labeit D, Gregorio CC, Granzier H, Labeit S
**Journal:** Circ Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1161/hh2301.100981](https://doi.org/10.1161/hh2301.100981)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2001 Nov 23;89(11):1065-72. doi: 10.1161/hh2301.100981.

The complete gene sequence of titin, expression of an unusual approximately 
700-kDa titin isoform, and its interaction with obscurin identify a novel Z-line 
to I-band linking system.

Bang ML(1), Centner T, Fornoff F, Geach AJ, Gotthardt M, McNabb M, Witt CC, 
Labeit D, Gregorio CC, Granzier H, Labeit S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Anästhesiologie und Operative Intensivmedizin, 
Universitätsklinikum Mannheim, Germany.

Titin is a giant vertebrate striated muscle protein with critical importance for 
myofibril elasticity and structural integrity. We show here that the complete 
sequence of the human titin gene contains 363 exons, which together code for 38 
138 residues (4200 kDa). In its central I-band region, 47 novel PEVK exons were 
found, which contribute to titin's extensible spring properties. Additionally, 3 
unique I-band titin exons were identified (named novex-1 to -3). Novex-3 
functions as an alternative titin C-terminus. The novex-3 titin isoform is 
approximately 700 kDa in size and spans from Z1-Z2 (titin's N-terminus) to 
novex-3 (C-terminal exon). Novex-3 titin specifically interacts with obscurin, a 
721-kDa myofibrillar protein composed of 57 Ig/FN3 domains, followed by one IQ, 
SH3, DH, and a PH domain at its C-terminus. The obscurin domains Ig48/Ig49 bind 
to novex-3 titin and target to the Z-line region when expressed as a GFP fusion 
protein in live cardiac myocytes. Immunoelectron microscopy detected the 
C-terminal Ig48/Ig49 obscurin epitope near the Z-line edge. The distance from 
the Z-line varied with sarcomere length, suggesting that the novex-3 
titin/obscurin complex forms an elastic Z-disc to I-band linking system. This 
system could link together calcium-dependent, SH3-, and GTPase-regulated 
signaling pathways in close proximity to the Z-disc, a structure increasingly 
implicated in the restructuring of sarcomeres during cardiomyopathies.

DOI: 10.1161/hh2301.100981
PMID: 11717165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
