---
pmid: '20130576'
title: RAF inhibitors prime wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and enhance
  growth.
authors:
- Hatzivassiliou G
- Song K
- Yen I
- Brandhuber BJ
- Anderson DJ
- Alvarado R
- Ludlam MJ
- Stokoe D
- Gloor SL
- Vigers G
- Morales T
- Aliagas I
- Liu B
- Sideris S
- Hoeflich KP
- Jaiswal BS
- Seshagiri S
- Koeppen H
- Belvin M
- Friedman LS
- Malek S
journal: Nature
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature08833
---

# RAF inhibitors prime wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and enhance growth.
**Authors:** Hatzivassiliou G, Song K, Yen I, Brandhuber BJ, Anderson DJ, Alvarado R, Ludlam MJ, Stokoe D, Gloor SL, Vigers G, Morales T, Aliagas I, Liu B, Sideris S, Hoeflich KP, Jaiswal BS, Seshagiri S, Koeppen H, Belvin M, Friedman LS, Malek S
**Journal:** Nature (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature08833](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08833)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2010 Mar 18;464(7287):431-5. doi: 10.1038/nature08833. Epub 2010 Feb
3.

RAF inhibitors prime wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and enhance 
growth.

Hatzivassiliou G(1), Song K, Yen I, Brandhuber BJ, Anderson DJ, Alvarado R, 
Ludlam MJ, Stokoe D, Gloor SL, Vigers G, Morales T, Aliagas I, Liu B, Sideris S, 
Hoeflich KP, Jaiswal BS, Seshagiri S, Koeppen H, Belvin M, Friedman LS, Malek S.

Author information:
(1)Genentech, South San Francisco, California 94080, USA. 
hatzivassiliou.georgia@gene.com

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Mar 18;464(7287):358-9. doi: 10.1038/464358a.

Activating mutations in KRAS and BRAF are found in more than 30% of all human 
tumours and 40% of melanoma, respectively, thus targeting this pathway could 
have broad therapeutic effects. Small molecule ATP-competitive RAF kinase 
inhibitors have potent antitumour effects on mutant BRAF(V600E) tumours but, in 
contrast to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors, are not 
potent against RAS mutant tumour models, despite RAF functioning as a key 
effector downstream of RAS and upstream of MEK. Here we show that 
ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors have two opposing mechanisms of action depending 
on the cellular context. In BRAF(V600E) tumours, RAF inhibitors effectively 
block the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway and 
decrease tumour growth. Notably, in KRAS mutant and RAS/RAF wild-type tumours, 
RAF inhibitors activate the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway in a RAS-dependent manner, thus 
enhancing tumour growth in some xenograft models. Inhibitor binding activates 
wild-type RAF isoforms by inducing dimerization, membrane localization and 
interaction with RAS-GTP. These events occur independently of kinase inhibition 
and are, instead, linked to direct conformational effects of inhibitors on the 
RAF kinase domain. On the basis of these findings, we demonstrate that 
ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors can have opposing functions as inhibitors or 
activators of signalling pathways, depending on the cellular context. 
Furthermore, this work provides new insights into the therapeutic use of 
ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1038/nature08833
PMID: 20130576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
