---
pmid: '31884023'
title: The utility of S100B level in detecting mild traumatic brain injury in intoxicated
  patients.
authors:
- Rahimian S
- Potteiger S
- Loynd R
- Mercogliano C
- Sigal A
- Short A
- Donato A
journal: Am J Emerg Med
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.004
---

# The utility of S100B level in detecting mild traumatic brain injury in intoxicated patients.
**Authors:** Rahimian S, Potteiger S, Loynd R, Mercogliano C, Sigal A, Short A, Donato A
**Journal:** Am J Emerg Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.004)

## Abstract

1. Am J Emerg Med. 2020 Apr;38(4):799-805. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.004. Epub 
2019 Dec 9.

The utility of S100B level in detecting mild traumatic brain injury in 
intoxicated patients.

Rahimian S(1), Potteiger S(2), Loynd R(2), Mercogliano C(2), Sigal A(3), Short 
A(2), Donato A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Reading Hospital, Tower Health System, 420 
S. Fifth Avenue, West Reading, PA 19611, USA. Electronic address: 
shoja.rahimian@towerhealth.org.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Reading Hospital, Tower Health System, 420 
S. Fifth Avenue, West Reading, PA 19611, USA.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, Reading Hospital, Tower Health System, 420 
S. Fifth Avenue, West Reading, PA 19611, USA.

BACKGROUND: S100B is a serum protein known to elevate in patients with brain 
injury, but it is unknown whether it can predict intracranial pathology in 
intoxicated patients following mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI). We performed 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of the English language literature to 
address this question.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Four prospective cohort trials of serum S100B levels 
on acutely intoxicated patients with MTBI were included in this meta-analysis. 
Prevalence of intracranial pathology in the pooled cohort of the intoxicated 
MTBI patients was 10%, lower than the 15-30% reported in the literature for the 
general MTBI population. Standard mean difference of serum S100B levels between 
patients with and without intracranial pathology on CT was 0.73 μg/L (Z = 18.33, 
P < 0.001). Following sensitivity analysis and hierarchical summary 
receiver-operating characteristic models, three remaining articles were used for 
pooled estimates that found that S100B had a sensitivity of 0.96 (95% CI: 
0.84-1.00, I2 = 0%) and specificity of 0.63 (95% CI: 0.58-0.68, I2 = 86.8%) with 
a high negative predictive value (100%, 95% CI: 95.14-100, I2 = 0%) and a 
negative LR of 0.06 (95% CI: 0.01-0.31).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum S100B levels may have utility in ruling out intracranial 
pathology in intoxicated patients, however more study and comparison with other 
serum biomarkers of brain injury are necessary before this becomes the accepted 
standard of care.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2019.12.004
PMID: 31884023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
