---
pmid: '7937953'
title: The ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction cycle of the Escherichia coli Hsp70 system
  DnaK, DnaJ, and GrpE.
authors:
- Szabo A
- Langer T
- Schröder H
- Flanagan J
- Bukau B
- Hartl FU
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC45016
doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.22.10345
---

# The ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction cycle of the Escherichia coli Hsp70 system DnaK, DnaJ, and GrpE.
**Authors:** Szabo A, Langer T, Schröder H, Flanagan J, Bukau B, Hartl FU
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.91.22.10345](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.91.22.10345)
**PMC:** [PMC45016](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC45016/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Oct 25;91(22):10345-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.91.22.10345.

The ATP hydrolysis-dependent reaction cycle of the Escherichia coli Hsp70 system 
DnaK, DnaJ, and GrpE.

Szabo A(1), Langer T, Schröder H, Flanagan J, Bukau B, Hartl FU.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10021.

Molecular chaperones of the Hsp70 class bind unfolded polypeptide chains and are 
thought to be involved in the cellular folding pathway of many proteins. DnaK, 
the Hsp70 protein of Escherichia coli, is regulated by the chaperone protein 
DnaJ and the cofactor GrpE. To gain a biologically relevant understanding of the 
mechanism of Hsp70 action, we have analyzed a model reaction in which DnaK, 
DnaJ, and GrpE mediate the folding of denatured firefly luciferase. The binding 
and release of substrate protein for folding involves the following ATP 
hydrolysis-dependent cycle: (i) unfolded luciferase binds initially to DnaJ; 
(ii) upon interaction with luciferase-DnaJ, DnaK hydrolyzes its bound ATP, 
resulting in the formation of a stable luciferase-DnaK-DnaJ complex; (iii) GrpE 
releases ADP from DnaK; and (iv) ATP binding to DnaK triggers the release of 
substrate protein, thus completing the reaction cycle. A single cycle of binding 
and release leads to folding of only a fraction of luciferase molecules. Several 
rounds of ATP-dependent interaction with DnaK and DnaJ are required for fully 
efficient folding.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.22.10345
PMCID: PMC45016
PMID: 7937953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
