---
pmid: '23446637'
title: Pathogenic NPHP5 mutations impair protein interaction with Cep290, a prerequisite
  for ciliogenesis.
authors:
- Barbelanne M
- Song J
- Ahmadzai M
- Tsang WY
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3797088
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt100
---

# Pathogenic NPHP5 mutations impair protein interaction with Cep290, a prerequisite for ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** Barbelanne M, Song J, Ahmadzai M, Tsang WY
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt100](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt100)
**PMC:** [PMC3797088](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3797088/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jun 15;22(12):2482-94. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt100. Epub 2013 
Feb 27.

Pathogenic NPHP5 mutations impair protein interaction with Cep290, a 
prerequisite for ciliogenesis.

Barbelanne M(1), Song J, Ahmadzai M, Tsang WY.

Author information:
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Mutations in the human NPHP5 gene cause retinal and renal disease, but the 
precise mechanism by which NPHP5 functions is not understood. We report that 
NPHP5 is a centriolar protein whose depletion inhibits an early step of 
ciliogenesis, a phenotype reminiscent of Cep290 loss and contrary to IFT88 loss. 
Functional dissection of NPHP5 interactions with Cep290 and CaM reveals a 
requirement of the former for ciliogenesis, while the latter prevents NPHP5 
self-aggregation. Disease-causing mutations lead to truncated products unable to 
bind Cep290 and localize to centrosomes, thereby compromising cilia formation. 
In contrast, a modifier mutation cripples CaM binding but has no overt effect on 
ciliogenesis. Drugs that antagonize negative regulators of the ciliogenic 
pathway can rescue ciliogenesis in cells depleted of NPHP5, with response 
profiles similar to those of Cep290- but not IFT88-depleted cells. Our results 
uncover the underlying molecular basis of disease and provide novel insights 
into mitigating NPHP5 deficiency.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt100
PMCID: PMC3797088
PMID: 23446637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare.
