---
pmid: '30504268'
title: Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MICU1 regulates mitochondrial Ca(2+) levels
  and tumor growth.
authors:
- Marchi S
- Corricelli M
- Branchini A
- Vitto VAM
- Missiroli S
- Morciano G
- Perrone M
- Ferrarese M
- Giorgi C
- Pinotti M
- Galluzzi L
- Kroemer G
- Pinton P
journal: EMBO J
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6331721
doi: 10.15252/embj.201899435
---

# Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MICU1 regulates mitochondrial Ca(2+) levels and tumor growth.
**Authors:** Marchi S, Corricelli M, Branchini A, Vitto VAM, Missiroli S, Morciano G, Perrone M, Ferrarese M, Giorgi C, Pinotti M, Galluzzi L, Kroemer G, Pinton P
**Journal:** EMBO J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201899435](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201899435)
**PMC:** [PMC6331721](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6331721/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2019 Jan 15;38(2):e99435. doi: 10.15252/embj.201899435. Epub 2018 Nov 
30.

Akt-mediated phosphorylation of MICU1 regulates mitochondrial Ca(2+) levels and 
tumor growth.

Marchi S(1), Corricelli M(2), Branchini A(3), Vitto VAM(2), Missiroli S(2), 
Morciano G(2)(4), Perrone M(2), Ferrarese M(3), Giorgi C(2), Pinotti M(3), 
Galluzzi L(5)(6), Kroemer G(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12)(13), Pinton P(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Technologies of Advanced Therapies (LTTA), Department of 
Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, Section of Pathology, Oncology 
and Experimental Biology, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy 
saverio.marchi@unife.it paolo.pinton@unife.it.
(2)Laboratory for Technologies of Advanced Therapies (LTTA), Department of 
Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, Section of Pathology, Oncology 
and Experimental Biology, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Maria Cecilia Hospital, GVM Care & Research, Cotignola, Italy.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 
NY, USA.
(6)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(7)Equipe 11 Labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Centre de Recherche 
des Cordeliers, Paris, France.
(8)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1138, Paris, 
France.
(9)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.
(10)Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, 
Villejuif, France.
(11)Center of Clinical Investigations in Biotherapies of Cancer (CICBT), 
Villejuif, France.
(12)Pôle de Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Although mitochondria play a multifunctional role in cancer progression and Ca2+ 
signaling is remodeled in a wide variety of tumors, the underlying mechanisms 
that link mitochondrial Ca2+ homeostasis with malignant tumor formation and 
growth remain elusive. Here, we show that phosphorylation at the N-terminal 
region of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU) regulatory subunit MICU1 
leads to a notable increase in the basal mitochondrial Ca2+ levels. A pool of 
active Akt in the mitochondria is responsible for MICU1 phosphorylation, and 
mitochondrion-targeted Akt strongly regulates the mitochondrial Ca2+ content. 
The Akt-mediated phosphorylation impairs MICU1 processing and stability, 
culminating in reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and tumor progression. 
Thus, our data reveal the crucial role of the Akt-MICU1 axis in cancer and 
underscore the strategic importance of the association between aberrant 
mitochondrial Ca2+ levels and tumor development.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201899435
PMCID: PMC6331721
PMID: 30504268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
