---
pmid: '12924628'
title: The interaction between human PEX3 and PEX19 characterized by fluorescence
  resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis.
authors:
- Muntau AC
- Roscher AA
- Kunau WH
- Dodt G
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00325
---

# The interaction between human PEX3 and PEX19 characterized by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis.
**Authors:** Muntau AC, Roscher AA, Kunau WH, Dodt G
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00325](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00325)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;82(7):333-42. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00325.

The interaction between human PEX3 and PEX19 characterized by fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer (FRET) analysis.

Muntau AC(1), Roscher AA, Kunau WH, Dodt G.

Author information:
(1)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Research Center, Department of 
Biochemical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 
Munich, Germany.

The process of peroxisome biogenesis involves several PEX genes that encode the 
machinery required to assemble the organelle. Among the corresponding peroxins 
the interaction between PEX3 and PEX19 is essential for early peroxisome 
biogenesis. However, the intracellular site of this protein interaction is still 
unclear. To address this question by fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) analysis, we engineered the enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) to 
the C-terminus of PEX3 and the enhanced cyan fluorescent protein (ECFP) to the 
N-terminus of PEX19. Functionality of the fusion proteins was shown by 
transfection of human PEX3- and PEX19-deficient fibroblasts from Zellweger 
patients with tagged versions of PEX3 and PEX19. This led to reformation of 
import-competent peroxisomes in both cell lines previously lacking detectable 
peroxisomal membrane structures. The interaction of PEX3-EYFP with ECFP-PEX19 in 
a PEX3-deficient cell line during peroxisome biogenesis was visualized by FRET 
imaging. Although PEX19 was predominantly localized to the cytoplasma, the 
peroxisome was identified to be the main intracellular site of the PEX3-PEX19 
interaction. Results were confirmed and quantified by donor fluorescence 
photobleaching experiments. PEX3 deletion proteins lacking the N-terminal 
peroxisomal targeting sequence (PEX3 34-373-EYFP) or the PEX19-binding domain 
located in the C-terminal half of the protein (PEX3 1-140-EYFP) did not show the 
characteristic peroxisomal localization of PEX3, but were mislocalized to the 
cytoplasm (PEX3 34-373-EYFP) or to the mitochondria (PEX3 1-140-EYFP) and did 
not interact with ECFP-PEX19. We suggest that FRET is a suitable tool to gain 
quantitative spatial information about the interaction of peroxins during the 
process of peroxisome biogenesis in single cells. These findings complement and 
extend data from conventional in vitro protein interaction assays and support 
the hypothesis of PEX3 being an anchor for PEX19 at the peroxisomal membrane.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00325
PMID: 12924628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
