---
pmid: '9453566'
title: CuZn-superoxide dismutase, extracellular superoxide dismutase, and glutathione
  peroxidase in blood from individuals homozygous for Asp90Ala CuZu-superoxide dismutase
  mutation.
authors:
- Andersen PM
- Nilsson P
- Forsgren L
- Marklund SL
journal: J Neurochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70020715.x
---

# CuZn-superoxide dismutase, extracellular superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase in blood from individuals homozygous for Asp90Ala CuZu-superoxide dismutase mutation.
**Authors:** Andersen PM, Nilsson P, Forsgren L, Marklund SL
**Journal:** J Neurochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70020715.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70020715.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 1998 Feb;70(2):715-20. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70020715.x.

CuZn-superoxide dismutase, extracellular superoxide dismutase, and glutathione 
peroxidase in blood from individuals homozygous for Asp90Ala CuZu-superoxide 
dismutase mutation.

Andersen PM(1), Nilsson P, Forsgren L, Marklund SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Umeå University Hospital, Sweden.

The Asp90Ala CuZn-superoxide dismutase mutation is associated with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) in both homo- and heterozygous form. We analyzed 
antioxidant enzymes in blood from 44 individuals homozygous and 114 individuals 
heterozygous for the Asp90Ala mutation as well as 66 blood relatives carrying 
the wild-type allele only. Erythrocyte CuZn-superoxide dismutase activity was 
reduced by 9% in the homozygous individuals, confirming previous findings on a 
smaller cohort. The specific activity of Asp90Ala mutant CuZn-superoxide 
dismutase in erythrocytes was equal to that of isolated mutant enzyme and 
slightly higher than that of isolated wild-type enzyme. There was no evidence 
for the presence of inactive mutant molecules in erythrocytes, and the lower 
activity is due to the occurrence of fewer active molecules. There were no 
significant differences between the groups in plasma extracellular superoxide 
dismutase content, and the erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activities were 
virtually identical. Also, there were no differences in these parameters between 
homozygous individuals with or without ALS. There was no evidence for any 
association with ALS of a polymorphic extracellular superoxide dismutase 
mutation, Arg213Gly. The absence of response of the blood antioxidant enzymes to 
the Asp90Ala CuZn-superoxide dismutase mutation does not support the theory that 
the ALS-linked CuZn-superoxide dismutase mutations cause disease by increased 
oxidant stress.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.70020715.x
PMID: 9453566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
