---
pmid: '7487055'
title: 'Analysis of melanoma cells stably transfected with beta 1,4GalNAc transferase
  (GM2/GD2 synthase) cDNA: relative glycosyltransferase levels play a dominant role
  in determining ganglioside expression.'
authors:
- Ruan S
- Raj BK
- Furukawa K
- Lloyd KO
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abbi.1995.0003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of melanoma cells stably transfected with beta 1,4GalNAc transferase (GM2/GD2 synthase) cDNA: relative glycosyltransferase levels play a dominant role in determining ganglioside expression.
**Authors:** Ruan S, Raj BK, Furukawa K, Lloyd KO
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abbi.1995.0003](https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.1995.0003)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1995 Oct 20;323(1):11-8. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1995.0003.

Analysis of melanoma cells stably transfected with beta 1,4GalNAc transferase 
(GM2/GD2 synthase) cDNA: relative glycosyltransferase levels play a dominant 
role in determining ganglioside expression.

Ruan S(1), Raj BK, Furukawa K, Lloyd KO.

Author information:
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Previous studies (Y. Nagata, S. Yamashiro, J. Yodoi, K. O. Lloyd, H. Shiku, and 
K. Furukawa (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 12082-12089) had isolated a putative cDNA 
coding for beta 1,4 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GM2/GD2 synthase) and 
demonstrated the presence of GM2 and/or GD2 gangliosides in melanoma cell lines 
stably transfected with this gene. We have now measured the levels of 
glycosyltransferase activities and mRNA levels in five transfected cell lines in 
comparison with their parent cell lines (mouse melanoma B16 and human melanoma 
MeWo). Membrane preparations from the transfected cell lines demonstrated de 
novo synthesis of GM2 or GD2 in in vitro assays using GM3 or GD3, respectively, 
as ganglioside acceptors. The enzyme levels, however, varied considerably among 
the different transfectants, as did the mRNA levels for the beta 1,4 
Gal-NAc-transferase. The effect of the transfected gene on levels of preexisting 
glycosyltransferases involved in ganglioside biosynthesis was also measured and 
the ganglioside composition of the cell lines was determined. The level of beta 
1,4 GalNAc-transferase expressed in the different cell lines was found to 
dramatically influence the overall ganglioside composition of the cell. In the 
transfected cell line with the highest levels of the transferase, for example, 
biosynthesis was almost completely redirected away from the b pathway to the a 
pathway with the resulting expression of only GM2. These data from this family 
of related cell lines clearly demonstrate the primary roles that relative 
glycosyltransferase levels play in determining the ganglioside composition of 
cells.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1995.0003
PMID: 7487055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
