---
pmid: '25255767'
title: Molecular mechanisms of disease-related human β-actin mutations p.R183W and
  p.E364K.
authors:
- Hundt N
- Preller M
- Swolski O
- Ang AM
- Mannherz HG
- Manstein DJ
- Müller M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.13068
---

# Molecular mechanisms of disease-related human β-actin mutations p.R183W and p.E364K.
**Authors:** Hundt N, Preller M, Swolski O, Ang AM, Mannherz HG, Manstein DJ, Müller M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.13068](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.13068)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2014 Dec;281(23):5279-91. doi: 10.1111/febs.13068. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Molecular mechanisms of disease-related human β-actin mutations p.R183W and 
p.E364K.

Hundt N(1), Preller M, Swolski O, Ang AM, Mannherz HG, Manstein DJ, Müller M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

Cytoplasmic β-actin supports fundamental cellular processes in healthy and 
diseased cells including cell adhesion, migration, cytokinesis and maintenance 
of cell polarity. Mutations in ACTB, the gene encoding cytoplasmic β-actin, lead 
to severe disorders with a broad range of symptoms. The two dominant 
heterozygous gain-of-function β-actin mutations p.R183W and p.E364K were 
identified in patients with developmental malformations, deafness and 
juvenile-onset dystonia (p.R183W) and neutrophil dysfunction (p.E364K). Here, we 
report the recombinant production and functional characterization of the two 
mutant proteins. Arg183 is located near the nucleotide-binding pocket of actin. 
Our results from biochemical studies and molecular dynamics simulations show 
that replacement by a tryptophan residue at position 183 establishes an unusual 
stacking interaction with Tyr69 that perturbs nucleotide release from actin 
monomers and polymerization behavior by inducing a closed state conformation. 
The replacement of Glu364 by a lysine residue appears to act as an allosteric 
trigger event leading to the preferred formation of the closed state. Thus, our 
approach indicates that both mutations affect interdomain mobility and 
nucleotide interactions as a basis for the formation of disease phenotypes in 
patients.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.13068
PMID: 25255767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
