---
pmid: '18455122'
title: Survival of cancer cells is maintained by EGFR independent of its kinase activity.
authors:
- Weihua Z
- Tsan R
- Huang WC
- Wu Q
- Chiu CH
- Fidler IJ
- Hung MC
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2413063
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.03.015
---

# Survival of cancer cells is maintained by EGFR independent of its kinase activity.
**Authors:** Weihua Z, Tsan R, Huang WC, Wu Q, Chiu CH, Fidler IJ, Hung MC
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2008.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2008.03.015)
**PMC:** [PMC2413063](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2413063/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2008 May;13(5):385-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.03.015.

Survival of cancer cells is maintained by EGFR independent of its kinase 
activity.

Weihua Z(1), Tsan R, Huang WC, Wu Q, Chiu CH, Fidler IJ, Hung MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2008 May;13(5):375-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.04.008.

Expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine 
kinase associated with cell proliferation and survival, is overactive in many 
tumors of epithelial origin. Blockade of the kinase activity of EGFR has been 
used for cancer therapy; however, by itself, it does not seem to reach maximum 
therapeutic efficacy. We report here that in human cancer cells, the function of 
kinase-independent EGFR is to prevent autophagic cell death by maintaining 
intracellular glucose level through interaction and stabilization of the 
sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1).

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.03.015
PMCID: PMC2413063
PMID: 18455122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

As a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), upon ligand binding, dimerizes, autophosphorylates, and triggers cascades of downstream signaling, such as activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/Akt, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Jak/Stat, and protein kinase C and modulation of ion channels, by which cell proliferation and survival are enhanced ( Wells, 1999 ). Overexpression/activation of EGFR, which is often found in tumors of epithelial origin, is associated with metastasis, poor prognosis, and resistance to chemotherapy ( Nicholson et al., 2001 ), which makes it an ideal target for therapy. Multiple clinical trials of using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer therapy have been conducted, but blockage of tyrosine kinase activity alone does not seem to reach maximum therapeutic efficacy. The general response rates are between 10%–20% across a variety of human malignancies ( Fukuoka et al., 2002 ; Kris et al., 2002 ; Cohen et al., 2003 ; Dancey and Freidlin, 2003 ).

The expression level of EGFR in cancer tissues is correlated with prognosis, but not with responsiveness, to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment ( Arteaga, 2002 ), suggesting that, independent of its kinase activity, EGFR may contribute to the progression of cancer. The existence of kinase-independent prosurvival function of EGFR is supported by several studies. First of all, loss of kinase activity of EGFR does not produce similar phenotypes as to loss of EGFR protein in vivo. EGFR knockout animals die soon after birth ( Miettinen et al., 1995 ), but animals with severely compromised kinase mutant EGFR are completely viable and display only some epithelial defects ( Luetteke et al., 1994 ). Second, EGFR without kinase activity was shown to be able to stimulate DNA synthesis ( Coker et al., 1994 ) and enhance cell survival ( Ewald et al., 2003 ). Finally, inhibition of the kinase activity of EGFR by tyrosine kinase inhibitors often leads to decreased cell proliferation but not cell death ( Harari and Huang, 2004 ), whereas knocking down the EGFR receptor protein results in cell death ( Nagy et al., 2003 ).

In this study, we investigated the mechanism of kinase-independent prosurvival function of the EGFR and found that, independent of its kinase activity, EGFR prevents cancer cells from autophagic cell death by maintaining the basal intracellular glucose level.

Loss of Expression of EGFR, but Not Its Kinase Activity, Resulted in Autophagic Cell Death

PC-3MM2 cells werecultured in minimum essentialmedium (MEM) containing physiological glucose content of 5.5 mM ( Baltzan et al., 1962 ). As shown in Figure 1A , EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, AEE788 ( Traxler et al., 2004 ) (5.0 μM), did not decrease the expression of EGFR but did completely inhibit its phosphorylation. In contrast, the transfection of the cells with EGFR siRNA decreased the expression of the EGFR ( Figure 1B ). As shown in Figure 1C , unlike control cells, treatment of PC-3MM2 cells with AEE788 (5.0 μM) for 3 days led to inhibition of cell proliferation, but not to cell death. However, incubation of PC-3MM2 cells transfected with EGFR siRNA for 3 days in MEM resulted in cell death, as indicated by the presence of sub-G1 cells. The use of the commercial EGFR kinase inhibitor, AG1478 (data not shown), and different siRNA against EGFR produced similar results ( Figure S1 available online ).

To characterize the cell death due to loss of the EGFR protein, we measured EGFR downstream signalings Akt and MAPK and apoptotic-associated caspases 9 and 3 by western blotting. Contrary to our expectation, the knocking down of EGFR by siRNA led to upregulation of phosphorylated Akt (pAkt) and phosphorylated MAPK (pMAPK) without changes in Akt and MAPK levels ( Figure 2A ). Only procaspases 9 and 3 were detected, but not their cleaved forms, indicating that the cell death caused by knocking down EGFR was not due to typical apoptosis.

To further elucidate the mechanisms of this cell death, we examined the cells with transmission electron microscopy. As shown in Figure 2B , the EGFR siRNA-transfected cells contained multiple autophagosomes: that is, lysosome-infused cytoplasmic organelles in which the contents are degraded for energy production ( Kroemer and Jaattela, 2005 ). It is worth noting here that, as a survival mechanism triggered by an intracellular energy crisis, autophagy provides cells with an energy backup mechanism, ultimately leading to death if external energetic substrates remain deprived ( Lum et al., 2005 ). Aggregates of exogenous microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) ( Tanida et al., 2004 ) were found in the cytoplasm of EGFR siRNA-transfected cells, but not in the control cells ( Figure 2C ), providing additional evidence that the cell death was due to autophagy. Treatment of EGFR siRNA-transfected cells with the autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine ( Petiot et al., 2000 ) resulted in cell death with characteristics of necrosis—translocation of HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1) ( Ito et al., 2007 ) from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and cell lysis in situ ( Figure S2 ). The autophagic phenotype in PC-3MM2 cells treated with EGFR siRNA was also seen in other cell types, for example, MDA-MB231 human breast cancer cells and KM12C human colon cancer cells ( Figures S3A and S3B ).

DISCUSSION

Activation of EGFR has been reported to transiently increase glucose transport ( Inman and Colowick, 1985 ). We reproduced this transient increase in glucose uptake following the activation of EGFR in PC-3MM2 cells by exposure to EGF in serum-free medium. This activation was abrogated by the presence of the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor AEE788 ( Traxler et al., 2004 ) ( Figure S4 ). Inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation, however, only blocked the peak glucose uptake and did not decrease the level of intracellular glucose to below that found in cells whose EGFR was not activated ( Figure S4 ). These data suggest that peak glucose intake into cells requires EGFR kinase activity, but maintenance of a basal level of intracellular glucose does not. Indeed, expression of nonphosphorylated EGFR is often observed in normal human tissues ( Hudelist et al., 2006 ) as well as in multiple tumor samples ( Piazzi et al., 2006 ), where the role of EGFR may likely be maintaining basal glucose uptake required for survival.

Although kinase-independent functions of EGFR have been reported previously ( Coker et al., 1994 ; Ewald et al., 2003 ), efforts to understand the role of EGFR have been largely directed to its kinase-related activity. The yet unimpressive clinical outcomes of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors for treatment of multiple types of cancer suggest that kinase independent functions of EGFR may be a significant contributor for cancer progression.

The prosurvival and proproliferation roles of EGFR might be mediated by at least two separated pathways. Activation of the EGFR by its ligands results in increased cell proliferation, which is often supported by data of deceleration of cell proliferation by inhibitions of tyrosine kinase activity of EGFR ( Mendelsohn, 2001 ; Rodeck et al., 1997 ; Peng et al., 1996 ). However, very rarely ( Wu et al., 1995 ), inhibition of the tyrosine kinase activity of EGFR leads to cell death. The lack of cytotoxicity of inhibitors of EGFR tyrosine kinase may partially explain the clinical outcome of using tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer treatment ( Dancey and Freidlin, 2003 ).

Our present study shows that EGFR is a stabilizer of an active glucose transporter, SGLT1, empowering cancer cells with the ability to uptake the basic energy substrate, glucose, regardless the level of extracellular glucose, for their survival. Maintaining a sufficient level of intracellular ATP is required to prevent cells from dying. There is at least one commonality among different kinds of cell deaths, apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagic cell deaths, which is an energy crisis triggered at different levels along their death pathways. During apoptosis, ATP level sharply decreases when mitochondria lose their transmembrane potential. In hypoxia-induced necrosis, the most common cause of necrosis in vivo, depletion of ATP precedes mitochondrial permeability alteration. Autophagy, a process of self-degradation to complement environmental energy/nutrient paucity, is also characterized with ATP insufficiency occurring prior to cell death ( Lemasters et al., 2002 ; Skulachev, 2006 ). The presence of SGLT1 allows cancer cells to uptake enough glucose for ATP generation via glycolysis ( Nishimura et al., 1998 ). In general, when mitochondria are dysfunctional, high levels of glucose or ATP can prevent/delay cell deaths, such as apoptosis ( Malhotra and Brosius, 1999 ; Palaga et al., 2004 ; Honda et al., 2003 ) and necrosis ( Kinzer and Lehmann, 1991 ).

In normal tissues where active glucose uptake is critical for the body, such as the epithelium of intestine, tubules of the kidney ( Lee et al., 1994 ), and vascular endothelium of the brain ( Elfeber et al., 2004 ), EGFR and SGLT1 are coexpressed. In fact, activation of EGFR in the epithelium of intestine leads to active transport of glucose ( Hardin et al., 1996 ). Using EGFR/SGLT1 double-negative (at mRNA level) HEK293 cells, we found that exogenous SGLT1 could only be expressed when EGFR was co-transfected ( Figure S5 ), supporting the notion that EGFR may stabilize SGLT1. The higher content of glucose in tumor cells, as compared to normal cells ( Gatenby and Gillies, 2004 ) requires the active glucose transport system SGLT. Considering the fact that EGFR is overexpressed in tumors of epithelial origin and our current finding that EGFR stabilizes SGLT1, we postulate that SGLT1 might also be overexpressed in EGFR-positive tumors. Indeed, it was reported that SGLT1 is overexpressed in preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions of the head and neck ( Helmke et al., 2004 ) (i.e., in cells that express high levels of EGFR [ Ford and Grandis, 2003 ]). Whether SGLT1 is also overexpressed in other types of epithelial neoplasms remains to be determined.

In summary, we report that EGFR, independent of its kinase activity, maintains the basal intracellular glucose level, thereby preventing cells from undergoing autophagic death. This function of EGFR may endow tumor cells with an increased survival capacity even in the presence of chemotherapeutic agents and tyrosine kinase inhibitors ( Ikari et al., 2005 ). Thus, the inhibition of this function and of the kinase activity of EGFR may both be necessary for eradication of epithelial neoplasms.
