---
pmid: '30916986'
title: 'CFAP300: Mutations in Slavic Patients with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia and
  a Role in Ciliary Dynein Arms Trafficking.'
authors:
- Zietkiewicz E
- Bukowy-Bieryllo Z
- Rabiasz A
- Daca-Roszak P
- Wojda A
- Voelkel K
- Rutkiewicz E
- Pogorzelski A
- Rasteiro M
- Witt M
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2018-0260OC
---

# CFAP300: Mutations in Slavic Patients with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia and a Role in Ciliary Dynein Arms Trafficking.
**Authors:** Zietkiewicz E, Bukowy-Bieryllo Z, Rabiasz A, Daca-Roszak P, Wojda A, Voelkel K, Rutkiewicz E, Pogorzelski A, Rasteiro M, Witt M
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2018-0260OC](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2018-0260OC)

## Abstract

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2019 Oct;61(4):440-449. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2018-0260OC.

CFAP300: Mutations in Slavic Patients with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia and a Role 
in Ciliary Dynein Arms Trafficking.

Zietkiewicz E(1), Bukowy-Bieryllo Z(1), Rabiasz A(1), Daca-Roszak P(1), Wojda 
A(1), Voelkel K(1), Rutkiewicz E(1), Pogorzelski A(2), Rasteiro M(3), Witt M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Pneumology and Cystic Fibrosis, Institute of Tuberculosis and 
Lung Diseases, Rabka, Poland; and.
(3)Chronic Diseases Research Centre (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School-Faculdade de 
Ciências Médicas, Lisbon, Portugal.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2019 Oct;61(4):403-404. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2019-0103ED.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, genetically heterogeneous hereditary 
disease from a class of ciliopathies. In spite of the recent progress, the 
genetic basis of PCD in one-third of patients remains unknown. In search for new 
genes and/or mutations, whole-exome sequencing was performed in 120 unrelated 
Polish patients with PCD, in whom no genetic cause of PCD was earlier 
identified. Among a number of pathogenic variants in PCD genes, mutations in 
CFAP300 (alias C11orf70) were detected. Extended screening in the whole Polish 
PCD cohort revealed the relatively high frequency (3.6%) of otherwise rare 
c.[198_200 del_insCC] variant, indicating that it should be included in 
population-specific genetic tests for PCD in Slavic populations. 
Immunofluorescence analysis of the respiratory epithelial cells from patients 
with CFAP300 mutations revealed the absence or aberrant localization of outer 
and inner dynein arm markers, consistent with transmission electron microscope 
images indicating the lack of both dynein arms. Interestingly, the disparate 
localization of DNAH5 and DNALI1 proteins in patients with CFAP300 mutations 
suggested differential mechanisms for the trafficking of preassembled outer and 
inner dynein arms to the axoneme. The profile of CFAP300 expression during 
ciliogenesis in suspension culture was consistent with its role in cilia 
assembly. Gene silencing experiments, performed in a model organism, Schmidtea 
mediterranea (flatworm), pointed to the conserved role of CFAP300 in ciliary 
function.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2018-0260OC
PMID: 30916986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
