---
pmid: '9025717'
title: Post-transcriptional induction of beta 1-adrenergic receptor by retinoic acid,
  but not triiodothyronine, in C6 glioma cells expressing thyroid hormone receptors.
authors:
- López-Barahona M
- Iglesias T
- García-Higuera I
- Mayor F Jr
- Zaballos A
- Bernal J
- Muñoz A
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1530/eje.0.1350709
---

# Post-transcriptional induction of beta 1-adrenergic receptor by retinoic acid, but not triiodothyronine, in C6 glioma cells expressing thyroid hormone receptors.
**Authors:** López-Barahona M, Iglesias T, García-Higuera I, Mayor F Jr, Zaballos A, Bernal J, Muñoz A
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1530/eje.0.1350709](https://doi.org/10.1530/eje.0.1350709)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;135(6):709-15. doi: 10.1530/eje.0.1350709.

Post-transcriptional induction of beta 1-adrenergic receptor by retinoic acid, 
but not triiodothyronine, in C6 glioma cells expressing thyroid hormone 
receptors.

López-Barahona M(1), Iglesias T, García-Higuera I, Mayor F Jr, Zaballos A, 
Bernal J, Muñoz A.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Investigación, Pharmacia-Antibióticos, SA, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Eur J Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;135(6):651-2. doi: 10.1530/eje.0.1350651.

Thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine; T3) has been shown to control the expression 
of beta 1-adrenergic receptors (beta 1-AR) in cardiac myocytes, but not in C6 
glioma cells. This cell specificity has been attributed to low expression of T3 
receptors and high expression of the c-erbA alpha 2 splice variant that 
interferes with the action of T3. To check this hypothesis we have expressed the 
c-erbA/thyroid hormone receptor (TR) alpha 1 gene in C6 glioma cells and 
investigated their response to thyroid hormone. Cells expressing TR alpha 1, but 
not wild-type cells, were responsive to T3 as shown by increased expression of 
mitochrondrial hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA synthase after T3 exposure. However, T3 
had no effect on beta 1-AR gene expression in either set of cells. The beta 1-AR 
mRNA concentrations were, however, altered by retinoic acid (RA) treatment. 
Retinoic acid caused a rapid up-regulation of beta 1-AR mRNA levels that was 
blocked by cycloheximide. Retinoic acid did not increase the beta 1-AR gene 
transcription rate in run-on experiments. These results indicate an indirect 
post-transcriptional effect of RA. Control of beta 1-AR expression in C6 cells 
is also exerted at the translational level, because there was no correlation 
between mRNA and protein induction, as determined by radioligand binding 
studies. We conclude that lack of responsiveness of the beta 1-AR gene in C6 
cells to T3 is not due to high expression of c-erbA alpha 2 but to undefined 
cell-specific factors.

DOI: 10.1530/eje.0.1350709
PMID: 9025717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
