---
pmid: '17443180'
title: Anaphase initiation is regulated by antagonistic ubiquitination and deubiquitination
  activities.
authors:
- Stegmeier F
- Rape M
- Draviam VM
- Nalepa G
- Sowa ME
- Ang XL
- McDonald ER 3rd
- Li MZ
- Hannon GJ
- Sorger PK
- Kirschner MW
- Harper JW
- Elledge SJ
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05694
---

# Anaphase initiation is regulated by antagonistic ubiquitination and deubiquitination activities.
**Authors:** Stegmeier F, Rape M, Draviam VM, Nalepa G, Sowa ME, Ang XL, McDonald ER 3rd, Li MZ, Hannon GJ, Sorger PK, Kirschner MW, Harper JW, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05694](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05694)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Apr 19;446(7138):876-81. doi: 10.1038/nature05694.

Anaphase initiation is regulated by antagonistic ubiquitination and 
deubiquitination activities.

Stegmeier F(1), Rape M, Draviam VM, Nalepa G, Sowa ME, Ang XL, McDonald ER 3rd, 
Li MZ, Hannon GJ, Sorger PK, Kirschner MW, Harper JW, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Harvard Partners 
Center for Genetics and Genomics,Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Apr 19;446(7138):868-9. doi: 10.1038/446868a.

The spindle checkpoint prevents chromosome mis-segregation by delaying sister 
chromatid separation until all chromosomes have achieved bipolar attachment to 
the mitotic spindle. Its operation is essential for accurate chromosome 
segregation, whereas its dysregulation can contribute to birth defects and 
tumorigenesis. The target of the spindle checkpoint is the anaphase-promoting 
complex (APC), a ubiquitin ligase that promotes sister chromatid separation and 
progression to anaphase. Using a short hairpin RNA screen targeting components 
of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in human cells, we identified the 
deubiquitinating enzyme USP44 (ubiquitin-specific protease 44) as a critical 
regulator of the spindle checkpoint. USP44 is not required for the initial 
recognition of unattached kinetochores and the subsequent recruitment of 
checkpoint components. Instead, it prevents the premature activation of the APC 
by stabilizing the APC-inhibitory Mad2-Cdc20 complex. USP44 deubiquitinates the 
APC coactivator Cdc20 both in vitro and in vivo, and thereby directly 
counteracts the APC-driven disassembly of Mad2-Cdc20 complexes (discussed in an 
accompanying paper). Our findings suggest that a dynamic balance of 
ubiquitination by the APC and deubiquitination by USP44 contributes to the 
generation of the switch-like transition controlling anaphase entry, analogous 
to the way that phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of Cdk1 by Wee1 and Cdc25 
controls entry into mitosis.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05694
PMID: 17443180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
