---
pmid: '17132048'
title: Drosophila NMNAT maintains neural integrity independent of its NAD synthesis
  activity.
authors:
- Zhai RG
- Cao Y
- Hiesinger PR
- Zhou Y
- Mehta SQ
- Schulze KL
- Verstreken P
- Bellen HJ
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1665629
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040416
---

# Drosophila NMNAT maintains neural integrity independent of its NAD synthesis activity.
**Authors:** Zhai RG, Cao Y, Hiesinger PR, Zhou Y, Mehta SQ, Schulze KL, Verstreken P, Bellen HJ
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.0040416](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0040416)
**PMC:** [PMC1665629](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1665629/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Biol. 2006 Nov;4(12):e416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040416.

Drosophila NMNAT maintains neural integrity independent of its NAD synthesis 
activity.

Zhai RG(1), Cao Y, Hiesinger PR, Zhou Y, Mehta SQ, Schulze KL, Verstreken P, 
Bellen HJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2006 Dec;4(12):e438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040438.

Wallerian degeneration refers to a loss of the distal part of an axon after 
nerve injury. Wallerian degeneration slow (Wld(s)) mice overexpress a chimeric 
protein containing the NAD synthase NMNAT (nicotinamide mononucleotide 
adenylyltransferase 1) and exhibit a delay in axonal degeneration. Currently, 
conflicting evidence raises questions as to whether NMNAT is the protecting 
factor and whether its enzymatic activity is required for such a possible 
function. Importantly, the link between nmnat and axon degeneration is at 
present solely based on overexpression studies of enzymatically active protein. 
Here we use the visual system of Drosophila as a model system to address these 
issues. We have isolated the first nmnat mutations in a multicellular organism 
in a forward genetic screen for synapse malfunction in Drosophila. Loss of nmnat 
causes a rapid and severe neurodegeneration that can be attenuated by blocking 
neuronal activity. Furthermore, in vivo neuronal expression of mutated nmnat 
shows that enzymatically inactive NMNAT protein retains strong neuroprotective 
effects and rescues the degeneration phenotype caused by loss of nmnat. Our data 
indicate an NAD-independent requirement of NMNAT for maintaining neuronal 
integrity that can be exploited to protect neurons from neuronal 
activity-induced degeneration by overexpression of the protein.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040416
PMCID: PMC1665629
PMID: 17132048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
