---
pmid: '16484612'
title: Embryonic growth-associated protein is one subunit of a novel N-terminal acetyltransferase
  complex essential for embryonic vascular development.
authors:
- Wenzlau JM
- Garl PJ
- Simpson P
- Stenmark KR
- West J
- Artinger KB
- Nemenoff RA
- Weiser-Evans MC
journal: Circ Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000214539.86593.7a
---

# Embryonic growth-associated protein is one subunit of a novel N-terminal acetyltransferase complex essential for embryonic vascular development.
**Authors:** Wenzlau JM, Garl PJ, Simpson P, Stenmark KR, West J, Artinger KB, Nemenoff RA, Weiser-Evans MC
**Journal:** Circ Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.RES.0000214539.86593.7a](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000214539.86593.7a)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):846-55. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000214539.86593.7a. 
Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Embryonic growth-associated protein is one subunit of a novel N-terminal 
acetyltransferase complex essential for embryonic vascular development.

Wenzlau JM(1), Garl PJ, Simpson P, Stenmark KR, West J, Artinger KB, Nemenoff 
RA, Weiser-Evans MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Renal Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2006 Mar 31;98(6):723-6. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000217601.30361.b1.

N-terminal protein acetylation, catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases 
(NATs) recognizing distinct N-terminal sequences, is gaining recognition as an 
essential regulator of normal cell function, but little is known of its role in 
vertebrate development. We previously cloned a novel gene, embryonic 
growth-associated protein (EGAP), the expression of which is associated with 
rapid vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation during development. We show 
herein EGAP is the mammalian/zebrafish homologue of yeast Mak10p, one subunit of 
the yeast NatC complex, and describe the cloning of its binding partners Mak3 
and Mak31. The EGAP NAT forms a functional complex in mammalian cells, is 
evolutionarily conserved, and developmentally regulated. It is widely but not 
ubiquitously expressed during early zebrafish development but undetectable in 
later developmental stages. We demonstrate EGAP- and Mak3-deficient zebrafish 
fail to develop because of, in part, decreased cell proliferation, increased 
apoptosis, and poor blood vessel formation contributing to embryonic lethality. 
We examined the role of target of rapamycin (TOR), a highly conserved protein 
kinase controlling cell growth, as a physiological target of EGAP NAT 
acetylation. Compared with controls, TOR expression and signaling is 
significantly reduced in EGAP morphants. Pharmacological inhibition of TOR with 
rapamycin phenocopied the EGAP morpholino oligonucleotide-induced growth and 
vessel defects. Overexpression of constitutively active TOR rescued EGAP 
morphants, suggesting TOR is a direct or indirect endogenous substrate of the 
EGAP NAT complex. These data suggest the EGAP NAT complex is an essential 
regulatory enzyme controlling the function of a subset of proteins required for 
embryonic growth control and vessel development.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000214539.86593.7a
PMID: 16484612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
