---
pmid: '17012397'
title: The ColRS two-component system regulates membrane functions and protects Pseudomonas
  putida against phenol.
authors:
- Kivistik PA
- Putrins M
- Püvi K
- Ilves H
- Kivisaar M
- Hõrak R
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1698186
doi: 10.1128/JB.01262-06
---

# The ColRS two-component system regulates membrane functions and protects Pseudomonas putida against phenol.
**Authors:** Kivistik PA, Putrins M, Püvi K, Ilves H, Kivisaar M, Hõrak R
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.01262-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01262-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1698186](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1698186/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 2006 Dec;188(23):8109-17. doi: 10.1128/JB.01262-06. Epub 2006 Sep
 29.

The ColRS two-component system regulates membrane functions and protects 
Pseudomonas putida against phenol.

Kivistik PA(1), Putrins M, Püvi K, Ilves H, Kivisaar M, Hõrak R.

Author information:
(1)Estonian Biocentre and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu 
University, 51010 Tartu, Estonia.

As reported, the two-component system ColRS is involved in two completely 
different processes. It facilitates the root colonization ability of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens and is necessary for the Tn4652 transposition-dependent accumulation 
of phenol-utilizing mutants in Pseudomonas putida. To determine the role of the 
ColRS system in P. putida, we searched for target genes of response regulator 
ColR by use of a promoter library. Promoter screening was performed on phenol 
plates to mimic the conditions under which the effect of ColR on transposition 
was detected. The library screen revealed the porin-encoding gene oprQ and the 
alginate biosynthesis gene algD occurring under negative control of ColR. 
Binding of ColR to the promoter regions of oprQ and algD in vitro confirmed its 
direct involvement in regulation of these genes. Additionally, the 
porin-encoding gene ompA(PP0773) and the type I pilus gene csuB were also 
identified in the promoter screen. However, it turned out that ompA(PP0773) and 
csuB were actually affected by phenol and that the influence of ColR on these 
promoters was indirect. Namely, our results show that ColR is involved in phenol 
tolerance of P. putida. Phenol MIC measurement demonstrated that a colR mutant 
strain did not tolerate elevated phenol concentrations. Our data suggest that 
increased phenol susceptibility is also the reason for inhibition of 
transposition of Tn4652 in phenol-starving colR mutant bacteria. Thus, the 
current study revealed the role of the ColRS two-component system in regulation 
of membrane functionality, particularly in phenol tolerance of P. putida.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01262-06
PMCID: PMC1698186
PMID: 17012397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
