---
pmid: '12762575'
title: Genetic aspects of susceptibility to air pollution.
authors:
- Kleeberger SR
journal: Eur Respir J Suppl
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00403003
---

# Genetic aspects of susceptibility to air pollution.
**Authors:** Kleeberger SR
**Journal:** Eur Respir J Suppl (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1183/09031936.03.00403003](https://doi.org/10.1183/09031936.03.00403003)

## Abstract

1. Eur Respir J Suppl. 2003 May;40:52s-56s. doi: 10.1183/09031936.03.00403003.

Genetic aspects of susceptibility to air pollution.

Kleeberger SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. kleeber1@niehs.nih.gov

Inter-individual variation in human responses to air pollutants suggests that 
some subpopulations are at increased risk, and it is increasingly clear that 
genetic background is an important susceptibility factor. Genetically 
standardised animal models provide useful investigative tools. Linkage analyses 
using inbred mice identified chromosomal segments (quantitative trait loci 
(QTL)), with genes controlling susceptibility to the lung inflammatory 
(chromosome 17), injury (chromosome 11), and hyperpermeability (chromosome 4) 
responses to ozone (O3) exposure. An immune dysfunction response induced by 
exposure to sulphate-associated particles is linked to the identical chromosome 
17 and 11 QTLs described for O3 susceptibility, thus similar genetic mechanisms 
may be controlling pulmonary responses to these pollutants. Candidate genes 
within the QTLs on chromosomes 4 and 17 include the toll-like receptor 4 and the 
pro-inflammatory cytokine, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, respectively. 
Functional analyses strongly support a role for these candidate genes in 
determining susceptibility to O3 and particulates. Because striking linkage 
homology exists between the human and mouse genomes, candidate susceptibility 
genes identified in the mouse are likely to aid research aimed at understanding 
human genetic factors that contribute to differential susceptibility. To date, 
no studies have examined the interaction between age and genetic background in 
the development of air pollution-induced lung disease. However, investigations 
have suggested an influence of age on genetic susceptibility to lung cancer and 
other diseases, which indicate that an interaction between age and genetic 
background may be important in air pollution disease pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1183/09031936.03.00403003
PMID: 12762575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
