---
pmid: '15738392'
title: Hereditary juvenile cobalamin deficiency caused by mutations in the intrinsic
  factor gene.
authors:
- Tanner SM
- Li Z
- Perko JD
- Oner C
- Cetin M
- Altay C
- Yurtsever Z
- David KL
- Faivre L
- Ismail EA
- Gräsbeck R
- de la Chapelle A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC554821
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0500517102
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Hereditary juvenile cobalamin deficiency caused by mutations in the intrinsic factor gene.
**Authors:** Tanner SM, Li Z, Perko JD, Oner C, Cetin M, Altay C, Yurtsever Z, David KL, Faivre L, Ismail EA, Gräsbeck R, de la Chapelle A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0500517102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0500517102)
**PMC:** [PMC554821](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC554821/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 15;102(11):4130-3. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0500517102. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

Hereditary juvenile cobalamin deficiency caused by mutations in the intrinsic 
factor gene.

Tanner SM(1), Li Z, Perko JD, Oner C, Cetin M, Altay C, Yurtsever Z, David KL, 
Faivre L, Ismail EA, Gräsbeck R, de la Chapelle A.

Author information:
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Hereditary juvenile megaloblastic anemia due to vitamin B12 (cobalamin) 
deficiency is caused by intestinal malabsorption of cobalamin. In 
Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome (IGS), cobalamin absorption is completely abolished 
and not corrected by the administration of intrinsic factor (IF); if untreated, 
the disease is fatal. Biallelic mutations either in the cubilin (CUBN) or 
amnionless (AMN) gene cause IGS. In a series of families clinically diagnosed 
with likely IGS, at least six displayed no evidence of mutations in CUBN or AMN. 
A genome-wide search for linkage followed by mutational analysis of candidate 
genes was performed in five of these families. A region in chromosome 11 showed 
evidence of linkage in four families. The gastric IF (GIF) gene located in this 
region harbored homozygous nonsense and missense mutations in these four 
families and in three additional families. The disease in these cases therefore 
should be classified as hereditary IF deficiency. Clinically, these patients 
resembled those with typical IGS; radiocobalamin absorption tests had been 
inconclusive regarding the nature of the defect. In the diagnosis of juvenile 
cobalamin deficiency, mutational analysis of the CUBN, AMN, and GIF genes 
provides a molecular characterization of the underlying defect and may be the 
diagnostic method of choice.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0500517102
PMCID: PMC554821
PMID: 15738392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
