---
pmid: '15713656'
title: Constitutive activation of the fission yeast pheromone-responsive pathway induces
  ectopic meiosis and reveals ste11 as a mitogen-activated protein kinase target.
authors:
- Kjaerulff S
- Lautrup-Larsen I
- Truelsen S
- Pedersen M
- Nielsen O
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC549357
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.5.2045-2059.2005
---

# Constitutive activation of the fission yeast pheromone-responsive pathway induces ectopic meiosis and reveals ste11 as a mitogen-activated protein kinase target.
**Authors:** Kjaerulff S, Lautrup-Larsen I, Truelsen S, Pedersen M, Nielsen O
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.5.2045-2059.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.5.2045-2059.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC549357](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC549357/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(5):2045-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.5.2045-2059.2005.

Constitutive activation of the fission yeast pheromone-responsive pathway 
induces ectopic meiosis and reveals ste11 as a mitogen-activated protein kinase 
target.

Kjaerulff S(1), Lautrup-Larsen I, Truelsen S, Pedersen M, Nielsen O.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Copenhagen, Øster Farimagsgade 
2A, DK-1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark.

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, meiosis normally takes place in 
diploid zygotes resulting from conjugation of haploid cells. In the present 
study, we report that the expression of a constitutively activated version of 
the pheromone-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K) 
Byr2 can induce ectopic meiosis directly in haploid cells. We find that the 
Ste11 transcription factor becomes constitutively expressed in these cells and 
that the expression of pheromone-responsive genes no longer depends on nitrogen 
starvation. Epistasis analysis revealed that these conditions bypassed the 
requirement for the meiotic activator Mei3. Since Mei3 is normally needed for 
inactivation of the meiosis-repressing protein kinase Pat1, this finding 
suggests that the strong Byr2 signal causes inactivation of Pat1 by an 
alternative mechanism. Consistent with this possibility, we found that haploid 
meiosis was dramatically reduced when Ste11 was mutated to mimic phosphorylation 
by Pat1. The mutation of two putative MAPK sites in Ste11 also dramatically 
reduced the level of haploid meiosis, suggesting that Ste11 is a direct target 
of Spk1. Supporting this, we show that Spk1 can interact physically with Ste11 
and also phosphorylate the transcription factor in vitro. Finally, we 
demonstrate that ste11 is required for pheromone-induced G1 arrest. 
Interestingly, when we mutated Ste11 in the sites for Pat1 and Spk1 
phosphorylation simultaneously, the cells could still arrest in G1 in response 
to pheromone, suggesting the existence of yet a third bifurcation of the 
signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.5.2045-2059.2005
PMCID: PMC549357
PMID: 15713656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , meiosis normally takes place in diploid zygotes resulting from conjugation of haploid cells. In the present study, we report that the expression of a constitutively activated version of the pheromone-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K) Byr2 can induce ectopic meiosis directly in haploid cells. We find that the Ste11 transcription factor becomes constitutively expressed in these cells and that the expression of pheromone-responsive genes no longer depends on nitrogen starvation. Epistasis analysis revealed that these conditions bypassed the requirement for the meiotic activator Mei3. Since Mei3 is normally needed for inactivation of the meiosis-repressing protein kinase Pat1, this finding suggests that the strong Byr2 signal causes inactivation of Pat1 by an alternative mechanism. Consistent with this possibility, we found that haploid meiosis was dramatically reduced when Ste11 was mutated to mimic phosphorylation by Pat1. The mutation of two putative MAPK sites in Ste11 also dramatically reduced the level of haploid meiosis, suggesting that Ste11 is a direct target of Spk1. Supporting this, we show that Spk1 can interact physically with Ste11 and also phosphorylate the transcription factor in vitro. Finally, we demonstrate that ste11 is required for pheromone-induced G 1 arrest. Interestingly, when we mutated Ste11 in the sites for Pat1 and Spk1 phosphorylation simultaneously, the cells could still arrest in G 1 in response to pheromone, suggesting the existence of yet a third bifurcation of the signaling pathway.

DISCUSSION

In this report, we have demonstrated that the activation of the pheromone-responsive signaling cascade is sufficient for the activation of meiosis in S. pombe . Thus, the expression of a constitutive allele of the MAP3K Byr2 ( byr2- Δ N ) induced haploid cells to directly enter meiosis and sporulation. Furthermore, the normal requirement of nitrogen starvation for meiotic entry was bypassed. Curiously, mei3 + was not required for the byr2- Δ N -induced meiosis. This observation challenges our present understanding of the regulation of meiosis, where Mei3 is required for inactivation of the Pat1 protein kinase in order to relieve its inhibitory phosphorylation of Mei2 ( 22 , 31 , 32 , 57 ). Normally, only diploid cells enter meiosis, because induction of the mei3 gene requires coexpression of the mat1-Pm and mat1-Mm genes expressed from the mat1 locus ( 32 , 61 ). Our finding implies that pheromone signaling can cause Mei3-independent inactivation of Pat1, as previously anticipated ( 39 ), although we cannot rule out the alternative explanation that Mei2 can be activated in a Pat1-independent manner.
