---
pmid: '26015579'
title: The disordered P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separation into droplets
  with tunable viscosity and dynamics.
authors:
- Elbaum-Garfinkle S
- Kim Y
- Szczepaniak K
- Chen CC
- Eckmann CR
- Myong S
- Brangwynne CP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4466716
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1504822112
---

# The disordered P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and dynamics.
**Authors:** Elbaum-Garfinkle S, Kim Y, Szczepaniak K, Chen CC, Eckmann CR, Myong S, Brangwynne CP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1504822112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1504822112)
**PMC:** [PMC4466716](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4466716/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):7189-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1504822112. Epub 2015 May 26.

The disordered P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separation into droplets 
with tunable viscosity and dynamics.

Elbaum-Garfinkle S(1), Kim Y(2), Szczepaniak K(3), Chen CC(1), Eckmann CR(4), 
Myong S(2), Brangwynne CP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08540;
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 
Urbana, IL 61801;
(3)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany; Department of Genetics, Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg, 
06108 Halle, Germany; Dresden International PhD Program, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(4)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany; Department of Genetics, Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg, 
06108 Halle, Germany;
(5)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08540; cbrangwy@princeton.edu.

P granules and other RNA/protein bodies are membrane-less organelles that may 
assemble by intracellular phase separation, similar to the condensation of water 
vapor into droplets. However, the molecular driving forces and the nature of the 
condensed phases remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the Caenorhabditis 
elegans protein LAF-1, a DDX3 RNA helicase found in P granules, phase separates 
into P granule-like droplets in vitro. We adapt a microrheology technique to 
precisely measure the viscoelasticity of micrometer-sized LAF-1 droplets, 
revealing purely viscous properties highly tunable by salt and RNA 
concentration. RNA decreases viscosity and increases molecular dynamics within 
the droplet. Single molecule FRET assays suggest that this RNA fluidization 
results from highly dynamic RNA-protein interactions that emerge close to the 
droplet phase boundary. We demonstrate than an N-terminal, arginine/glycine 
rich, intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) domain of LAF-1 is necessary and 
sufficient for both phase separation and RNA-protein interactions. In vivo, RNAi 
knockdown of LAF-1 results in the dissolution of P granules in the early embryo, 
with an apparent submicromolar phase boundary comparable to that measured in 
vitro. Together, these findings demonstrate that LAF-1 is important for 
promoting P granule assembly and provide insight into the mechanism by which 
IDP-driven molecular interactions give rise to liquid phase organelles with 
tunable properties.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1504822112
PMCID: PMC4466716
PMID: 26015579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

P granules and other RNA/protein bodies are membrane-less organelles that may assemble by intracellular phase separation, similar to the condensation of water vapor into droplets. However, the molecular driving forces and the nature of the condensed phases remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the Caenorhabditis elegans protein LAF-1, a DDX3 RNA helicase found in P granules, phase separates into P granule-like droplets in vitro. We adapt a microrheology technique to precisely measure the viscoelasticity of micrometer-sized LAF-1 droplets, revealing purely viscous properties highly tunable by salt and RNA concentration. RNA decreases viscosity and increases molecular dynamics within the droplet. Single molecule FRET assays suggest that this RNA fluidization results from highly dynamic RNA–protein interactions that emerge close to the droplet phase boundary. We demonstrate than an N-terminal, arginine/glycine rich, intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) domain of LAF-1 is necessary and sufficient for both phase separation and RNA–protein interactions. In vivo, RNAi knockdown of LAF-1 results in the dissolution of P granules in the early embryo, with an apparent submicromolar phase boundary comparable to that measured in vitro. Together, these findings demonstrate that LAF-1 is important for promoting P granule assembly and provide insight into the mechanism by which IDP-driven molecular interactions give rise to liquid phase organelles with tunable properties.

Discussion

An increasing body of work suggests that P granules and other RNP bodies assemble by a type of intracellular phase transition ( 2 , 4 , 7 , 19 ). However, molecular-level insight into the components necessary to drive phase separation and maintain liquid-like properties is severely lacking. Here we showed that a single P granule protein, LAF-1, can drive phase separation in vitro, resulting in P granule-like liquid droplets. These data provide strong support for a role for LAF-1 in driving P granule assembly in vivo, by promoting cytoplasmic liquid–liquid phase separation. The contribution of LAF-1 to P granule assembly may be linked to the critical role played by LAF-1 in germ-line maintenance and embryogenesis, underscored by the lethal and feminizing phenotype of LAF-1 mutants ( 20 ).

P granules are implicated in germ-line establishment and maintenance, but their precise function remains largely unknown. A recent study has shown that segregation of P granules to progenitor germ cells is only necessary for germ-line specification under certain conditions, suggesting a potential role for P granules in protection from stress ( 34 ); consistent with this, recent work has implicated LAF-1 and its close homolog VBH-1 in the stress response of C. elegans ( 35 ). P granules likely function in cytoplasmic RNA regulation, including storage and release of mRNA transcripts ( 36 , 37 ). The liquid-like properties of P granules could facilitate their function as intracellular RNA microreactors, concentrating and colocalizing specific molecules, which nonetheless remain mobile within the droplet ( 25 , 38 ). Our finding that LAF-1 droplet viscosity, and the dynamics of droplet components, can be tuned by both salt and RNA ( Fig. 2 ) suggests the potential for functional feedback. In particular, the rate at which P granule components are stored, processed, and/or released should depend on viscosity and transport within P granules, which in turn can depend on the concentration of these same components. Such functional feedback could potentially be tuned throughout development, in parallel with altered germ-line RNA expression.

Our work demonstrates a key role for the N-terminal RGG domain of LAF-1. This region of LAF-1 is intrinsically disordered and is necessary and sufficient for phase separation ( Fig. 4 ). Moreover, the RGG domain is also necessary and sufficient for the surprising RNA binding dynamics that coincide with the protein phase boundary. IDPs have remained largely mysterious and poorly understood, because they are outside of the traditional paradigm of stereospecific molecular interactions mediated by compact, well-folded 3D protein structure. However, it is estimated that as many as 30% ( 39 ) of proteins in the human genome have regions of intrinsic disorder, and IDPs appear to be involved in a range of biological functions, owing to their flexible conformations and binding promiscuity. Our findings are consistent with the emerging role of LCS/IDPs in promoting the assembly of RNP bodies ( 15 , 16 , 40 – 42 ).

The disordered N terminus is rich in arginines (R) and glycines (G) and is similar to the well-known RGG/RG motif RNA-binding domain ( 43 ). Several other P granule proteins, including PGL-1 and -3 and VBH-1 contain RGG-rich sequences similar to that of LAF-1, which are also predicted to be disordered. Intermolecular IDP interactions between LAF-1 and various P granule proteins could thus underlie maintenance of a dynamic but coherent P granule structure ( Fig. 7 ). This picture is consistent with recent work suggesting a role in P granule assembly for two predicted IDP-containing proteins: MEG-1 and MEG-3 ( 41 ). The interactions between these proteins is controlled by phosphorylation, reflecting a balance between activity of the kinase MBK-2/DYRK and the phosphatase PPTR-1/2; this manifests in altered propensity for assembly of P granules. Such posttranslational modifications are likely to tune intermolecular interactions by regulating the charge state of IDPs ( 42 ), consistent with our findings on the salt and RNA dependence of LAF-1 droplet assembly and properties.

Our work shows that RNA does not shift the LAF-1 phase diagram ( Fig. S4 ), despite contributing to a decrease in droplet viscosity. Thus the molecular interactions that give rise to the material properties within droplets are not necessarily equivalent to the interactions that govern droplet assembly. Droplet properties could also be affected by the predicted ATPase activity of the DEAD box helicase domain within LAF-1. Indeed, prior work on nucleoli suggests that the viscosity of RNP bodies may be ATP dependent ( 3 ). However, the experiments we performed here were done in the absence of ATP, and thus both assembly and RNA-mediated fluidization are independent of ATPase activity. Nonetheless, ATP could also play an important role in regulating P granule droplet properties and dynamics in vivo.

IDPs are closely related to LCS proteins, which have been suggested to promote RNP body formation by assembling into gel-like states ( 16 , 17 ). However, our work here, performed using near-physiological buffer conditions, demonstrates that a P granule IDP assembles into purely viscous liquid droplets. These results are consistent with the idea that RNP assemblies lie on a viscoelastic spectrum, where solid-like states may be more typical of pathological extremes ( 19 ). The cell’s ability to tune the properties of RNP bodies is likely to have important consequences for the biological function of these liquid phase organelles, underscored by the strong link we identified between droplet material properties and internal molecular dynamics. Elucidating the functional intracellular consequences of altered droplet properties remains an exciting and key future challenge.
