---
pmid: '15313620'
title: Exploring the structural dynamics of the E.coli chaperonin GroEL using translation-libration-screw
  crystallographic refinement of intermediate states.
authors:
- Chaudhry C
- Horwich AL
- Brunger AT
- Adams PD
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.015
---

# Exploring the structural dynamics of the E.coli chaperonin GroEL using translation-libration-screw crystallographic refinement of intermediate states.
**Authors:** Chaudhry C, Horwich AL, Brunger AT, Adams PD
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.015)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2004 Sep 3;342(1):229-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.015.

Exploring the structural dynamics of the E.coli chaperonin GroEL using 
translation-libration-screw crystallographic refinement of intermediate states.

Chaudhry C(1), Horwich AL, Brunger AT, Adams PD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Large rigid-body domain movements are critical to GroEL-mediated protein 
folding, especially apical domain elevation and twist associated with the 
formation of a folding chamber upon binding ATP and co-chaperonin GroES. Here, 
we have modeled the anisotropic displacements of GroEL domains from various 
crystallized states, unliganded GroEL, ATPgammaS-bound, ADP-AlFx/GroES-bound, 
and ADP/GroES bound, using translation-libration-screw (TLS) analysis. 
Remarkably, the TLS results show that the inherent motions of unliganded GroEL, 
a polypeptide-accepting state, are biased along the transition pathway that 
leads to the folding-active state. In the ADP-AlFx/GroES-bound folding-active 
state the dynamic modes of the apical domains become reoriented and coupled to 
the motions of bound GroES. The ADP/GroES complex exhibits these same motions, 
but they are increased in magnitude, potentially reflecting the decreased 
stability of the complex after nucleotide hydrolysis. Our results have allowed 
the visualization of the anisotropic molecular motions that link the static 
conformations previously observed by X-ray crystallography. Application of the 
same analyses to other macromolecules where rigid body motions occur may give 
insight into the large scale dynamics critical for function and thus has the 
potential to extend our fundamental understanding of molecular machines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.07.015
PMID: 15313620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
