---
pmid: '27899274'
title: Systematic identification of hepatitis E virus ORF2 interactome reveals that
  TMEM134 engages in ORF2-mediated NF-κB pathway.
authors:
- Tian Y
- Huang W
- Yang J
- Wen Z
- Geng Y
- Zhao C
- Zhang H
- Wang Y
journal: Virus Res
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.027
---

# Systematic identification of hepatitis E virus ORF2 interactome reveals that TMEM134 engages in ORF2-mediated NF-κB pathway.
**Authors:** Tian Y, Huang W, Yang J, Wen Z, Geng Y, Zhao C, Zhang H, Wang Y
**Journal:** Virus Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.027)

## Abstract

1. Virus Res. 2017 Jan 15;228:102-108. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.027. Epub 
2016 Nov 27.

Systematic identification of hepatitis E virus ORF2 interactome reveals that 
TMEM134 engages in ORF2-mediated NF-κB pathway.

Tian Y(1), Huang W(2), Yang J(3), Wen Z(4), Geng Y(5), Zhao C(6), Zhang H(7), 
Wang Y(8).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health for Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products, Division of HIV/AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2 
Tiantanxili, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: tianyabin@nifdc.org.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health for Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products, Division of HIV/AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2 
Tiantanxili, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: 
huangweijin@nifdc.org.cn.
(3)Department of Surgery, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas 
Place, Memphis, TN 38015, USA. Electronic address: Jun.Yang2@stjude.org.
(4)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health for Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products, Division of HIV/AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2 
Tiantanxili, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: zhihengw_bj@126.com.
(5)Health Science Center, Hebei University, No. 342 Yuhuadonglu, Baoding 071000, 
China. Electronic address: ysgeng09@aliyun.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health for Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products, Division of HIV/AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2 
Tiantanxili, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: 
zhaochenyan@nifdc.org.cn.
(7)Department of Bio-diagnosis, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, 27, Taiping 
Road, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: zhangheqiu2004@126.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Health for Research on Quality and 
Standardization of Biotech Products, Division of HIV/AIDS and Sexually 
Transmitted Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug Control, No. 2 
Tiantanxili, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: wangyc@nifdc.org.cn.

Erratum in
    Virus Res. 2025 Apr;354:199553. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2025.199553.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is the causative agent of acute hepatitis E. Open 
reading frame 2 (ORF2) encodes the capsid protein of HEV, which is the main 
structural protein and may participate, together with the host factors, in viral 
entry and egress. However, it is still not clear which host proteins are 
involved in the interaction with ORF2 and what the functions of these 
ORF2-interacting proteins are. In this study, we have applied a split-ubiquitin 
yeast two-hybrid screening approach in combination with the pull-down and 
coimmunoprecipitation assays, identified and validated multiple interacting 
partners of ORF2 of genotype 1 and 4, which have diverse biological functions. 
Among these novel candidates that have not been previously reported, we have 
found that 20 of them are located in endoplasmic reticulum. TMEM134, which 
interacts and co-localizes with ORF2 in the endoplasmic reticulum, negatively 
regulates ORF2-mediated inhibition of the NF-κB signaling pathway. Our study for 
the first time has systematically mapped the ORF2 interactome in two genotypes 
of HEV, providing a new insight of understanding the virus-host interaction 
during the pathogenesis of HEV, and may offer potential therapeutic targets to 
intervene the HEV life cycle.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2016.11.027
PMID: 27899274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
