---
pmid: '38885626'
title: Eosinophil-Epithelial Cell Interactions in Asthma.
authors:
- Steffan BN
- Townsend EA
- Denlinger LC
- Johansson MW
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11534548
doi: 10.1159/000539309
---

# Eosinophil-Epithelial Cell Interactions in Asthma.
**Authors:** Steffan BN, Townsend EA, Denlinger LC, Johansson MW
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000539309](https://doi.org/10.1159/000539309)
**PMC:** [PMC11534548](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11534548/)

## Abstract

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2024;185(11):1033-1047. doi: 10.1159/000539309. Epub
 2024 Jun 17.

Eosinophil-Epithelial Cell Interactions in Asthma.

Steffan BN(1), Townsend EA(1)(2), Denlinger LC(1), Johansson MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophils have numerous roles in type 2 inflammation depending on 
their activation states in the blood and airway or after encounter with 
inflammatory mediators. Airway epithelial cells have a sentinel role in the lung 
and, by instructing eosinophils, likely have a foundational role in asthma 
pathogenesis.
SUMMARY: In this review, we discuss various topics related to 
eosinophil-epithelial cell interactions in asthma, including the influence of 
eosinophils and eosinophil products, e.g., granule proteins, on epithelial cell 
function, expression, secretion, and plasticity; the effects of epithelial 
released factors, including oxylipins, cytokines, and other mediators on 
eosinophils, e.g., on their activation, expression, and survival; possible 
mechanisms of eosinophil-epithelial cell adhesion; and the role of 
intra-epithelial eosinophils in asthma.
KEY MESSAGES: We suggest that eosinophils and their products can have both 
injurious and beneficial effects on airway epithelial cells in asthma and that 
there are bidirectional interactions and signaling between eosinophils and 
airway epithelial cells in asthma.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000539309
PMCID: PMC11534548
PMID: 38885626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EAT reports grant support from the Foundation 
for Anesthesia Education and Research and the Society for the Advancement of 
Transplant Anesthesia. EAT does not have consulting relationships or other 
disclosures. LCD reports grant support from the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) and the American Lung Association, and has consulted with Glaxo Smith 
Kline, AstraZeneca, Sanofi, and OM Pharma. MWJ reports a research grant from 
Hoffmann-La Roche. BNS has no conflict of interest to declare. No company 
representative was involved in conception, writing, or financing of this 
manuscript.
