---
pmid: '11549596'
title: 'Endothelial oxidative stress activates the lectin complement pathway: role
  of cytokeratin 1.'
authors:
- Collard CD
- Montalto MC
- Reenstra WR
- Buras JA
- Stahl GL
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1850443
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)61779-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Endothelial oxidative stress activates the lectin complement pathway: role of cytokeratin 1.
**Authors:** Collard CD, Montalto MC, Reenstra WR, Buras JA, Stahl GL
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9440(10)61779-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)61779-8)
**PMC:** [PMC1850443](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1850443/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Pathol. 2001 Sep;159(3):1045-54. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)61779-8.

Endothelial oxidative stress activates the lectin complement pathway: role of 
cytokeratin 1.

Collard CD(1), Montalto MC, Reenstra WR, Buras JA, Stahl GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative, and Pain Medicine, Center for 
Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Oxidative stress increases endothelial mannose-binding lectin (MBL) binding and 
activates the lectin complement pathway (LCP). However, the molecular mechanism 
of MBL binding to the endothelium after oxidative stress is unknown. 
Intermediate filaments have been previously reported to activate the classical 
complement pathway in an antibody-independent manner. We investigated whether 
oxidative stress increases human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) 
cytokeratin 1 (CK1) expression and activates the LCP via MBL binding to CK1. 
Reoxygenation (3 hours, 21% O(2)) of hypoxic HUVECs (24 hours, 1% O(2)) 
significantly increased CK1 mRNA (in situ hybridization) and membrane protein 
expression [enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)/confocal microscopy]. 
Incubating human serum (HS) with N-acetyl-D-glucosamine or anti-human MBL 
monoclonal antibody attenuated MBL and C3 deposition on purified CK1 (ELISA). 
CK1 and MBL were co-immunoprecipitated from hypoxic HUVECs reoxygenated in HS. 
Treatment with anti-human cytokeratin Fab fragments attenuated endothelial MBL 
and C3 deposition after oxidative stress (ELISA/confocal microscopy). We 
conclude that: 1) endothelial oxidative stress increases CK1 expression, MBL 
binding, and C3 deposition; 2) inhibition of MBL attenuates purified CK1-induced 
complement activation; and 3) anti-human cytokeratin Fab fragments attenuate 
endothelial MBL and C3 deposition after oxidative stress. These results suggest 
that MBL binding to endothelial cytokeratins may mediate LCP activation after 
oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)61779-8
PMCID: PMC1850443
PMID: 11549596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Oxidative stress increases endothelial mannose-binding lectin (MBL) binding and activates the lectin complement pathway (LCP). However, the molecular mechanism of MBL binding to the endothelium after oxidative stress is unknown. Intermediate filaments have been previously reported to activate the classical complement pathway in an antibody-independent manner. We investigated whether oxidative stress increases human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) cytokeratin 1 (CK1) expression and activates the LCP via MBL binding to CK1. Reoxygenation (3 hours, 21% O 2 ) of hypoxic HUVECs (24 hours, 1% O 2 ) significantly increased CK1 mRNA ( in situ hybridization) and membrane protein expression [enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)/confocal microscopy]. Incubating human serum (HS) with N -acetyl- d -glucosamine or anti-human MBL monoclonal antibody attenuated MBL and C3 deposition on purified CK1 (ELISA). CK1 and MBL were co-immunoprecipitated from hypoxic HUVECs reoxygenated in HS. Treatment with anti-human cytokeratin Fab fragments attenuated endothelial MBL and C3 deposition after oxidative stress (ELISA/confocal microscopy). We conclude that: 1) endothelial oxidative stress increases CK1 expression, MBL binding, and C3 deposition; 2) inhibition of MBL attenuates purified CK1-induced complement activation; and 3) anti-human cytokeratin Fab fragments attenuate endothelial MBL and C3 deposition after oxidative stress. These results suggest that MBL binding to endothelial cytokeratins may mediate LCP activation after oxidative stress.

Discussion

Growing evidence suggests that complement plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular injury after oxidative stress. 24-26 However, the role of the LCP in human cardiovascular disease is unknown. Human endothelial oxidative stress in vitro increases MBL deposition and activates the LCP. 5 Further, rat myocardial MBL and C3 deposition is increased after in vivo ischemia-reperfusion. 5 Although these data suggest a novel pathophysiological role for the LCP after oxidative stress, the molecular mechanism of MBL binding to the vascular endothelium is unknown. We demonstrate in the present study that activation of the LCP after oxidative stress may be mediated by MBL binding to vascular endothelial cytokeratins. Additionally, we demonstrate that human endothelial CK1 may be a novel ligand for human MBL.

Ogawa and colleagues 27 have shown that hypoxia induces endothelial neoantigen expression, creating the possibility that de novo surface ligand expression plays a role in the hypoxic response. Although endothelial cytokeratins have been previously identified, 28-30 the effect of oxidative stress on endothelial cytokeratin expression is primarily unknown. Consistent with previous reports, 11,12 HUVEC CK1 expression was confirmed by immunoprecipitation and protein sequencing. Further, oxidative stress significantly increased HUVEC CK1 mRNA and surface protein expression. Thus, oxidative stress alters human endothelial cytokeratin expression.

Historically, CK1 is known to be an intracellular structural protein that functions to maintain cytoskeletal integrity. 7 Consistent with previous reports of endothelial CK1 surface expression, 12,13 our data also demonstrates HUVEC CK1 surface expression. However, the mechanism of cell-surface CK1 expression is unclear. Although CK1 contains an internal hydrophobic rod domain, neither a membrane-spanning region, nor an insertional signal sequence has been described. Nonetheless, proteins may be externalized in the absence of vesicular transport. For example, the phospholipid-associated protein, annexin I, localizes to the extracellular membrane despite the lack of a signal peptide and co-localizes with CK8. 31 In this context, it is possible that membrane remodeling after oxidative stress results in transport of CK1 to the cell surface. Consistent with this hypothesis, endothelial cells subjected to chemical oxidative stress have been shown to undergo cytoskeletal remodeling and membrane blebbing in the absence of apoptosis. 32 Studies are ongoing in our laboratory to address the mechanisms regulating CK1 transport and expression.

Several lines of evidence suggest that cytokeratins may mediate immune responses. First, specific cytokeratin peptide sequences have been shown to be molecular mimics of the MBL ligand, GlcNAc and to induce in vivo anti-carbohydrate antibody responses. 14,15 Second, autoantibodies to cytokeratin were recently demonstrated in cardiac transplant patients with accelerated coronary artery disease. 33 Third, inflammation associated with blistering skin disorders is observed in humans with mutant cytokeratins. 7 Thus, cytokeratins may represent a novel class of endothelial ligands that mediate immune responses. Data from our laboratory demonstrate that GlcNAc, anti-human MBL mAbs or anti-human keratin Fab fragments inhibit human MBL and C3 deposition on purified human CK1-coated plastic plates or oxidatively stressed human endothelial cells. Together, these data suggest that human MBL binds CK1 and activates the LCP. Additionally, these data demonstrate that anti-human MBL treatment attenuates CK1-induced complement activation. Although we have not yet identified the MBL-binding site on keratin, the CK1 head and tail regions contain sequences highly homologous to a CK14 decapeptide (SFGSGFGGGY) known to mimic the MBL ligand, GlcNAc. 14,15 MBL was recently shown to specifically bind this GlcNAc-mimicking peptide sequence, and pretreatment of human sera with this peptide significantly attenuated MBL and complement deposition on oxidatively stressed human endothelial cells. 16 Thus, MBL may bind the CK1 head and/or tail region(s) after endothelial oxidative stress. Epitope mapping the MBL binding site on CK1 will address this issue.

To determine whether endothelial cytokeratins-induce complement activation after oxidative stress, endothelial MBL and C3 deposition were measured. Treatment with anti-human dermal cytokeratin Fab fragments significantly attenuated endothelial MBL and C3 deposition, suggesting that endothelial cytokeratin epitope blockade attenuates MBL deposition and complement activation after oxidative stress. Interestingly, minimal MBL deposition was observed on untreated, normoxic cells despite the fact that CK1 has been previously cloned from and shown to be expressed by normoxic HUVECs. 11,12 Although we were able to immunoprecipitate and sequence CK1 with a monospecific anti-CK1 pAb from both normoxic and hypoxic/reoxygenated HUVECs, CK1 could only be immunoprecipitated with purified MBL from hypoxic/reoxygenated HUVECs. Additionally, MBL and CK1 could only be co-immunoprecipitated with the anti-CK1 pAb from hypoxic/reoxygenated HUVECs. Together, these data suggest that oxidative stress increases total endothelial CK1 protein expression resulting in a neo-epitope recognized by MBL. These observations are consistent with our previous finding that inhibition of de novo protein synthesis or nuclear factor-κB translocation attenuates endothelial C3 deposition after oxidative stress. 23 Cytokeratin organization and expression is known to be regulated by nuclear factor-κB, protein kinase C, activator protein-1 and cAMP-dependent phosphorylases 34-37 that, in turn, may be altered by hypoxia. 38,39 Indeed, oxidative stress in the present study increased HUVEC CK1 mRNA and cell-surface protein expression. Further studies on the effect of oxidative stress on endothelial cytokeratin protein expression are warranted.

In summary, 1) CK1 mRNA and protein expression, MBL binding, and C3 deposition are increased after human endothelial oxidative stress in vitro , 2) inhibition of MBL deposition with GlcNAc or anti-human MBL mAb attenuates MBL and C3 deposition on purified CK1, and 3) anti-human cytokeratin Fab fragments attenuate endothelial MBL and C3 deposition after oxidative stress. These results suggest that MBL deposition and activation of the LCP after oxidative stress may be mediated by endothelial cytokeratins. Further, these results identify human CK1 as a novel ligand for human MBL. Future studies with specific inhibitors of MBL and cytokeratin in animal models will help define the role of MBL and the LCP in cardiovascular disease.
