---
pmid: '35793002'
title: Zika virus alters centrosome organization to suppress the innate immune response.
authors:
- Kodani A
- Knopp KA
- Di Lullo E
- Retallack H
- Kriegstein AR
- DeRisi JL
- Reiter JF
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9442309
doi: 10.15252/embr.202052211
---

# Zika virus alters centrosome organization to suppress the innate immune response.
**Authors:** Kodani A, Knopp KA, Di Lullo E, Retallack H, Kriegstein AR, DeRisi JL, Reiter JF
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.202052211](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.202052211)
**PMC:** [PMC9442309](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9442309/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2022 Sep 5;23(9):e52211. doi: 10.15252/embr.202052211. Epub 2022 Jul
 6.

Zika virus alters centrosome organization to suppress the innate immune 
response.

Kodani A(#)(1), Knopp KA(#)(2)(3), Di Lullo E(4)(5), Retallack H(2)(3), 
Kriegstein AR(4)(5), DeRisi JL(2)(3), Reiter JF(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Center for Pediatric Neurological 
Disease Research, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(6)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Zika virus (ZIKV) is a flavivirus transmitted via mosquitoes and sex to cause 
congenital neurodevelopmental defects, including microcephaly. Inherited forms 
of microcephaly (MCPH) are associated with disrupted centrosome organization. 
Similarly, we found that ZIKV infection disrupted centrosome organization. ZIKV 
infection disrupted the organization of centrosomal proteins including CEP63, a 
MCPH-associated protein. The ZIKV nonstructural protein NS3 bound CEP63, and 
expression of NS3 was sufficient to alter centrosome architecture and CEP63 
localization. Loss of CEP63 suppressed ZIKV-induced centrosome disorganization, 
indicating that ZIKV requires CEP63 to disrupt centrosome organization. ZIKV 
infection or CEP63 loss decreased the centrosomal localization and stability of 
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), a regulator of the innate immune response. ZIKV 
infection also increased the centrosomal accumulation of the CEP63 interactor 
DTX4, a ubiquitin ligase that degrades TBK1. Therefore, we propose that ZIKV 
disrupts CEP63 function to increase centrosomal DTX4 localization and 
destabilization of TBK1, thereby tempering the innate immune response.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.202052211
PMCID: PMC9442309
PMID: 35793002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
