---
pmid: '9891079'
title: Cyclin E associates with BAF155 and BRG1, components of the mammalian SWI-SNF
  complex, and alters the ability of BRG1 to induce growth arrest.
authors:
- Shanahan F
- Seghezzi W
- Parry D
- Mahony D
- Lees E
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC116074
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1460
---

# Cyclin E associates with BAF155 and BRG1, components of the mammalian SWI-SNF complex, and alters the ability of BRG1 to induce growth arrest.
**Authors:** Shanahan F, Seghezzi W, Parry D, Mahony D, Lees E
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.2.1460](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.2.1460)
**PMC:** [PMC116074](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC116074/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1460-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1460.

Cyclin E associates with BAF155 and BRG1, components of the mammalian SWI-SNF 
complex, and alters the ability of BRG1 to induce growth arrest.

Shanahan F(1), Seghezzi W, Parry D, Mahony D, Lees E.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Department, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 
94304, USA.

SWI-SNF complexes have been implicated in transcriptional regulation by 
chromatin remodeling. We have identified an interaction between two components 
of the mammalian SWI-SNF complex and cyclin E, an essential cell cycle 
regulatory protein required for G1/S transition. BRG1 and BAF155, mammalian 
homologs of yeast SWI2 and SWI3, respectively, are found in cyclin E complexes 
and are phosphorylated by cyclin E-associated kinase activity. In this report, 
we show that overexpression of BRG1 causes growth arrest and induction of 
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity, which can be overcome by 
cyclin E. Our results suggest that cyclin E may modulate the activity of the 
SWI-SNF apparatus to maintain the chromatin in a transcriptionally permissive 
state.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.2.1460
PMCID: PMC116074
PMID: 9891079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
