---
pmid: '29249658'
title: Mechanisms Connecting the Conserved Protein Kinases Ssp1, Kin1, and Pom1 in
  Fission Yeast Cell Polarity and Division.
authors:
- Lee ME
- Rusin SF
- Jenkins N
- Kettenbach AN
- Moseley JB
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC5760279
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.034
---

# Mechanisms Connecting the Conserved Protein Kinases Ssp1, Kin1, and Pom1 in Fission Yeast Cell Polarity and Division.
**Authors:** Lee ME, Rusin SF, Jenkins N, Kettenbach AN, Moseley JB
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.034)
**PMC:** [PMC5760279](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5760279/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2018 Jan 8;28(1):84-92.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.034. Epub
2017  Dec 14.

Mechanisms Connecting the Conserved Protein Kinases Ssp1, Kin1, and Pom1 in 
Fission Yeast Cell Polarity and Division.

Lee ME(1), Rusin SF(1), Jenkins N(2), Kettenbach AN(2), Moseley JB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, The Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, The Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center, The Geisel 
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, The Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. Electronic address: 
james.b.moseley@dartmouth.edu.

Connections between the protein kinases that function within complex cell 
polarity networks are poorly understood. Rod-shaped fission yeast cells grow in 
a highly polarized manner, and genetic screens have identified many protein 
kinases, including the CaMKK-like Ssp1 and the MARK/PAR-1 family kinase Kin1, 
that are required for polarized growth and cell shape, but their functional 
mechanisms and connections have been unknown [1-5]. We found that Ssp1 promotes 
cell polarity by phosphorylating the activation loop of Kin1. Kin1 regulates 
cell polarity and cytokinesis through unknown mechanisms [4-7]. We performed a 
large-scale phosphoproteomic screen and found that Kin1 phosphorylates itself 
and Pal1 to promote growth at cell tips, and these proteins are interdependent 
for localization to growing cell tips. Additional Kin1 substrates for cell 
polarity and cytokinesis (Tea4, Mod5, Cdc15, and Cyk3) were also phosphorylated 
by a second kinase, the DYRK family member Pom1 [8]. Kin1 and Pom1 were enriched 
at opposite ends of growing cells, and they phosphorylated largely 
non-overlapping sites on shared substrates. Combined inhibition of both Kin1and 
Pom1 led to synthetic defects in their shared substrates Cdc15 and Cyk3, 
confirming a non-redundant functional connection through shared substrates. 
These findings uncover a new Ssp1-Kin1 signaling pathway, and define its 
functional and mechanistic connection with Pom1 signaling for cell polarity and 
cytokinesis. These kinases are conserved in many eukaryotes including humans, 
suggesting that similar connections and mechanisms might operate in a broad 
range of cells.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.11.034
PMCID: PMC5760279
PMID: 29249658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Results and DiscussionMutations in the fission yeast CaMKK-like protein kinase Ssp1 generate defects in cell cycle progression, nutrient sensing, and cell polarity [9–11]. Ssp1 directly phosphorylates the activation loops of the cell cycle kinase Cdr2 and the metabolic sensor kinase Ssp2 [12, 13], but Ssp1 substrates in cell polarity have been undefined. The activation loop of fission yeast Kin1 is nearly identical both to its MARK/PAR-1 orthologs and to Cdr2 and Ssp2 (Figure 1A). Thus, we hypothesized that Ssp1 might regulate cell polarity by phosphorylating this conserved threonine (T299) within the Kin1 activation loop.We used BiFC (Bimolecular fluorescence complementation) as a first test because this assay has the potential to trap transient cellular interactions, such as between a kinase and its substrate. Ssp1 localizes primarily in the cytoplasm [9, 10, 16] and Kin1 localizes to growing cell ends [4, 6]. In BiFC assays, we observed fluorescence at the ends of cells expressing Ssp1-VC and Kin1-VN, but not in negative controls (Figure S1A). Therefore, we raised a phospho-specific antibody against Kin1-pT299. Kin1 was phosphorylated at T299 in wild type cells but not in ssp1Δ cells or a non-phosphorylatable kin1-T299A mutant (Figure 1B, S1B-C). To test direct phosphorylation, we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays using purified analog-sensitive Ssp1-as1 and immunoprecipitated Kin1. Analog-sensitive kinase alleles can use a bio-orthogonal ATPγS molecule in which the γ-phosphate is replaced by a thiophosphate moiety [17, 18]. Only direct substrates become thiophosphorylated, and this modification can then be alkylated for detection by a specific anti-thiophosphate ester antibody. Using this assay, we found that Ssp1-as1 directly phosphorylates Kin1 in vitro (Figure 1C). We conclude that Ssp1 phosphorylates the Kin1 activation loop, and this modification might explain the function of Ssp1 in cell polarity.If Ssp1 promotes cell polarity by phosphorylating Kin1-T299, then a non-phosphorylatable kin1-T299A mutant should exhibit defects in cell polarity. kin1-T299A mutant cells displayed increased monopolar growth (Figures 1D–E), indicating a defect in the switch to bipolar growth. cdc25-22 mutant cells arrest at 36° in G2 with a bipolar growth pattern [19], as visualized by actin and cell wall staining (Figures 1F–H, S1D-E). However, kin1-T299A cdc25-22 mutants exhibited monopolar growth with displaced actin patches and cell wall deposition (Figures 1F–H, S1D-E). Finally, previous work identified synthetic lethality between kin1Δ and pom1Δ, a different cell polarity kinase [7]. kin1-T299A pom1Δ double mutant cells displayed severe synthetic defects in growth and morphology (Figures S1F-G). These results show that phosphorylation of Kin1-T299 by Ssp1 is required for proper cell polarity.The phenotypes of kin1-T299A cells are less severe than kin1Δ or kinase-dead kin1 mutations. Rather, the kin1-T299A phenotype is reminiscent of ssp1 mutant cells, which have defects in bipolar growth but not severe morphology defects [9, 10]. These results indicate that Kin1 retains some kinase activity in the absence of activation by Ssp1, unlike the related Ssp1 substrates Cdr2 and Ssp2 [12, 13]. The pleiotropic defects of ssp1 mutants can be explained by these three related substrates, with Kin1 as the key target for cell polarity. However, no substrates of Kin1 are known, raising the question of how Kin1 converts upstream activation by Ssp1 into downstream cell polarity cues.Identification of Kin1 substrates by phosphoproteomicsTo understand how Kin1 regulates cell polarity, we performed an unbiased phosphoproteomic screen. We generated an analog-sensitive mutant of Kin1 (F220G) (kin1-as1) based on previous work [20]. kin1-as1 cells phenocopied kin1Δ cells when grown in the presence of 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor but not in DMSO (Figure 2A). Kin1 kinase activity is required for its localization to cell tips [20]. Using Kin1 tip localization and SDS-PAGE mobility shifts as a read-out for kinase activity, we found that 1 μM 3-MB-PP1 inhibited kin1-as1 activity within 5-15 minutes (Figure 2B and S2A).We integrated Kin1 inhibition into a pipeline for quantitative phosphoproteomics (see Method details). In 4 separate experiments, kin1-as1 cultures were treated with either 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor or DMSO control, and then cells were harvested and lysed. We used heavy/light dimethyl labeling with liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to compare the abundance of tryptic phosphopeptides isolated from 3-MB-PP1 versus DMSO treatment. We identified over 1400 phosphopeptides that were >2 fold reduced by Kin1-specific inhibition (Table S1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that potential Kin1 substrates were enriched for factors that function in polarity establishment and localize at cell tips (Figure S2B). Critical proteins include Kin1 itself, cell polarity proteins (Pal1, Mod5, Tea4, and Spa2), cell division proteins (Cyk3, Cdc15, and Rng10), a cell wall enzyme (Bgs1), and Rho GTPase regulators (Rga2 and Rgf1) (Table S2). We conclude that our screen identified candidate substrates that might be phosphorylated by Kin1, after its activation by Ssp1, to regulate cell polarity and division.Kin1 autophosphorylation is required for localization and functionKin1 activity is required for its localization and phosphorylation-dependent SDS-PAGE band shift, raising the possibility of autophosphorylation (Figures 2B; S2A,G) [20]. We identified 19 phosphorylation sites on Kin1 that were >1.4-fold reduced upon inhibition. These sites clustered in an uncharacterized central domain (Figure 2C). Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP autophosphorylated when we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays (Figure 2D). Kin1 autophosphorylation in cells requires its activation by Ssp1, as shown by SDS-PAGE mobility shifts in kin1-T299A and ssp1Δ mutants (Figure S2C-D).To test the function of Kin1 autophosphorylation, we mutated 16 autophosphorylation sites to alanine. Three results showed that kin1(16A) eliminated most, but not all, autophosphorylation sites. First, the kin1-as1(16A) mutation decreased in vitro autophosphorylation 6-fold (Figure S2E). Second, kin1(16A)-mEGFP migrated faster than wild-type Kin1-mEGFP by SDS-PAGE (Figure 2E), similar to the inhibited kin1-as1 mutant (Figure 2B). Third, λ-phosphatase treatment induced a larger SDS-PAGE band shift for wild type Kin1 than for kin1(16A) (Figures S2F). Therefore, we used kin1(16A) to test the function of autophosphorylation in cells. kin1(16A) cells displayed cell polarity and septation defects similar to kin1Δ, and failed to enrich at cell tips even in rod-shaped cells (Figure 2F, S2H). These data indicate that Kin1 autophosphorylation of its central domain is required for localization and function in cells.Kin1 directly phosphorylates polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5We identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites on multiple cell polarity proteins, including Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 2G). Similar to Kin1, these proteins all localize to growing cell ends and the division site, and are required for proper cell polarity and shape [21–24]. To test if Kin1 directly phosphorylates these substrates, we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays. We expressed and purified full-length Pal1 and fragments of Mod5 and Tea4 that contained Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites from bacteria [8]. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP directly thiophosphorylated these proteins, and this activity was inhibited by excess 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor (Figure 2H–J). Next, we used LC-MS/MS to identify phosphorylation sites that were phosphorylated by wild-type Kin1 but not by kinase-dead Kin1(K154R) [25] (Figure 2G; Table S3). For each protein, we detected overlap between these in vitro phosphorylation sites and the sites that were Kin1-dependent in cells (Figure 2G). Thus, Kin1 directly phosphorylates the cell polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5.Interdependent localization of Kin1 and its substrate Pal1We investigated the connection between Kin1 and its substrate Pal1, a fungal protein that interacts with endocytic proteins [21]. pal1Δ and kin1Δ mutants exhibit similar phenotypic defects in cell shape and septation [4, 21]. In addition, Pal1 localizes to growing cell ends and to the cell middle at division, similar to Kin1 [21, 26]. Pal1-mEGFP localization to cell ends was lost in kin1Δ mutants (Figure 3A) or upon inhibition of kin1-as1 cells (Figure 3B). Next, we generated a pal1(7A) mutant by mutating 7 residues phosphorylated by Kin1 to alanine. The pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant localized uniformly around the cell cortex (Figure 3C), showing that Kin1 phosphorylates Pal1 to promote its localization to growing cell tips. Further, Pal1 localization at cell tips was reduced in the kin1-T299A mutant (Figure S3A). Thus, Ssp1 phosphorylation of the Kin1 activation loop leads to both Kin1 autophosphorylation and Kin1 phosphorylation of Pal1. These modifications promote localization of Kin1 and Pal1 at the cell tips.Despite its localization defect, the morphology defect of pal1(7A) cells is much less severe than pal1Δ cells (Figure S3B). kin1(16A) and pal1(7A) mutations did not show synthetic growth defects, consistent with a linear pathway (Figure S3C). To test pal1(7A) function more carefully, we combined it with deletion of tea4, another Kin1 substrate. pal1Δ and tea4Δ mutations are synthetically lethal at high temperature [8]. pal1(7A) tea4Δ double mutant cells failed to grow at high temperature and exhibited severe morphology defects at permissive temperatures (Figures S3D-E). We conclude that phosphorylation by Kin1 is required for the localization and full function of Pal1. This mechanism requires activation of Kin1 by Ssp1, thereby defining a novel Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1 pathway for cell polarity.We next tested reciprocal regulation of Kin1 by Pal1. In pal1Δ mutant cells, Kin1-mEGFP was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm and cortex (Figure 3D). Thus, Kin1 and Pal1 are interdependent for localization, and Pal1 contributes to recruitment of Kin1 to both the cortex and growing cell tips. The reduction of cortical Kin1-mEGFP in pal1Δ cells was unexpected because Kin1 has a phospholipid-binding KA1 domain [27], which is predicted to associate with the plasma membrane [20]. However, a kin1(ΔKA1)-mEGFP mutant had no defects in localization or function (Figure 3E–F). This result led us to dissect the requirements for Kin1 localization and function through structure-function experiments (Figures 3E and S3F). Consistent with proper localization of kin1(ΔKA1), the KA1 domain alone (aa 753-end) only weakly associated with the cortex. We found a critical role for amino acids 511-752 within the previously uncharacterized middle region of Kin1, which contains the majority of autophosphorylation sites (Figure 2C). Kin1(1-510), which truncates both the KA1 domain and the middle region, was nonfunctional and localized to the cytoplasm (Figure S3F). Further, the Kin1(Δ511-752) construct that deletes only the internal region abolished cortical localization and function (Figure S3F). Pal1 localization largely mirrored Kin1 localization in these mutants (Figure S3F), and we did not observe synthetic growth defects when kin1(ΔKA1) or kin1(Δ511-752) were combined with pal1(7A) (Figure S3G-H). We conclude that Kin1 localization and function require the middle region but not the KA1 domain.Kin1(ΔKA1) might localize to the cell cortex by interacting with other proteins. We tested the role of Kin1 substrates Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 3G and S3I). pal1Δ prevented cortical localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) but not full-length Kin1 (Figure 3D). This result indicates that cortical targeting by the Kin1 KA1 domain is dispensable in the presence of Pal1. The localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) at the cell tips and cell cortex was also reduced but not abolished in the pal1(7A) mutant (Figure 3G). These combined results suggest that a physical interaction between Kin1 and Pal1 reciprocally promotes their localization for proper cell polarity.In addition to our in vitro kinase assays, we used two independent approaches to test the physical interaction of Kin1-Pal1. First, Kin1 and Pal1 exhibited strong interaction in vivo by BiFC (Figure 3H). This interaction was not simply due to colocalization at cell ends because Kin1 did not associate by BiFC with Gef1, an unrelated protein at cell ends. Pal1 interacted with Kin1(511-752) but not Kin1(1-510) by BiFC, indicating that the Kin1 middle region is both necessary and sufficient to interact with Pal1 in this assay (Figure 3H). Second, purified GST-Kin1(511-752) associated with Pal1-mEGFP in yeast cell extracts, but GST alone did not (Figure 3I–J). Interestingly, the Pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant retained physical interaction with GST-Kin1(511-752). We conclude that Kin1 localizes to the cortex and cell ends primarily by associating with its substrate Pal1, while the KA1 domain can act to promote membrane association. This two-part mechanism is reminiscent of the C. elegans Kin1-related kinase PAR-1, which localizes due to both its membrane-binding KA1 domain and binding to its ligand PAR-2 [28].Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substratesWe considered how this new pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5) connects with other cell polarity pathways. Several Kin1 substrates were previously shown to be phosphorylated by the cell polarity kinase Pom1 (Figure 4A) [8], and kin1Δ and pom1Δ are synthetically lethal [7]. Interestingly, Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylated largely distinct residues on shared substrates Pal1, Mod5, and Tea4 (Figure S4A). Consistent with distinct phosphorylation sites, Pal1 localization depends on Kin1 (Figure 3) but not on Pom1 [8]. We found that Kin1 and Pom1 are enriched at opposite ends of growing cells (Figures 4B, S4B). Using a kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant strain, inhibiting both kinases led to T-shaped cells that were not observed in either kin1-as1 or pom1-as1 single mutants (Figures 4C–D). Thus, the combined activities of Kin1 and Pom1 kinases at opposite cell ends restrict polarized growth to the cell ends. These kinases phosphorylate largely distinct residues on shared substrates.We also observed defects in division septa upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells (Figures 4C, E). Our phosphoproteomics identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation of two cytokinesis proteins, Cyk3 and Cdc15 (Table S2), which physically interact [29]. Cdc15 scaffolds the cytokinetic ring to the plasma membrane, and Cyk3 coordinates septum assembly with ring constriction [30–32]. Previous phosphoproteomics also identified Pom1-dependent phosphorylation of Cyk3 and Cdc15 in cells [8], and Kin1 physically associates with Cdc15 [31]. Pom1 also regulates Cdc15 localization in S. japonicus [33], and has been functionally linked to Cdc15 in S. pombe [34]. In thiophosphate kinase assays, both Kin1-as1-mEGFP and Pom1-as1-3HA directly thiophosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3 (Figure S4C). We performed a second set of in vitro kinase assays, and then used LC-MS/MS to map phosphorylation sites. Kin1 and Pom1 both directly phosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3, but at largely non-overlapping sites (Figure S4D and Table S3). We conclude that Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substrates for both cell polarity and cytokinesis.Finally, we tested how Kin1 and Pom1 cooperate to regulate their shared cytokinesis targets in cells. Cyk3 localizes at cell ends during interphase and then at the cytokinetic ring during division [30]. Upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells, Cyk3-GFP did not fully relocalize to the cytokinetic ring during division, exhibited by residual signal at cell ends (Figures 4F–G). In movies of inhibited cells, Cyk3-GFP remained partially at cell tips during cell division (Figure S4E). Cyk3 also mislocalized during interphase in both kin1-as1 and kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells upon inhibition (Figures 4F, S4F).In addition to Cyk3, organization of Cdc15 at cell division required both protein kinases. We inhibited GFP-cdc15 kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells with 3-MB-PP1 and observed a strand of GFP-Cdc15 trailing off the cytokinetic ring, resembling a “lasso” (Figures 4H–I). Lassos were not observed in single as mutants or DMSO controls (Figures 4H–I, S4G-H). Lasso strands emerged during constrictions of the cytokinetic ring and contained Rlc1, a marker of the actomyosin ring (Figure 4J, lasso observed in 7 out of 9 cells). Cytokinetic rings were also positioned off-center in inhibited kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells due to Pom1 [2, 33, 34] (Figure 4I). We conclude that Kin1 works with Pom1 to organize cytokinesis proteins including Cyk3 and Cdc15. Their combined activities relocalize Cyk3 from the cell tips to the cytokinetic ring, and generate a coherent cytokinetic ring through regulation of Cdc15.ConclusionsWe uncovered a multi-step signaling pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5/Cyk3/Cdc15) that intersects with Pom1 as part of a larger cell polarity signaling network (Figure 4K). Ssp1 promotes bipolar growth by phosphorylating the activation loop of MARK/PAR-1 kinase Kin1, which is the third known substrate of Ssp1. Kin1 and its substrate Pal1 are interdependent for localization and function. Pal1 is one of several proteins also phosphorylated by the DYRK Pom1. Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate these shared substrates at largely non-overlapping sites, and inhibition of Kin1 and Pom1 results in synthetic defects in these substrates.The cell polarity program plays a critical role in cell division and cytokinesis [35], but the signaling pathways that distinguish cell polarity during growth versus division are poorly understood. Our work shows that polarity kinases Kin1 and Pom1 promote localization of Cyk3 to the division site and organize Cdc15 in the contractile ring. The functional connection between Kin1 and Pom1 in cell polarity and cytokinesis may represent a general theme for MARK/PAR-1 and DYRK kinases in other organisms. For example, polarity in the one-cell C. elegans embryo requires Kin1-related PAR-1 and Pom1-related MBK-2. These two kinases phosphorylate distinct sites on the polarity protein MEX-5, leading to regulation of MEX-5 localization (by PAR-1) [36, 37] and function (by MBK-2) [38]. Large-scale studies examining additional substrates in C. elegans and other systems may reveal more broad overlap between these kinase families, as we have shown in fission yeast. Functional connections between protein kinases in complex signaling networks can be direct, as for Ssp1-Kin1, or indirect, as for the shared substrates of Kin1 and Pom1. These connections are likely required to coordinate the many events of cell polarity, and to ensure robustness and fidelity of the cell polarity control system.

Results and Discussion

Mutations in the fission yeast CaMKK-like protein kinase Ssp1 generate defects in cell cycle progression, nutrient sensing, and cell polarity [9–11]. Ssp1 directly phosphorylates the activation loops of the cell cycle kinase Cdr2 and the metabolic sensor kinase Ssp2 [12, 13], but Ssp1 substrates in cell polarity have been undefined. The activation loop of fission yeast Kin1 is nearly identical both to its MARK/PAR-1 orthologs and to Cdr2 and Ssp2 (Figure 1A). Thus, we hypothesized that Ssp1 might regulate cell polarity by phosphorylating this conserved threonine (T299) within the Kin1 activation loop.

We used BiFC (Bimolecular fluorescence complementation) as a first test because this assay has the potential to trap transient cellular interactions, such as between a kinase and its substrate. Ssp1 localizes primarily in the cytoplasm [9, 10, 16] and Kin1 localizes to growing cell ends [4, 6]. In BiFC assays, we observed fluorescence at the ends of cells expressing Ssp1-VC and Kin1-VN, but not in negative controls (Figure S1A). Therefore, we raised a phospho-specific antibody against Kin1-pT299. Kin1 was phosphorylated at T299 in wild type cells but not in ssp1Δ cells or a non-phosphorylatable kin1-T299A mutant (Figure 1B, S1B-C). To test direct phosphorylation, we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays using purified analog-sensitive Ssp1-as1 and immunoprecipitated Kin1. Analog-sensitive kinase alleles can use a bio-orthogonal ATPγS molecule in which the γ-phosphate is replaced by a thiophosphate moiety [17, 18]. Only direct substrates become thiophosphorylated, and this modification can then be alkylated for detection by a specific anti-thiophosphate ester antibody. Using this assay, we found that Ssp1-as1 directly phosphorylates Kin1 in vitro (Figure 1C). We conclude that Ssp1 phosphorylates the Kin1 activation loop, and this modification might explain the function of Ssp1 in cell polarity.

If Ssp1 promotes cell polarity by phosphorylating Kin1-T299, then a non-phosphorylatable kin1-T299A mutant should exhibit defects in cell polarity. kin1-T299A mutant cells displayed increased monopolar growth (Figures 1D–E), indicating a defect in the switch to bipolar growth. cdc25-22 mutant cells arrest at 36° in G2 with a bipolar growth pattern [19], as visualized by actin and cell wall staining (Figures 1F–H, S1D-E). However, kin1-T299A cdc25-22 mutants exhibited monopolar growth with displaced actin patches and cell wall deposition (Figures 1F–H, S1D-E). Finally, previous work identified synthetic lethality between kin1Δ and pom1Δ, a different cell polarity kinase [7]. kin1-T299A pom1Δ double mutant cells displayed severe synthetic defects in growth and morphology (Figures S1F-G). These results show that phosphorylation of Kin1-T299 by Ssp1 is required for proper cell polarity.

The phenotypes of kin1-T299A cells are less severe than kin1Δ or kinase-dead kin1 mutations. Rather, the kin1-T299A phenotype is reminiscent of ssp1 mutant cells, which have defects in bipolar growth but not severe morphology defects [9, 10]. These results indicate that Kin1 retains some kinase activity in the absence of activation by Ssp1, unlike the related Ssp1 substrates Cdr2 and Ssp2 [12, 13]. The pleiotropic defects of ssp1 mutants can be explained by these three related substrates, with Kin1 as the key target for cell polarity. However, no substrates of Kin1 are known, raising the question of how Kin1 converts upstream activation by Ssp1 into downstream cell polarity cues.

Identification of Kin1 substrates by phosphoproteomicsTo understand how Kin1 regulates cell polarity, we performed an unbiased phosphoproteomic screen. We generated an analog-sensitive mutant of Kin1 (F220G) (kin1-as1) based on previous work [20]. kin1-as1 cells phenocopied kin1Δ cells when grown in the presence of 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor but not in DMSO (Figure 2A). Kin1 kinase activity is required for its localization to cell tips [20]. Using Kin1 tip localization and SDS-PAGE mobility shifts as a read-out for kinase activity, we found that 1 μM 3-MB-PP1 inhibited kin1-as1 activity within 5-15 minutes (Figure 2B and S2A).We integrated Kin1 inhibition into a pipeline for quantitative phosphoproteomics (see Method details). In 4 separate experiments, kin1-as1 cultures were treated with either 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor or DMSO control, and then cells were harvested and lysed. We used heavy/light dimethyl labeling with liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to compare the abundance of tryptic phosphopeptides isolated from 3-MB-PP1 versus DMSO treatment. We identified over 1400 phosphopeptides that were >2 fold reduced by Kin1-specific inhibition (Table S1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that potential Kin1 substrates were enriched for factors that function in polarity establishment and localize at cell tips (Figure S2B). Critical proteins include Kin1 itself, cell polarity proteins (Pal1, Mod5, Tea4, and Spa2), cell division proteins (Cyk3, Cdc15, and Rng10), a cell wall enzyme (Bgs1), and Rho GTPase regulators (Rga2 and Rgf1) (Table S2). We conclude that our screen identified candidate substrates that might be phosphorylated by Kin1, after its activation by Ssp1, to regulate cell polarity and division.

Identification of Kin1 substrates by phosphoproteomics

To understand how Kin1 regulates cell polarity, we performed an unbiased phosphoproteomic screen. We generated an analog-sensitive mutant of Kin1 (F220G) (kin1-as1) based on previous work [20]. kin1-as1 cells phenocopied kin1Δ cells when grown in the presence of 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor but not in DMSO (Figure 2A). Kin1 kinase activity is required for its localization to cell tips [20]. Using Kin1 tip localization and SDS-PAGE mobility shifts as a read-out for kinase activity, we found that 1 μM 3-MB-PP1 inhibited kin1-as1 activity within 5-15 minutes (Figure 2B and S2A).

We integrated Kin1 inhibition into a pipeline for quantitative phosphoproteomics (see Method details). In 4 separate experiments, kin1-as1 cultures were treated with either 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor or DMSO control, and then cells were harvested and lysed. We used heavy/light dimethyl labeling with liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to compare the abundance of tryptic phosphopeptides isolated from 3-MB-PP1 versus DMSO treatment. We identified over 1400 phosphopeptides that were >2 fold reduced by Kin1-specific inhibition (Table S1). Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that potential Kin1 substrates were enriched for factors that function in polarity establishment and localize at cell tips (Figure S2B). Critical proteins include Kin1 itself, cell polarity proteins (Pal1, Mod5, Tea4, and Spa2), cell division proteins (Cyk3, Cdc15, and Rng10), a cell wall enzyme (Bgs1), and Rho GTPase regulators (Rga2 and Rgf1) (Table S2). We conclude that our screen identified candidate substrates that might be phosphorylated by Kin1, after its activation by Ssp1, to regulate cell polarity and division.

Kin1 autophosphorylation is required for localization and functionKin1 activity is required for its localization and phosphorylation-dependent SDS-PAGE band shift, raising the possibility of autophosphorylation (Figures 2B; S2A,G) [20]. We identified 19 phosphorylation sites on Kin1 that were >1.4-fold reduced upon inhibition. These sites clustered in an uncharacterized central domain (Figure 2C). Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP autophosphorylated when we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays (Figure 2D). Kin1 autophosphorylation in cells requires its activation by Ssp1, as shown by SDS-PAGE mobility shifts in kin1-T299A and ssp1Δ mutants (Figure S2C-D).To test the function of Kin1 autophosphorylation, we mutated 16 autophosphorylation sites to alanine. Three results showed that kin1(16A) eliminated most, but not all, autophosphorylation sites. First, the kin1-as1(16A) mutation decreased in vitro autophosphorylation 6-fold (Figure S2E). Second, kin1(16A)-mEGFP migrated faster than wild-type Kin1-mEGFP by SDS-PAGE (Figure 2E), similar to the inhibited kin1-as1 mutant (Figure 2B). Third, λ-phosphatase treatment induced a larger SDS-PAGE band shift for wild type Kin1 than for kin1(16A) (Figures S2F). Therefore, we used kin1(16A) to test the function of autophosphorylation in cells. kin1(16A) cells displayed cell polarity and septation defects similar to kin1Δ, and failed to enrich at cell tips even in rod-shaped cells (Figure 2F, S2H). These data indicate that Kin1 autophosphorylation of its central domain is required for localization and function in cells.

Kin1 autophosphorylation is required for localization and function

Kin1 activity is required for its localization and phosphorylation-dependent SDS-PAGE band shift, raising the possibility of autophosphorylation (Figures 2B; S2A,G) [20]. We identified 19 phosphorylation sites on Kin1 that were >1.4-fold reduced upon inhibition. These sites clustered in an uncharacterized central domain (Figure 2C). Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP autophosphorylated when we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays (Figure 2D). Kin1 autophosphorylation in cells requires its activation by Ssp1, as shown by SDS-PAGE mobility shifts in kin1-T299A and ssp1Δ mutants (Figure S2C-D).

To test the function of Kin1 autophosphorylation, we mutated 16 autophosphorylation sites to alanine. Three results showed that kin1(16A) eliminated most, but not all, autophosphorylation sites. First, the kin1-as1(16A) mutation decreased in vitro autophosphorylation 6-fold (Figure S2E). Second, kin1(16A)-mEGFP migrated faster than wild-type Kin1-mEGFP by SDS-PAGE (Figure 2E), similar to the inhibited kin1-as1 mutant (Figure 2B). Third, λ-phosphatase treatment induced a larger SDS-PAGE band shift for wild type Kin1 than for kin1(16A) (Figures S2F). Therefore, we used kin1(16A) to test the function of autophosphorylation in cells. kin1(16A) cells displayed cell polarity and septation defects similar to kin1Δ, and failed to enrich at cell tips even in rod-shaped cells (Figure 2F, S2H). These data indicate that Kin1 autophosphorylation of its central domain is required for localization and function in cells.

Kin1 directly phosphorylates polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5We identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites on multiple cell polarity proteins, including Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 2G). Similar to Kin1, these proteins all localize to growing cell ends and the division site, and are required for proper cell polarity and shape [21–24]. To test if Kin1 directly phosphorylates these substrates, we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays. We expressed and purified full-length Pal1 and fragments of Mod5 and Tea4 that contained Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites from bacteria [8]. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP directly thiophosphorylated these proteins, and this activity was inhibited by excess 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor (Figure 2H–J). Next, we used LC-MS/MS to identify phosphorylation sites that were phosphorylated by wild-type Kin1 but not by kinase-dead Kin1(K154R) [25] (Figure 2G; Table S3). For each protein, we detected overlap between these in vitro phosphorylation sites and the sites that were Kin1-dependent in cells (Figure 2G). Thus, Kin1 directly phosphorylates the cell polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5.

Kin1 directly phosphorylates polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5

We identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites on multiple cell polarity proteins, including Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 2G). Similar to Kin1, these proteins all localize to growing cell ends and the division site, and are required for proper cell polarity and shape [21–24]. To test if Kin1 directly phosphorylates these substrates, we performed in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays. We expressed and purified full-length Pal1 and fragments of Mod5 and Tea4 that contained Kin1-dependent phosphorylation sites from bacteria [8]. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-as1-mEGFP directly thiophosphorylated these proteins, and this activity was inhibited by excess 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor (Figure 2H–J). Next, we used LC-MS/MS to identify phosphorylation sites that were phosphorylated by wild-type Kin1 but not by kinase-dead Kin1(K154R) [25] (Figure 2G; Table S3). For each protein, we detected overlap between these in vitro phosphorylation sites and the sites that were Kin1-dependent in cells (Figure 2G). Thus, Kin1 directly phosphorylates the cell polarity proteins Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5.

Interdependent localization of Kin1 and its substrate Pal1We investigated the connection between Kin1 and its substrate Pal1, a fungal protein that interacts with endocytic proteins [21]. pal1Δ and kin1Δ mutants exhibit similar phenotypic defects in cell shape and septation [4, 21]. In addition, Pal1 localizes to growing cell ends and to the cell middle at division, similar to Kin1 [21, 26]. Pal1-mEGFP localization to cell ends was lost in kin1Δ mutants (Figure 3A) or upon inhibition of kin1-as1 cells (Figure 3B). Next, we generated a pal1(7A) mutant by mutating 7 residues phosphorylated by Kin1 to alanine. The pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant localized uniformly around the cell cortex (Figure 3C), showing that Kin1 phosphorylates Pal1 to promote its localization to growing cell tips. Further, Pal1 localization at cell tips was reduced in the kin1-T299A mutant (Figure S3A). Thus, Ssp1 phosphorylation of the Kin1 activation loop leads to both Kin1 autophosphorylation and Kin1 phosphorylation of Pal1. These modifications promote localization of Kin1 and Pal1 at the cell tips.Despite its localization defect, the morphology defect of pal1(7A) cells is much less severe than pal1Δ cells (Figure S3B). kin1(16A) and pal1(7A) mutations did not show synthetic growth defects, consistent with a linear pathway (Figure S3C). To test pal1(7A) function more carefully, we combined it with deletion of tea4, another Kin1 substrate. pal1Δ and tea4Δ mutations are synthetically lethal at high temperature [8]. pal1(7A) tea4Δ double mutant cells failed to grow at high temperature and exhibited severe morphology defects at permissive temperatures (Figures S3D-E). We conclude that phosphorylation by Kin1 is required for the localization and full function of Pal1. This mechanism requires activation of Kin1 by Ssp1, thereby defining a novel Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1 pathway for cell polarity.We next tested reciprocal regulation of Kin1 by Pal1. In pal1Δ mutant cells, Kin1-mEGFP was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm and cortex (Figure 3D). Thus, Kin1 and Pal1 are interdependent for localization, and Pal1 contributes to recruitment of Kin1 to both the cortex and growing cell tips. The reduction of cortical Kin1-mEGFP in pal1Δ cells was unexpected because Kin1 has a phospholipid-binding KA1 domain [27], which is predicted to associate with the plasma membrane [20]. However, a kin1(ΔKA1)-mEGFP mutant had no defects in localization or function (Figure 3E–F). This result led us to dissect the requirements for Kin1 localization and function through structure-function experiments (Figures 3E and S3F). Consistent with proper localization of kin1(ΔKA1), the KA1 domain alone (aa 753-end) only weakly associated with the cortex. We found a critical role for amino acids 511-752 within the previously uncharacterized middle region of Kin1, which contains the majority of autophosphorylation sites (Figure 2C). Kin1(1-510), which truncates both the KA1 domain and the middle region, was nonfunctional and localized to the cytoplasm (Figure S3F). Further, the Kin1(Δ511-752) construct that deletes only the internal region abolished cortical localization and function (Figure S3F). Pal1 localization largely mirrored Kin1 localization in these mutants (Figure S3F), and we did not observe synthetic growth defects when kin1(ΔKA1) or kin1(Δ511-752) were combined with pal1(7A) (Figure S3G-H). We conclude that Kin1 localization and function require the middle region but not the KA1 domain.Kin1(ΔKA1) might localize to the cell cortex by interacting with other proteins. We tested the role of Kin1 substrates Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 3G and S3I). pal1Δ prevented cortical localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) but not full-length Kin1 (Figure 3D). This result indicates that cortical targeting by the Kin1 KA1 domain is dispensable in the presence of Pal1. The localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) at the cell tips and cell cortex was also reduced but not abolished in the pal1(7A) mutant (Figure 3G). These combined results suggest that a physical interaction between Kin1 and Pal1 reciprocally promotes their localization for proper cell polarity.In addition to our in vitro kinase assays, we used two independent approaches to test the physical interaction of Kin1-Pal1. First, Kin1 and Pal1 exhibited strong interaction in vivo by BiFC (Figure 3H). This interaction was not simply due to colocalization at cell ends because Kin1 did not associate by BiFC with Gef1, an unrelated protein at cell ends. Pal1 interacted with Kin1(511-752) but not Kin1(1-510) by BiFC, indicating that the Kin1 middle region is both necessary and sufficient to interact with Pal1 in this assay (Figure 3H). Second, purified GST-Kin1(511-752) associated with Pal1-mEGFP in yeast cell extracts, but GST alone did not (Figure 3I–J). Interestingly, the Pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant retained physical interaction with GST-Kin1(511-752). We conclude that Kin1 localizes to the cortex and cell ends primarily by associating with its substrate Pal1, while the KA1 domain can act to promote membrane association. This two-part mechanism is reminiscent of the C. elegans Kin1-related kinase PAR-1, which localizes due to both its membrane-binding KA1 domain and binding to its ligand PAR-2 [28].

Interdependent localization of Kin1 and its substrate Pal1

We investigated the connection between Kin1 and its substrate Pal1, a fungal protein that interacts with endocytic proteins [21]. pal1Δ and kin1Δ mutants exhibit similar phenotypic defects in cell shape and septation [4, 21]. In addition, Pal1 localizes to growing cell ends and to the cell middle at division, similar to Kin1 [21, 26]. Pal1-mEGFP localization to cell ends was lost in kin1Δ mutants (Figure 3A) or upon inhibition of kin1-as1 cells (Figure 3B). Next, we generated a pal1(7A) mutant by mutating 7 residues phosphorylated by Kin1 to alanine. The pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant localized uniformly around the cell cortex (Figure 3C), showing that Kin1 phosphorylates Pal1 to promote its localization to growing cell tips. Further, Pal1 localization at cell tips was reduced in the kin1-T299A mutant (Figure S3A). Thus, Ssp1 phosphorylation of the Kin1 activation loop leads to both Kin1 autophosphorylation and Kin1 phosphorylation of Pal1. These modifications promote localization of Kin1 and Pal1 at the cell tips.

Despite its localization defect, the morphology defect of pal1(7A) cells is much less severe than pal1Δ cells (Figure S3B). kin1(16A) and pal1(7A) mutations did not show synthetic growth defects, consistent with a linear pathway (Figure S3C). To test pal1(7A) function more carefully, we combined it with deletion of tea4, another Kin1 substrate. pal1Δ and tea4Δ mutations are synthetically lethal at high temperature [8]. pal1(7A) tea4Δ double mutant cells failed to grow at high temperature and exhibited severe morphology defects at permissive temperatures (Figures S3D-E). We conclude that phosphorylation by Kin1 is required for the localization and full function of Pal1. This mechanism requires activation of Kin1 by Ssp1, thereby defining a novel Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1 pathway for cell polarity.

We next tested reciprocal regulation of Kin1 by Pal1. In pal1Δ mutant cells, Kin1-mEGFP was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm and cortex (Figure 3D). Thus, Kin1 and Pal1 are interdependent for localization, and Pal1 contributes to recruitment of Kin1 to both the cortex and growing cell tips. The reduction of cortical Kin1-mEGFP in pal1Δ cells was unexpected because Kin1 has a phospholipid-binding KA1 domain [27], which is predicted to associate with the plasma membrane [20]. However, a kin1(ΔKA1)-mEGFP mutant had no defects in localization or function (Figure 3E–F). This result led us to dissect the requirements for Kin1 localization and function through structure-function experiments (Figures 3E and S3F). Consistent with proper localization of kin1(ΔKA1), the KA1 domain alone (aa 753-end) only weakly associated with the cortex. We found a critical role for amino acids 511-752 within the previously uncharacterized middle region of Kin1, which contains the majority of autophosphorylation sites (Figure 2C). Kin1(1-510), which truncates both the KA1 domain and the middle region, was nonfunctional and localized to the cytoplasm (Figure S3F). Further, the Kin1(Δ511-752) construct that deletes only the internal region abolished cortical localization and function (Figure S3F). Pal1 localization largely mirrored Kin1 localization in these mutants (Figure S3F), and we did not observe synthetic growth defects when kin1(ΔKA1) or kin1(Δ511-752) were combined with pal1(7A) (Figure S3G-H). We conclude that Kin1 localization and function require the middle region but not the KA1 domain.

Kin1(ΔKA1) might localize to the cell cortex by interacting with other proteins. We tested the role of Kin1 substrates Pal1, Tea4, and Mod5 (Figure 3G and S3I). pal1Δ prevented cortical localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) but not full-length Kin1 (Figure 3D). This result indicates that cortical targeting by the Kin1 KA1 domain is dispensable in the presence of Pal1. The localization of Kin1(ΔKA1) at the cell tips and cell cortex was also reduced but not abolished in the pal1(7A) mutant (Figure 3G). These combined results suggest that a physical interaction between Kin1 and Pal1 reciprocally promotes their localization for proper cell polarity.

In addition to our in vitro kinase assays, we used two independent approaches to test the physical interaction of Kin1-Pal1. First, Kin1 and Pal1 exhibited strong interaction in vivo by BiFC (Figure 3H). This interaction was not simply due to colocalization at cell ends because Kin1 did not associate by BiFC with Gef1, an unrelated protein at cell ends. Pal1 interacted with Kin1(511-752) but not Kin1(1-510) by BiFC, indicating that the Kin1 middle region is both necessary and sufficient to interact with Pal1 in this assay (Figure 3H). Second, purified GST-Kin1(511-752) associated with Pal1-mEGFP in yeast cell extracts, but GST alone did not (Figure 3I–J). Interestingly, the Pal1(7A)-mEGFP mutant retained physical interaction with GST-Kin1(511-752). We conclude that Kin1 localizes to the cortex and cell ends primarily by associating with its substrate Pal1, while the KA1 domain can act to promote membrane association. This two-part mechanism is reminiscent of the C. elegans Kin1-related kinase PAR-1, which localizes due to both its membrane-binding KA1 domain and binding to its ligand PAR-2 [28].

Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substratesWe considered how this new pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5) connects with other cell polarity pathways. Several Kin1 substrates were previously shown to be phosphorylated by the cell polarity kinase Pom1 (Figure 4A) [8], and kin1Δ and pom1Δ are synthetically lethal [7]. Interestingly, Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylated largely distinct residues on shared substrates Pal1, Mod5, and Tea4 (Figure S4A). Consistent with distinct phosphorylation sites, Pal1 localization depends on Kin1 (Figure 3) but not on Pom1 [8]. We found that Kin1 and Pom1 are enriched at opposite ends of growing cells (Figures 4B, S4B). Using a kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant strain, inhibiting both kinases led to T-shaped cells that were not observed in either kin1-as1 or pom1-as1 single mutants (Figures 4C–D). Thus, the combined activities of Kin1 and Pom1 kinases at opposite cell ends restrict polarized growth to the cell ends. These kinases phosphorylate largely distinct residues on shared substrates.We also observed defects in division septa upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells (Figures 4C, E). Our phosphoproteomics identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation of two cytokinesis proteins, Cyk3 and Cdc15 (Table S2), which physically interact [29]. Cdc15 scaffolds the cytokinetic ring to the plasma membrane, and Cyk3 coordinates septum assembly with ring constriction [30–32]. Previous phosphoproteomics also identified Pom1-dependent phosphorylation of Cyk3 and Cdc15 in cells [8], and Kin1 physically associates with Cdc15 [31]. Pom1 also regulates Cdc15 localization in S. japonicus [33], and has been functionally linked to Cdc15 in S. pombe [34]. In thiophosphate kinase assays, both Kin1-as1-mEGFP and Pom1-as1-3HA directly thiophosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3 (Figure S4C). We performed a second set of in vitro kinase assays, and then used LC-MS/MS to map phosphorylation sites. Kin1 and Pom1 both directly phosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3, but at largely non-overlapping sites (Figure S4D and Table S3). We conclude that Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substrates for both cell polarity and cytokinesis.Finally, we tested how Kin1 and Pom1 cooperate to regulate their shared cytokinesis targets in cells. Cyk3 localizes at cell ends during interphase and then at the cytokinetic ring during division [30]. Upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells, Cyk3-GFP did not fully relocalize to the cytokinetic ring during division, exhibited by residual signal at cell ends (Figures 4F–G). In movies of inhibited cells, Cyk3-GFP remained partially at cell tips during cell division (Figure S4E). Cyk3 also mislocalized during interphase in both kin1-as1 and kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells upon inhibition (Figures 4F, S4F).In addition to Cyk3, organization of Cdc15 at cell division required both protein kinases. We inhibited GFP-cdc15 kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells with 3-MB-PP1 and observed a strand of GFP-Cdc15 trailing off the cytokinetic ring, resembling a “lasso” (Figures 4H–I). Lassos were not observed in single as mutants or DMSO controls (Figures 4H–I, S4G-H). Lasso strands emerged during constrictions of the cytokinetic ring and contained Rlc1, a marker of the actomyosin ring (Figure 4J, lasso observed in 7 out of 9 cells). Cytokinetic rings were also positioned off-center in inhibited kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells due to Pom1 [2, 33, 34] (Figure 4I). We conclude that Kin1 works with Pom1 to organize cytokinesis proteins including Cyk3 and Cdc15. Their combined activities relocalize Cyk3 from the cell tips to the cytokinetic ring, and generate a coherent cytokinetic ring through regulation of Cdc15.

Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substrates

We considered how this new pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5) connects with other cell polarity pathways. Several Kin1 substrates were previously shown to be phosphorylated by the cell polarity kinase Pom1 (Figure 4A) [8], and kin1Δ and pom1Δ are synthetically lethal [7]. Interestingly, Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylated largely distinct residues on shared substrates Pal1, Mod5, and Tea4 (Figure S4A). Consistent with distinct phosphorylation sites, Pal1 localization depends on Kin1 (Figure 3) but not on Pom1 [8]. We found that Kin1 and Pom1 are enriched at opposite ends of growing cells (Figures 4B, S4B). Using a kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant strain, inhibiting both kinases led to T-shaped cells that were not observed in either kin1-as1 or pom1-as1 single mutants (Figures 4C–D). Thus, the combined activities of Kin1 and Pom1 kinases at opposite cell ends restrict polarized growth to the cell ends. These kinases phosphorylate largely distinct residues on shared substrates.

We also observed defects in division septa upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells (Figures 4C, E). Our phosphoproteomics identified Kin1-dependent phosphorylation of two cytokinesis proteins, Cyk3 and Cdc15 (Table S2), which physically interact [29]. Cdc15 scaffolds the cytokinetic ring to the plasma membrane, and Cyk3 coordinates septum assembly with ring constriction [30–32]. Previous phosphoproteomics also identified Pom1-dependent phosphorylation of Cyk3 and Cdc15 in cells [8], and Kin1 physically associates with Cdc15 [31]. Pom1 also regulates Cdc15 localization in S. japonicus [33], and has been functionally linked to Cdc15 in S. pombe [34]. In thiophosphate kinase assays, both Kin1-as1-mEGFP and Pom1-as1-3HA directly thiophosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3 (Figure S4C). We performed a second set of in vitro kinase assays, and then used LC-MS/MS to map phosphorylation sites. Kin1 and Pom1 both directly phosphorylated Cdc15 and Cyk3, but at largely non-overlapping sites (Figure S4D and Table S3). We conclude that Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate distinct sites on shared substrates for both cell polarity and cytokinesis.

Finally, we tested how Kin1 and Pom1 cooperate to regulate their shared cytokinesis targets in cells. Cyk3 localizes at cell ends during interphase and then at the cytokinetic ring during division [30]. Upon inhibition of kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells, Cyk3-GFP did not fully relocalize to the cytokinetic ring during division, exhibited by residual signal at cell ends (Figures 4F–G). In movies of inhibited cells, Cyk3-GFP remained partially at cell tips during cell division (Figure S4E). Cyk3 also mislocalized during interphase in both kin1-as1 and kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells upon inhibition (Figures 4F, S4F).

In addition to Cyk3, organization of Cdc15 at cell division required both protein kinases. We inhibited GFP-cdc15 kin1-as1 pom1-as1 cells with 3-MB-PP1 and observed a strand of GFP-Cdc15 trailing off the cytokinetic ring, resembling a “lasso” (Figures 4H–I). Lassos were not observed in single as mutants or DMSO controls (Figures 4H–I, S4G-H). Lasso strands emerged during constrictions of the cytokinetic ring and contained Rlc1, a marker of the actomyosin ring (Figure 4J, lasso observed in 7 out of 9 cells). Cytokinetic rings were also positioned off-center in inhibited kin1-as1 pom1-as1 double mutant cells due to Pom1 [2, 33, 34] (Figure 4I). We conclude that Kin1 works with Pom1 to organize cytokinesis proteins including Cyk3 and Cdc15. Their combined activities relocalize Cyk3 from the cell tips to the cytokinetic ring, and generate a coherent cytokinetic ring through regulation of Cdc15.

ConclusionsWe uncovered a multi-step signaling pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5/Cyk3/Cdc15) that intersects with Pom1 as part of a larger cell polarity signaling network (Figure 4K). Ssp1 promotes bipolar growth by phosphorylating the activation loop of MARK/PAR-1 kinase Kin1, which is the third known substrate of Ssp1. Kin1 and its substrate Pal1 are interdependent for localization and function. Pal1 is one of several proteins also phosphorylated by the DYRK Pom1. Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate these shared substrates at largely non-overlapping sites, and inhibition of Kin1 and Pom1 results in synthetic defects in these substrates.The cell polarity program plays a critical role in cell division and cytokinesis [35], but the signaling pathways that distinguish cell polarity during growth versus division are poorly understood. Our work shows that polarity kinases Kin1 and Pom1 promote localization of Cyk3 to the division site and organize Cdc15 in the contractile ring. The functional connection between Kin1 and Pom1 in cell polarity and cytokinesis may represent a general theme for MARK/PAR-1 and DYRK kinases in other organisms. For example, polarity in the one-cell C. elegans embryo requires Kin1-related PAR-1 and Pom1-related MBK-2. These two kinases phosphorylate distinct sites on the polarity protein MEX-5, leading to regulation of MEX-5 localization (by PAR-1) [36, 37] and function (by MBK-2) [38]. Large-scale studies examining additional substrates in C. elegans and other systems may reveal more broad overlap between these kinase families, as we have shown in fission yeast. Functional connections between protein kinases in complex signaling networks can be direct, as for Ssp1-Kin1, or indirect, as for the shared substrates of Kin1 and Pom1. These connections are likely required to coordinate the many events of cell polarity, and to ensure robustness and fidelity of the cell polarity control system.

Conclusions

We uncovered a multi-step signaling pathway (Ssp1➔Kin1➔Pal1/Tea4/Mod5/Cyk3/Cdc15) that intersects with Pom1 as part of a larger cell polarity signaling network (Figure 4K). Ssp1 promotes bipolar growth by phosphorylating the activation loop of MARK/PAR-1 kinase Kin1, which is the third known substrate of Ssp1. Kin1 and its substrate Pal1 are interdependent for localization and function. Pal1 is one of several proteins also phosphorylated by the DYRK Pom1. Kin1 and Pom1 phosphorylate these shared substrates at largely non-overlapping sites, and inhibition of Kin1 and Pom1 results in synthetic defects in these substrates.

The cell polarity program plays a critical role in cell division and cytokinesis [35], but the signaling pathways that distinguish cell polarity during growth versus division are poorly understood. Our work shows that polarity kinases Kin1 and Pom1 promote localization of Cyk3 to the division site and organize Cdc15 in the contractile ring. The functional connection between Kin1 and Pom1 in cell polarity and cytokinesis may represent a general theme for MARK/PAR-1 and DYRK kinases in other organisms. For example, polarity in the one-cell C. elegans embryo requires Kin1-related PAR-1 and Pom1-related MBK-2. These two kinases phosphorylate distinct sites on the polarity protein MEX-5, leading to regulation of MEX-5 localization (by PAR-1) [36, 37] and function (by MBK-2) [38]. Large-scale studies examining additional substrates in C. elegans and other systems may reveal more broad overlap between these kinase families, as we have shown in fission yeast. Functional connections between protein kinases in complex signaling networks can be direct, as for Ssp1-Kin1, or indirect, as for the shared substrates of Kin1 and Pom1. These connections are likely required to coordinate the many events of cell polarity, and to ensure robustness and fidelity of the cell polarity control system.

STAR METHODSCONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARINGFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, James B. Moseley (james.b.moseley@dartmouth.edu).EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSThe fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table S4. For microscopy experiments, cells were grown in shaking flasks in EMM4S medium at 32°C to mid-log phase unless otherwise indicated.METHOD DETAILSYeast strains and growthStandard S. pombe media and methods were used [39]. Gene tagging and deletion were performed using PCR and homologous recombination [40], and correct integrations were verified by colony PCR, fluorescence, or backcross as needed. The non-phosphorylatable kin1 mutants, kinase-dead kin1(K154R) and analog-sensitive kin1-as1 (F220G) alleles were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using QuikChange II mutagenesis (Stratagene) kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and integrated into kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus using pJK210 [41]. The wild type pJK210-kin1+ plasmid integrated in this manner fully rescued all kin1Δ mutant phenotypes. The kin1(16A) mutant allele was synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment (Integrated DNA Technologies), and then inserted into the PCR-linearized fragment from pJK210-kin1-mEGFP plasmid by Gibson Assembly Cloning Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The non-phosphorylatable mutants of Pal1 were also generated with the same method except that these alleles were integrated at the leu1 locus using pJK148 [41]. Double mutants were generated by tetrad dissections. To generate Kin1 truncations, Kin1 fragments were cloned into the pJK210 vector using XhoI and NotI sites, GFP was inserted at the C-terminus of Kin1 using NotI, and integrated into the kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus. All plasmids were sequenced for verification. For growth assays in Figure S1F S3C-D, S3G-H, cells were spotted by 10-fold serial dilutions (started at OD595 = 0.1) on YE4S plates and were incubated at 32°C or 37°C for 3-4 days before scanning.Large-scale phosphoproteomic screensThe strain used for phosphoproteomic screen was JM4023 (kin1Δ::kanR ura4::[pJK210-Pkin1-kin1-as1(F220G)-Tkin1]). The experimental procedure was similar to previous work [8], except cells were grown in EMM2 (Edinburgh Minimal Medium with supplements) or 2X YE (Yeast Extract). After 10 generations of growth at 32°C, cell cultures were treated for 10 minutes with final concentration of 2 μM 3-MB-PP1 (1-(tert-Butyl)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine-4-amine (Toronto Research Chemicals), while control culture was treated with an equal volume of DMSO. 5 minutes was the minimal time needed to observe Kin1-as1 inhibition by 3-MB-PP1, and we used 10 minutes inhibition for these large-scale experiments to ensure maximal identification of sites. Each culture volume was 1.5 liters in 2X YE or 3 liters in EMM2. The cultures were then harvested by 6-minute centrifugation at 8,000g at 4°C, washed once with 200 ml ice-cold PBS, and then centrifuged again. The pellet was lysed as previously described [8].Lysed powder was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.6, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences), followed by three rounds of sonication (15 sec each) with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were then spun for 30 min at 2851 × g, and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce/ThermoFisher Scientific). Phosphopeptide enrichment followed by dimethyl-labeling was performed as previously described [42]. After labeling, samples were combined and fractionated by pentafluorophenyl (PFP)-RP chromatography [43]. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described [44]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)ImmunoprecipitationFission yeast cells were grown at least eight generations at 32°C in rich medium. For Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-as1-mEGFP, Pom1-mEGFP, pom1-as1-3HA pull-down experiments, 25 OD595 cells were harvested and lysed in 200 μl IP buffer (20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid [HEPES], pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets [Roche, Indianapolis, IN], 25 mM NaF, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate) with 400 μl glass beads using a Mini-beadbeater-16 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK; two cycles of 2 min at maximum speed) at 4°C. Lysates were then spun at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were incubated at 4°C for 1.5 h with anti-GFP magnetic beads (Allele Biotech) or anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce).For in vitro phosphatase assay, immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-16A-mEGFP, and kin1-as1-mEGFP with/without 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor were treated with/without λ-phosphatase (New England Biolabs Inc.) at 30°C for 30 minutes according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP migrated as a double band for unknown reasons that were not affected by λ-phosphatase treatment.In vitro kinase assays and western blotsFull length Ssp1-as1 and the fragments of Tea4 (amino acids 113-436), Mod5 (amino acids 28-495), and Cyk3 (amino acids 81-388) were cloned into pGEX6P1 (GST tag) vector (GE Healthcare), expressed in BL21 (Rosetta) E. coli strain, and purified with glutathione-agarose resin (Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described [8]. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with 3C protease at 4°C or by elution with glutathione. Full length Pal1 was cloned into pQE30 vector (Qiagen), expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E. coli, and purified with Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen). Purified protein was eluted with 250 mM imidazole [8]. The fragment of Cdc15 (358-928) was cloned into pMBP-parallel1 [46], expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E.coli, and purified with Amylose resin (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with AcTEV™ Protease (Invitrogen) at 4°C. For in vitro kinase assays, the purified proteins were incubated with immunoprecipitated wild type Kin1 or catalytically inactive Kin1(K154R) or wild type Pom1 or catalytically inactive Pom1 (K728R) in kinase assay buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol) supplemented with 20 μM ATP in 40 μL reactions at 30°C for 30 minutes. Reactions were stopped by boiling for 5 minutes at 80°C in buffer (1% SDS, 15% glycerol, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.7, 100mM NaCl), reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer for 5 minutes at 99°C. Reactions were separated by SDS-PAGE analysis. Bands were excised, destained, trypsin-digested, and peptides were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above. We detected some phosphorylation of substrates by kinase-dead Kin1 and kinase-dead Pom1 immunoprecipitates, likely due to contaminating kinases. Therefore, we determined the degree of phosphorylation by label-free quantification. The peak intensity of each peptide was determined for wild-type Kin1 and kinase-dead Kin1 reactions. Sites were considered to be phosphorylated by Kin1 if the peptide intensity was two-fold or more increased upon treatment with wild type Kin1 versus kinase-dead Kin1, or if they were present in reactions with wild type but absent from reactions with kinase-dead. The same criteria were applied for Pom1 substrates.For in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays, the kinase reactions were performed using 6-Bn-ATP-γ-S (Axxora) in place of ATP. The reactions were stopped by adding EDTA at 20mM final concentration. Subsequently, alkylation of substrates was performed by adding p-nitrobenzyl mesylate for a final concentration of 2.5mM (Abcam Biochemicals) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hrs. After alkylation, samples were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and boiled for 5 min at 99° C. Western blots were performed using thiophosphate ester specific RabMAb (ab92570) according to manufacturer’s protocol.Whole-cell extracts were prepared as described [13]. Western blots were probed with anti-GFP [47], anti-myc (Santa Cruz), and anti-HA (Covance) antibodies. Rabbit anti-Kin1-pT299 antibody was generated against the phosphopeptide YRRQSRLR[pT]FCGSLYF (21st Century Biochemicals, Inc). Secondary antibodies were conjugated to IRDye680RD or IRDye800CW (LI-COR Biosciences). Blots were developed by Odyssey CLx Imaging System (LI-COR), and bands were quantified in Image Studio Lite (LI-COR) for figure S2E graph.In vitro binding assayGST control and GST-kin1 (a.a 511–752) were expressed in E. coli BL21(Rosetta) cells using pGEX6P1 vector. Cells were grown to OD600 = 0.3 at 37°C, and then expression was induced for 3 hrs at 37°C by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside to 0.4 mM. To isolate GST fusion proteins, cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 300 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and then lysed by French press. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation, and then incubated with glutathione-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed extensively using the same lysis buffer, and then washed into binding buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF). Cell lysates containing Pal1-mEGFP or pal1-7A-mEGFP from S. pombe were prepared using the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and incubated with GST-kin1(511-752) or GST on agarose resin for 1 hour at 4°C by rocking. Agarose beads were washed with the binding buffer, and proteins were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and analyzed for SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.Imaging and data analysisMicroscopy was performed at room temperature with a DeltaVision Imaging System (Applied Precision), equipped with an Olympus IX-71 inverted wide-field microscope, a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 camera, and Insight solid-state illumination unit. All images are single focal planes positioned in the cell middle unless indicated. All fluorescence images are shown with inverted look-up table. All image analysis was performed on ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). For quantification of Pal1 or Kin1 mislocalized cells, the absence of strong fluorescent signal at cell ends was considered mislocalization. For time-lapse imaging, cells were placed onto agarose pads containing the same growth medium and 2% agarose. For Figure 4I, 25 z-stacks were acquired with 0.2 μm step size and iteratively deconvolved in SoftWoRx software (Applied Precision). All statistical differences were determined by a two-tailed Student’s t-test using Excel (Microsoft).For gene ontology analysis, proteins with phosphopeptides that were >16-fold reduced by Kin1-as1 inhibition were selected. From this list, any proteins containing phosphopeptides that were 1.5-fold reduced by 3-MB-PP1 treatment in wildtype strain [8] were removed for the analysis to eliminate non-specific inhibition by the drug. The process and component analysis were performed using Princeton GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/), using all S. pombe proteins as a background. For actin staining, cells were grown to log phase in YE4S and fixed by adding 16% paraformaldehyde (Fisher scientific) at the growing temperature for 10 min. Cells were washed with PEM buffer (0.1 M Na Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM MgCl2) [48] and permeabilized with 1% Triton X-100 for 2min, and washed in PEM buffer for three times. Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (ThermoFisher) was dissolved in MeOH and dried according to manufacturer’s protocol, and resuspended in PEM buffer and used to stain cells for 30 min in dark. After staining, cells were washed once in PEM buffer prior to imaging. For images in Figure 1D and F, maximum projections were generated using 0.2-μm focal planes throughout the entire cell (25 steps, 5 μm total) using ImageJ.QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISFor all statistical analyses, two-tailed unpaired t test (unequal variances) was performed using Microsoft Excel. P values are described in the Figure legends. Total n refers to the number of cells analyzed. Analysis of phosphoproteomic data is described in the Methods details.DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITYThe full list of proteins identified in the phosphoproteomic screen is available with the online version of the paper as table S1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)

STAR METHODS

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARINGFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, James B. Moseley (james.b.moseley@dartmouth.edu).

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, James B. Moseley (james.b.moseley@dartmouth.edu).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSThe fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table S4. For microscopy experiments, cells were grown in shaking flasks in EMM4S medium at 32°C to mid-log phase unless otherwise indicated.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe strains used in this study are listed in Table S4. For microscopy experiments, cells were grown in shaking flasks in EMM4S medium at 32°C to mid-log phase unless otherwise indicated.

METHOD DETAILSYeast strains and growthStandard S. pombe media and methods were used [39]. Gene tagging and deletion were performed using PCR and homologous recombination [40], and correct integrations were verified by colony PCR, fluorescence, or backcross as needed. The non-phosphorylatable kin1 mutants, kinase-dead kin1(K154R) and analog-sensitive kin1-as1 (F220G) alleles were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using QuikChange II mutagenesis (Stratagene) kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and integrated into kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus using pJK210 [41]. The wild type pJK210-kin1+ plasmid integrated in this manner fully rescued all kin1Δ mutant phenotypes. The kin1(16A) mutant allele was synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment (Integrated DNA Technologies), and then inserted into the PCR-linearized fragment from pJK210-kin1-mEGFP plasmid by Gibson Assembly Cloning Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The non-phosphorylatable mutants of Pal1 were also generated with the same method except that these alleles were integrated at the leu1 locus using pJK148 [41]. Double mutants were generated by tetrad dissections. To generate Kin1 truncations, Kin1 fragments were cloned into the pJK210 vector using XhoI and NotI sites, GFP was inserted at the C-terminus of Kin1 using NotI, and integrated into the kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus. All plasmids were sequenced for verification. For growth assays in Figure S1F S3C-D, S3G-H, cells were spotted by 10-fold serial dilutions (started at OD595 = 0.1) on YE4S plates and were incubated at 32°C or 37°C for 3-4 days before scanning.Large-scale phosphoproteomic screensThe strain used for phosphoproteomic screen was JM4023 (kin1Δ::kanR ura4::[pJK210-Pkin1-kin1-as1(F220G)-Tkin1]). The experimental procedure was similar to previous work [8], except cells were grown in EMM2 (Edinburgh Minimal Medium with supplements) or 2X YE (Yeast Extract). After 10 generations of growth at 32°C, cell cultures were treated for 10 minutes with final concentration of 2 μM 3-MB-PP1 (1-(tert-Butyl)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine-4-amine (Toronto Research Chemicals), while control culture was treated with an equal volume of DMSO. 5 minutes was the minimal time needed to observe Kin1-as1 inhibition by 3-MB-PP1, and we used 10 minutes inhibition for these large-scale experiments to ensure maximal identification of sites. Each culture volume was 1.5 liters in 2X YE or 3 liters in EMM2. The cultures were then harvested by 6-minute centrifugation at 8,000g at 4°C, washed once with 200 ml ice-cold PBS, and then centrifuged again. The pellet was lysed as previously described [8].Lysed powder was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.6, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences), followed by three rounds of sonication (15 sec each) with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were then spun for 30 min at 2851 × g, and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce/ThermoFisher Scientific). Phosphopeptide enrichment followed by dimethyl-labeling was performed as previously described [42]. After labeling, samples were combined and fractionated by pentafluorophenyl (PFP)-RP chromatography [43]. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described [44]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)ImmunoprecipitationFission yeast cells were grown at least eight generations at 32°C in rich medium. For Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-as1-mEGFP, Pom1-mEGFP, pom1-as1-3HA pull-down experiments, 25 OD595 cells were harvested and lysed in 200 μl IP buffer (20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid [HEPES], pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets [Roche, Indianapolis, IN], 25 mM NaF, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate) with 400 μl glass beads using a Mini-beadbeater-16 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK; two cycles of 2 min at maximum speed) at 4°C. Lysates were then spun at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were incubated at 4°C for 1.5 h with anti-GFP magnetic beads (Allele Biotech) or anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce).For in vitro phosphatase assay, immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-16A-mEGFP, and kin1-as1-mEGFP with/without 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor were treated with/without λ-phosphatase (New England Biolabs Inc.) at 30°C for 30 minutes according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP migrated as a double band for unknown reasons that were not affected by λ-phosphatase treatment.In vitro kinase assays and western blotsFull length Ssp1-as1 and the fragments of Tea4 (amino acids 113-436), Mod5 (amino acids 28-495), and Cyk3 (amino acids 81-388) were cloned into pGEX6P1 (GST tag) vector (GE Healthcare), expressed in BL21 (Rosetta) E. coli strain, and purified with glutathione-agarose resin (Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described [8]. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with 3C protease at 4°C or by elution with glutathione. Full length Pal1 was cloned into pQE30 vector (Qiagen), expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E. coli, and purified with Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen). Purified protein was eluted with 250 mM imidazole [8]. The fragment of Cdc15 (358-928) was cloned into pMBP-parallel1 [46], expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E.coli, and purified with Amylose resin (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with AcTEV™ Protease (Invitrogen) at 4°C. For in vitro kinase assays, the purified proteins were incubated with immunoprecipitated wild type Kin1 or catalytically inactive Kin1(K154R) or wild type Pom1 or catalytically inactive Pom1 (K728R) in kinase assay buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol) supplemented with 20 μM ATP in 40 μL reactions at 30°C for 30 minutes. Reactions were stopped by boiling for 5 minutes at 80°C in buffer (1% SDS, 15% glycerol, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.7, 100mM NaCl), reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer for 5 minutes at 99°C. Reactions were separated by SDS-PAGE analysis. Bands were excised, destained, trypsin-digested, and peptides were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above. We detected some phosphorylation of substrates by kinase-dead Kin1 and kinase-dead Pom1 immunoprecipitates, likely due to contaminating kinases. Therefore, we determined the degree of phosphorylation by label-free quantification. The peak intensity of each peptide was determined for wild-type Kin1 and kinase-dead Kin1 reactions. Sites were considered to be phosphorylated by Kin1 if the peptide intensity was two-fold or more increased upon treatment with wild type Kin1 versus kinase-dead Kin1, or if they were present in reactions with wild type but absent from reactions with kinase-dead. The same criteria were applied for Pom1 substrates.For in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays, the kinase reactions were performed using 6-Bn-ATP-γ-S (Axxora) in place of ATP. The reactions were stopped by adding EDTA at 20mM final concentration. Subsequently, alkylation of substrates was performed by adding p-nitrobenzyl mesylate for a final concentration of 2.5mM (Abcam Biochemicals) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hrs. After alkylation, samples were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and boiled for 5 min at 99° C. Western blots were performed using thiophosphate ester specific RabMAb (ab92570) according to manufacturer’s protocol.Whole-cell extracts were prepared as described [13]. Western blots were probed with anti-GFP [47], anti-myc (Santa Cruz), and anti-HA (Covance) antibodies. Rabbit anti-Kin1-pT299 antibody was generated against the phosphopeptide YRRQSRLR[pT]FCGSLYF (21st Century Biochemicals, Inc). Secondary antibodies were conjugated to IRDye680RD or IRDye800CW (LI-COR Biosciences). Blots were developed by Odyssey CLx Imaging System (LI-COR), and bands were quantified in Image Studio Lite (LI-COR) for figure S2E graph.In vitro binding assayGST control and GST-kin1 (a.a 511–752) were expressed in E. coli BL21(Rosetta) cells using pGEX6P1 vector. Cells were grown to OD600 = 0.3 at 37°C, and then expression was induced for 3 hrs at 37°C by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside to 0.4 mM. To isolate GST fusion proteins, cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 300 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and then lysed by French press. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation, and then incubated with glutathione-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed extensively using the same lysis buffer, and then washed into binding buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF). Cell lysates containing Pal1-mEGFP or pal1-7A-mEGFP from S. pombe were prepared using the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and incubated with GST-kin1(511-752) or GST on agarose resin for 1 hour at 4°C by rocking. Agarose beads were washed with the binding buffer, and proteins were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and analyzed for SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.Imaging and data analysisMicroscopy was performed at room temperature with a DeltaVision Imaging System (Applied Precision), equipped with an Olympus IX-71 inverted wide-field microscope, a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 camera, and Insight solid-state illumination unit. All images are single focal planes positioned in the cell middle unless indicated. All fluorescence images are shown with inverted look-up table. All image analysis was performed on ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). For quantification of Pal1 or Kin1 mislocalized cells, the absence of strong fluorescent signal at cell ends was considered mislocalization. For time-lapse imaging, cells were placed onto agarose pads containing the same growth medium and 2% agarose. For Figure 4I, 25 z-stacks were acquired with 0.2 μm step size and iteratively deconvolved in SoftWoRx software (Applied Precision). All statistical differences were determined by a two-tailed Student’s t-test using Excel (Microsoft).For gene ontology analysis, proteins with phosphopeptides that were >16-fold reduced by Kin1-as1 inhibition were selected. From this list, any proteins containing phosphopeptides that were 1.5-fold reduced by 3-MB-PP1 treatment in wildtype strain [8] were removed for the analysis to eliminate non-specific inhibition by the drug. The process and component analysis were performed using Princeton GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/), using all S. pombe proteins as a background. For actin staining, cells were grown to log phase in YE4S and fixed by adding 16% paraformaldehyde (Fisher scientific) at the growing temperature for 10 min. Cells were washed with PEM buffer (0.1 M Na Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM MgCl2) [48] and permeabilized with 1% Triton X-100 for 2min, and washed in PEM buffer for three times. Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (ThermoFisher) was dissolved in MeOH and dried according to manufacturer’s protocol, and resuspended in PEM buffer and used to stain cells for 30 min in dark. After staining, cells were washed once in PEM buffer prior to imaging. For images in Figure 1D and F, maximum projections were generated using 0.2-μm focal planes throughout the entire cell (25 steps, 5 μm total) using ImageJ.

METHOD DETAILS

Yeast strains and growthStandard S. pombe media and methods were used [39]. Gene tagging and deletion were performed using PCR and homologous recombination [40], and correct integrations were verified by colony PCR, fluorescence, or backcross as needed. The non-phosphorylatable kin1 mutants, kinase-dead kin1(K154R) and analog-sensitive kin1-as1 (F220G) alleles were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using QuikChange II mutagenesis (Stratagene) kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and integrated into kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus using pJK210 [41]. The wild type pJK210-kin1+ plasmid integrated in this manner fully rescued all kin1Δ mutant phenotypes. The kin1(16A) mutant allele was synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment (Integrated DNA Technologies), and then inserted into the PCR-linearized fragment from pJK210-kin1-mEGFP plasmid by Gibson Assembly Cloning Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The non-phosphorylatable mutants of Pal1 were also generated with the same method except that these alleles were integrated at the leu1 locus using pJK148 [41]. Double mutants were generated by tetrad dissections. To generate Kin1 truncations, Kin1 fragments were cloned into the pJK210 vector using XhoI and NotI sites, GFP was inserted at the C-terminus of Kin1 using NotI, and integrated into the kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus. All plasmids were sequenced for verification. For growth assays in Figure S1F S3C-D, S3G-H, cells were spotted by 10-fold serial dilutions (started at OD595 = 0.1) on YE4S plates and were incubated at 32°C or 37°C for 3-4 days before scanning.

Yeast strains and growth

Standard S. pombe media and methods were used [39]. Gene tagging and deletion were performed using PCR and homologous recombination [40], and correct integrations were verified by colony PCR, fluorescence, or backcross as needed. The non-phosphorylatable kin1 mutants, kinase-dead kin1(K154R) and analog-sensitive kin1-as1 (F220G) alleles were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using QuikChange II mutagenesis (Stratagene) kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and integrated into kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus using pJK210 [41]. The wild type pJK210-kin1+ plasmid integrated in this manner fully rescued all kin1Δ mutant phenotypes. The kin1(16A) mutant allele was synthesized as a gBlocks Gene Fragment (Integrated DNA Technologies), and then inserted into the PCR-linearized fragment from pJK210-kin1-mEGFP plasmid by Gibson Assembly Cloning Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The non-phosphorylatable mutants of Pal1 were also generated with the same method except that these alleles were integrated at the leu1 locus using pJK148 [41]. Double mutants were generated by tetrad dissections. To generate Kin1 truncations, Kin1 fragments were cloned into the pJK210 vector using XhoI and NotI sites, GFP was inserted at the C-terminus of Kin1 using NotI, and integrated into the kin1Δ::kanR strain at the ura4 locus. All plasmids were sequenced for verification. For growth assays in Figure S1F S3C-D, S3G-H, cells were spotted by 10-fold serial dilutions (started at OD595 = 0.1) on YE4S plates and were incubated at 32°C or 37°C for 3-4 days before scanning.

Large-scale phosphoproteomic screensThe strain used for phosphoproteomic screen was JM4023 (kin1Δ::kanR ura4::[pJK210-Pkin1-kin1-as1(F220G)-Tkin1]). The experimental procedure was similar to previous work [8], except cells were grown in EMM2 (Edinburgh Minimal Medium with supplements) or 2X YE (Yeast Extract). After 10 generations of growth at 32°C, cell cultures were treated for 10 minutes with final concentration of 2 μM 3-MB-PP1 (1-(tert-Butyl)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine-4-amine (Toronto Research Chemicals), while control culture was treated with an equal volume of DMSO. 5 minutes was the minimal time needed to observe Kin1-as1 inhibition by 3-MB-PP1, and we used 10 minutes inhibition for these large-scale experiments to ensure maximal identification of sites. Each culture volume was 1.5 liters in 2X YE or 3 liters in EMM2. The cultures were then harvested by 6-minute centrifugation at 8,000g at 4°C, washed once with 200 ml ice-cold PBS, and then centrifuged again. The pellet was lysed as previously described [8].Lysed powder was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.6, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences), followed by three rounds of sonication (15 sec each) with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were then spun for 30 min at 2851 × g, and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce/ThermoFisher Scientific). Phosphopeptide enrichment followed by dimethyl-labeling was performed as previously described [42]. After labeling, samples were combined and fractionated by pentafluorophenyl (PFP)-RP chromatography [43]. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described [44]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)

Large-scale phosphoproteomic screens

The strain used for phosphoproteomic screen was JM4023 (kin1Δ::kanR ura4::[pJK210-Pkin1-kin1-as1(F220G)-Tkin1]). The experimental procedure was similar to previous work [8], except cells were grown in EMM2 (Edinburgh Minimal Medium with supplements) or 2X YE (Yeast Extract). After 10 generations of growth at 32°C, cell cultures were treated for 10 minutes with final concentration of 2 μM 3-MB-PP1 (1-(tert-Butyl)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine-4-amine (Toronto Research Chemicals), while control culture was treated with an equal volume of DMSO. 5 minutes was the minimal time needed to observe Kin1-as1 inhibition by 3-MB-PP1, and we used 10 minutes inhibition for these large-scale experiments to ensure maximal identification of sites. Each culture volume was 1.5 liters in 2X YE or 3 liters in EMM2. The cultures were then harvested by 6-minute centrifugation at 8,000g at 4°C, washed once with 200 ml ice-cold PBS, and then centrifuged again. The pellet was lysed as previously described [8].

Lysed powder was resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH8.6, 150 mM NaCl, phosphatase inhibitors (2.5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium tartrate) and protease inhibitors (1 mini-Complete EDTA-free tablet per 10 ml lysis buffer; Roche Life Sciences), followed by three rounds of sonication (15 sec each) with intermittent cooling on ice. Lysates were then spun for 30 min at 2851 × g, and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Pierce/ThermoFisher Scientific). Phosphopeptide enrichment followed by dimethyl-labeling was performed as previously described [42]. After labeling, samples were combined and fractionated by pentafluorophenyl (PFP)-RP chromatography [43]. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described [44]. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)

ImmunoprecipitationFission yeast cells were grown at least eight generations at 32°C in rich medium. For Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-as1-mEGFP, Pom1-mEGFP, pom1-as1-3HA pull-down experiments, 25 OD595 cells were harvested and lysed in 200 μl IP buffer (20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid [HEPES], pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets [Roche, Indianapolis, IN], 25 mM NaF, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate) with 400 μl glass beads using a Mini-beadbeater-16 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK; two cycles of 2 min at maximum speed) at 4°C. Lysates were then spun at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were incubated at 4°C for 1.5 h with anti-GFP magnetic beads (Allele Biotech) or anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce).For in vitro phosphatase assay, immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-16A-mEGFP, and kin1-as1-mEGFP with/without 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor were treated with/without λ-phosphatase (New England Biolabs Inc.) at 30°C for 30 minutes according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP migrated as a double band for unknown reasons that were not affected by λ-phosphatase treatment.

Immunoprecipitation

Fission yeast cells were grown at least eight generations at 32°C in rich medium. For Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-as1-mEGFP, Pom1-mEGFP, pom1-as1-3HA pull-down experiments, 25 OD595 cells were harvested and lysed in 200 μl IP buffer (20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid [HEPES], pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride [PMSF], complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablets [Roche, Indianapolis, IN], 25 mM NaF, 50 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate) with 400 μl glass beads using a Mini-beadbeater-16 (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK; two cycles of 2 min at maximum speed) at 4°C. Lysates were then spun at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were incubated at 4°C for 1.5 h with anti-GFP magnetic beads (Allele Biotech) or anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce).

For in vitro phosphatase assay, immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP, kin1-16A-mEGFP, and kin1-as1-mEGFP with/without 3-MB-PP1 inhibitor were treated with/without λ-phosphatase (New England Biolabs Inc.) at 30°C for 30 minutes according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Immunoprecipitated Kin1-mEGFP migrated as a double band for unknown reasons that were not affected by λ-phosphatase treatment.

In vitro kinase assays and western blotsFull length Ssp1-as1 and the fragments of Tea4 (amino acids 113-436), Mod5 (amino acids 28-495), and Cyk3 (amino acids 81-388) were cloned into pGEX6P1 (GST tag) vector (GE Healthcare), expressed in BL21 (Rosetta) E. coli strain, and purified with glutathione-agarose resin (Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described [8]. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with 3C protease at 4°C or by elution with glutathione. Full length Pal1 was cloned into pQE30 vector (Qiagen), expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E. coli, and purified with Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen). Purified protein was eluted with 250 mM imidazole [8]. The fragment of Cdc15 (358-928) was cloned into pMBP-parallel1 [46], expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E.coli, and purified with Amylose resin (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with AcTEV™ Protease (Invitrogen) at 4°C. For in vitro kinase assays, the purified proteins were incubated with immunoprecipitated wild type Kin1 or catalytically inactive Kin1(K154R) or wild type Pom1 or catalytically inactive Pom1 (K728R) in kinase assay buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol) supplemented with 20 μM ATP in 40 μL reactions at 30°C for 30 minutes. Reactions were stopped by boiling for 5 minutes at 80°C in buffer (1% SDS, 15% glycerol, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.7, 100mM NaCl), reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer for 5 minutes at 99°C. Reactions were separated by SDS-PAGE analysis. Bands were excised, destained, trypsin-digested, and peptides were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above. We detected some phosphorylation of substrates by kinase-dead Kin1 and kinase-dead Pom1 immunoprecipitates, likely due to contaminating kinases. Therefore, we determined the degree of phosphorylation by label-free quantification. The peak intensity of each peptide was determined for wild-type Kin1 and kinase-dead Kin1 reactions. Sites were considered to be phosphorylated by Kin1 if the peptide intensity was two-fold or more increased upon treatment with wild type Kin1 versus kinase-dead Kin1, or if they were present in reactions with wild type but absent from reactions with kinase-dead. The same criteria were applied for Pom1 substrates.For in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays, the kinase reactions were performed using 6-Bn-ATP-γ-S (Axxora) in place of ATP. The reactions were stopped by adding EDTA at 20mM final concentration. Subsequently, alkylation of substrates was performed by adding p-nitrobenzyl mesylate for a final concentration of 2.5mM (Abcam Biochemicals) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hrs. After alkylation, samples were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and boiled for 5 min at 99° C. Western blots were performed using thiophosphate ester specific RabMAb (ab92570) according to manufacturer’s protocol.Whole-cell extracts were prepared as described [13]. Western blots were probed with anti-GFP [47], anti-myc (Santa Cruz), and anti-HA (Covance) antibodies. Rabbit anti-Kin1-pT299 antibody was generated against the phosphopeptide YRRQSRLR[pT]FCGSLYF (21st Century Biochemicals, Inc). Secondary antibodies were conjugated to IRDye680RD or IRDye800CW (LI-COR Biosciences). Blots were developed by Odyssey CLx Imaging System (LI-COR), and bands were quantified in Image Studio Lite (LI-COR) for figure S2E graph.

In vitro kinase assays and western blots

Full length Ssp1-as1 and the fragments of Tea4 (amino acids 113-436), Mod5 (amino acids 28-495), and Cyk3 (amino acids 81-388) were cloned into pGEX6P1 (GST tag) vector (GE Healthcare), expressed in BL21 (Rosetta) E. coli strain, and purified with glutathione-agarose resin (Sigma-Aldrich) as previously described [8]. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with 3C protease at 4°C or by elution with glutathione. Full length Pal1 was cloned into pQE30 vector (Qiagen), expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E. coli, and purified with Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen). Purified protein was eluted with 250 mM imidazole [8]. The fragment of Cdc15 (358-928) was cloned into pMBP-parallel1 [46], expressed in BL21(Rosetta) E.coli, and purified with Amylose resin (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Purified proteins were released from resin by overnight incubation with AcTEV™ Protease (Invitrogen) at 4°C. For in vitro kinase assays, the purified proteins were incubated with immunoprecipitated wild type Kin1 or catalytically inactive Kin1(K154R) or wild type Pom1 or catalytically inactive Pom1 (K728R) in kinase assay buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol) supplemented with 20 μM ATP in 40 μL reactions at 30°C for 30 minutes. Reactions were stopped by boiling for 5 minutes at 80°C in buffer (1% SDS, 15% glycerol, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.7, 100mM NaCl), reduced with 5 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer for 5 minutes at 99°C. Reactions were separated by SDS-PAGE analysis. Bands were excised, destained, trypsin-digested, and peptides were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above. We detected some phosphorylation of substrates by kinase-dead Kin1 and kinase-dead Pom1 immunoprecipitates, likely due to contaminating kinases. Therefore, we determined the degree of phosphorylation by label-free quantification. The peak intensity of each peptide was determined for wild-type Kin1 and kinase-dead Kin1 reactions. Sites were considered to be phosphorylated by Kin1 if the peptide intensity was two-fold or more increased upon treatment with wild type Kin1 versus kinase-dead Kin1, or if they were present in reactions with wild type but absent from reactions with kinase-dead. The same criteria were applied for Pom1 substrates.

For in vitro thiophosphate kinase assays, the kinase reactions were performed using 6-Bn-ATP-γ-S (Axxora) in place of ATP. The reactions were stopped by adding EDTA at 20mM final concentration. Subsequently, alkylation of substrates was performed by adding p-nitrobenzyl mesylate for a final concentration of 2.5mM (Abcam Biochemicals) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hrs. After alkylation, samples were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and boiled for 5 min at 99° C. Western blots were performed using thiophosphate ester specific RabMAb (ab92570) according to manufacturer’s protocol.

Whole-cell extracts were prepared as described [13]. Western blots were probed with anti-GFP [47], anti-myc (Santa Cruz), and anti-HA (Covance) antibodies. Rabbit anti-Kin1-pT299 antibody was generated against the phosphopeptide YRRQSRLR[pT]FCGSLYF (21st Century Biochemicals, Inc). Secondary antibodies were conjugated to IRDye680RD or IRDye800CW (LI-COR Biosciences). Blots were developed by Odyssey CLx Imaging System (LI-COR), and bands were quantified in Image Studio Lite (LI-COR) for figure S2E graph.

In vitro binding assayGST control and GST-kin1 (a.a 511–752) were expressed in E. coli BL21(Rosetta) cells using pGEX6P1 vector. Cells were grown to OD600 = 0.3 at 37°C, and then expression was induced for 3 hrs at 37°C by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside to 0.4 mM. To isolate GST fusion proteins, cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 300 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and then lysed by French press. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation, and then incubated with glutathione-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed extensively using the same lysis buffer, and then washed into binding buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF). Cell lysates containing Pal1-mEGFP or pal1-7A-mEGFP from S. pombe were prepared using the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and incubated with GST-kin1(511-752) or GST on agarose resin for 1 hour at 4°C by rocking. Agarose beads were washed with the binding buffer, and proteins were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and analyzed for SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.

In vitro binding assay

GST control and GST-kin1 (a.a 511–752) were expressed in E. coli BL21(Rosetta) cells using pGEX6P1 vector. Cells were grown to OD600 = 0.3 at 37°C, and then expression was induced for 3 hrs at 37°C by addition of isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactoside to 0.4 mM. To isolate GST fusion proteins, cells were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 300 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and then lysed by French press. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation, and then incubated with glutathione-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 hours at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed extensively using the same lysis buffer, and then washed into binding buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NaCl, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF). Cell lysates containing Pal1-mEGFP or pal1-7A-mEGFP from S. pombe were prepared using the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, Roche complete protease inhibitors, and 1mM PMSF), and incubated with GST-kin1(511-752) or GST on agarose resin for 1 hour at 4°C by rocking. Agarose beads were washed with the binding buffer, and proteins were eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and analyzed for SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.

Imaging and data analysisMicroscopy was performed at room temperature with a DeltaVision Imaging System (Applied Precision), equipped with an Olympus IX-71 inverted wide-field microscope, a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 camera, and Insight solid-state illumination unit. All images are single focal planes positioned in the cell middle unless indicated. All fluorescence images are shown with inverted look-up table. All image analysis was performed on ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). For quantification of Pal1 or Kin1 mislocalized cells, the absence of strong fluorescent signal at cell ends was considered mislocalization. For time-lapse imaging, cells were placed onto agarose pads containing the same growth medium and 2% agarose. For Figure 4I, 25 z-stacks were acquired with 0.2 μm step size and iteratively deconvolved in SoftWoRx software (Applied Precision). All statistical differences were determined by a two-tailed Student’s t-test using Excel (Microsoft).For gene ontology analysis, proteins with phosphopeptides that were >16-fold reduced by Kin1-as1 inhibition were selected. From this list, any proteins containing phosphopeptides that were 1.5-fold reduced by 3-MB-PP1 treatment in wildtype strain [8] were removed for the analysis to eliminate non-specific inhibition by the drug. The process and component analysis were performed using Princeton GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/), using all S. pombe proteins as a background. For actin staining, cells were grown to log phase in YE4S and fixed by adding 16% paraformaldehyde (Fisher scientific) at the growing temperature for 10 min. Cells were washed with PEM buffer (0.1 M Na Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM MgCl2) [48] and permeabilized with 1% Triton X-100 for 2min, and washed in PEM buffer for three times. Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (ThermoFisher) was dissolved in MeOH and dried according to manufacturer’s protocol, and resuspended in PEM buffer and used to stain cells for 30 min in dark. After staining, cells were washed once in PEM buffer prior to imaging. For images in Figure 1D and F, maximum projections were generated using 0.2-μm focal planes throughout the entire cell (25 steps, 5 μm total) using ImageJ.

Imaging and data analysis

Microscopy was performed at room temperature with a DeltaVision Imaging System (Applied Precision), equipped with an Olympus IX-71 inverted wide-field microscope, a Photometrics CoolSNAP HQ2 camera, and Insight solid-state illumination unit. All images are single focal planes positioned in the cell middle unless indicated. All fluorescence images are shown with inverted look-up table. All image analysis was performed on ImageJ (National Institutes of Health). For quantification of Pal1 or Kin1 mislocalized cells, the absence of strong fluorescent signal at cell ends was considered mislocalization. For time-lapse imaging, cells were placed onto agarose pads containing the same growth medium and 2% agarose. For Figure 4I, 25 z-stacks were acquired with 0.2 μm step size and iteratively deconvolved in SoftWoRx software (Applied Precision). All statistical differences were determined by a two-tailed Student’s t-test using Excel (Microsoft).

For gene ontology analysis, proteins with phosphopeptides that were >16-fold reduced by Kin1-as1 inhibition were selected. From this list, any proteins containing phosphopeptides that were 1.5-fold reduced by 3-MB-PP1 treatment in wildtype strain [8] were removed for the analysis to eliminate non-specific inhibition by the drug. The process and component analysis were performed using Princeton GO term finder (http://go.princeton.edu/), using all S. pombe proteins as a background. For actin staining, cells were grown to log phase in YE4S and fixed by adding 16% paraformaldehyde (Fisher scientific) at the growing temperature for 10 min. Cells were washed with PEM buffer (0.1 M Na Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM EGTA, and 1 mM MgCl2) [48] and permeabilized with 1% Triton X-100 for 2min, and washed in PEM buffer for three times. Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (ThermoFisher) was dissolved in MeOH and dried according to manufacturer’s protocol, and resuspended in PEM buffer and used to stain cells for 30 min in dark. After staining, cells were washed once in PEM buffer prior to imaging. For images in Figure 1D and F, maximum projections were generated using 0.2-μm focal planes throughout the entire cell (25 steps, 5 μm total) using ImageJ.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISFor all statistical analyses, two-tailed unpaired t test (unequal variances) was performed using Microsoft Excel. P values are described in the Figure legends. Total n refers to the number of cells analyzed. Analysis of phosphoproteomic data is described in the Methods details.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

For all statistical analyses, two-tailed unpaired t test (unequal variances) was performed using Microsoft Excel. P values are described in the Figure legends. Total n refers to the number of cells analyzed. Analysis of phosphoproteomic data is described in the Methods details.

DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITYThe full list of proteins identified in the phosphoproteomic screen is available with the online version of the paper as table S1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)

DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY

The full list of proteins identified in the phosphoproteomic screen is available with the online version of the paper as table S1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium [45] via the Mass spectrometry Interactive Virtual Environment (MassIVE) partner repository. PDX accession PXD006782 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset?ID=PXD006782)

Supplementary Material1Table S1, related to
Figure 2
and STAR METHODS. Phospho-peptides identified in this study. Values are from biological quadruplicate experiments for kin1-as1(JM4023) cultures and indicate log2 transformed heavy/light ratio for each phosphopeptide following treatment with 3-MB-PP1 or DMSO control. column A: the sequence of phosphopeptide, residues immediately before ‘#’ are phosphorylated; ‘*’ indicates the oxidized methionine residues; ‘.’ indicates the cleavage sites; Column D-H: representative primary analytical scores for peptide identification, including Xcorr, delta Xcorr, mass measurement accuracy (parts-per-million), localization (phosphoRS) scores; Column I-L total peptide (tp) count for indicated experiment; Column M-P: four biological repeats of Kin1 inhibition experiments in which kin1-as1 strain was used; the values are log2 values of heavy (3-MB-PP1)/light (DMSO); Column Q: The average values for Kin1 inhibition (Column M-P) were calculated, Column R: The p values for phosphorylation site quantification.Table S2, related to
Figures 2 and 4. Selected cell polarity and cell division targets of Kin1 kinase activity in cells. For each phosphopeptide, the average log2-transformed heavy/light ratio is given for kin1-as1. Phospho-peptides identified in ≥ 2 fold reduction changes in kin1-as1 experiments are shown. Abbreviations: # = phosphorylation; * = oxidationTable S3, related to
Figures 2 and S4. Phospho-peptides identified from the indicated in vitro kinase assays. column B: the sequence of phosphopeptide, residues immediately before ‘#’ are phosphorylated; ‘*’ indicates the oxidized methionine residues; ‘.’ indicates the cleavage sites. Phosphorylated peptides were identified in parallel reactions containing kinase-dead Kin1 in column K, wildtype Kin1 in column M, kinase-dead Pom1 in column O and wild type Pom1 in column Q.Table S4, Related to Figures 1–4, S1-4, and STAR METHODS. Yeast strains and plasmids used in this study.2345

Supplementary Material

Table S1, related to
Figure 2
and STAR METHODS. Phospho-peptides identified in this study. Values are from biological quadruplicate experiments for kin1-as1(JM4023) cultures and indicate log2 transformed heavy/light ratio for each phosphopeptide following treatment with 3-MB-PP1 or DMSO control. column A: the sequence of phosphopeptide, residues immediately before ‘#’ are phosphorylated; ‘*’ indicates the oxidized methionine residues; ‘.’ indicates the cleavage sites; Column D-H: representative primary analytical scores for peptide identification, including Xcorr, delta Xcorr, mass measurement accuracy (parts-per-million), localization (phosphoRS) scores; Column I-L total peptide (tp) count for indicated experiment; Column M-P: four biological repeats of Kin1 inhibition experiments in which kin1-as1 strain was used; the values are log2 values of heavy (3-MB-PP1)/light (DMSO); Column Q: The average values for Kin1 inhibition (Column M-P) were calculated, Column R: The p values for phosphorylation site quantification.

Table S2, related to
Figures 2 and 4. Selected cell polarity and cell division targets of Kin1 kinase activity in cells. For each phosphopeptide, the average log2-transformed heavy/light ratio is given for kin1-as1. Phospho-peptides identified in ≥ 2 fold reduction changes in kin1-as1 experiments are shown. Abbreviations: # = phosphorylation; * = oxidation

Table S3, related to
Figures 2 and S4. Phospho-peptides identified from the indicated in vitro kinase assays. column B: the sequence of phosphopeptide, residues immediately before ‘#’ are phosphorylated; ‘*’ indicates the oxidized methionine residues; ‘.’ indicates the cleavage sites. Phosphorylated peptides were identified in parallel reactions containing kinase-dead Kin1 in column K, wildtype Kin1 in column M, kinase-dead Pom1 in column O and wild type Pom1 in column Q.

Table S4, Related to Figures 1–4, S1-4, and STAR METHODS. Yeast strains and plasmids used in this study.
