---
pmid: '11793011'
title: Mechanism for the learning deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type
  1.
authors:
- Costa RM
- Federov NB
- Kogan JH
- Murphy GG
- Stern J
- Ohno M
- Kucherlapati R
- Jacks T
- Silva AJ
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature711
---

# Mechanism for the learning deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type 1.
**Authors:** Costa RM, Federov NB, Kogan JH, Murphy GG, Stern J, Ohno M, Kucherlapati R, Jacks T, Silva AJ
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature711](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature711)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Jan 31;415(6871):526-30. doi: 10.1038/nature711. Epub 2002 Jan
16.

Mechanism for the learning deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type 
1.

Costa RM(1), Federov NB, Kogan JH, Murphy GG, Stern J, Ohno M, Kucherlapati R, 
Jacks T, Silva AJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurobiology, Psychiatry and Psychology, BRI, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1761, USA.

Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is one of the most common single-gene disorders 
that causes learning deficits in humans. Mice carrying a heterozygous null 
mutation of the Nfl gene (Nfl(+/-) show important features of the learning 
deficits associated with NF1 (ref. 2). Although neurofibromin has several known 
properties and functions, including Ras GTPase-activating protein activity, 
adenylyl cyclase modulation and microtubule binding, it is unclear which of 
these are essential for learning in mice and humans. Here we show that the 
learning deficits of Nf1(+/-) mice can be rescued by genetic and pharmacological 
manipulations that decrease Ras function. We also show that the Nf1(+/-) mice 
have increased GABA (gamma-amino butyric acid)-mediated inhibition and specific 
deficits in long-term potentiation, both of which can be reversed by decreasing 
Ras function. Our results indicate that the learning deficits associated with 
NF1 may be caused by excessive Ras activity, which leads to impairments in 
long-term potentiation caused by increased GABA-mediated inhibition. Our 
findings have implications for the development of treatments for learning 
deficits associated with NF1.

DOI: 10.1038/nature711
PMID: 11793011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
