---
pmid: '15797381'
title: Degradation-mediated protein quality control in the nucleus.
authors:
- Gardner RG
- Nelson ZW
- Gottschling DE
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.016
---

# Degradation-mediated protein quality control in the nucleus.
**Authors:** Gardner RG, Nelson ZW, Gottschling DE
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.016)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Mar 25;120(6):803-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.016.

Degradation-mediated protein quality control in the nucleus.

Gardner RG(1), Nelson ZW, Gottschling DE.

Author information:
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Mar 25;120(6):734-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.003.

Protein quality control degradation systems rid the cell of aberrant proteins, 
preventing detrimental effects on normal cellular function. Although such 
systems have been identified in most subcellular compartments, none have been 
found in the nucleus. Here, we report the discovery of such a system in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It is defined by San1p, a ubiquitin-protein ligase 
that, in conjunction with the ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes Cdc34p and Ubc1p, 
targets four distinct mutant nuclear proteins for ubiquitination and destruction 
by the proteasome. San1p has exquisite specificity for aberrant proteins and 
does not target the wild-type versions of its mutant substrates. San1p is 
nuclear localized and requires nuclear localization for function. Loss of SAN1 
results in a chronic stress response, underscoring its role of protein quality 
control in the cell. We propose that San1p-mediated degradation acts as the last 
line of proteolytic defense against the deleterious accumulation of aberrant 
proteins in the nucleus and that analogous systems exist in other eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.016
PMID: 15797381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
