---
pmid: '33051204'
title: Kinetic investigation of the polymerase and exonuclease activities of human
  DNA polymerase ε holoenzyme.
authors:
- Zahurancik WJ
- Suo Z
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7863874
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013903
---

# Kinetic investigation of the polymerase and exonuclease activities of human DNA polymerase ε holoenzyme.
**Authors:** Zahurancik WJ, Suo Z
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA120.013903](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA120.013903)
**PMC:** [PMC7863874](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7863874/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Dec 11;295(50):17251-17264. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013903. 
Epub 2020 Oct 13.

Kinetic investigation of the polymerase and exonuclease activities of human DNA 
polymerase ε holoenzyme.

Zahurancik WJ(1), Suo Z(2).

Author information:
(1)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA.
(2)The Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA. Electronic address: 
zucai.suo@med.fsu.edu.

In eukaryotic DNA replication, DNA polymerase ε (Polε) is responsible for 
leading strand synthesis, whereas DNA polymerases α and δ synthesize the lagging 
strand. The human Polε (hPolε) holoenzyme is comprised of the catalytic p261 
subunit and the noncatalytic p59, p17, and p12 small subunits. So far, the 
contribution of the noncatalytic subunits to hPolε function is not well 
understood. Using pre-steady-state kinetic methods, we established a minimal 
kinetic mechanism for DNA polymerization and editing catalyzed by the hPolε 
holoenzyme. Compared with the 140-kDa N-terminal catalytic fragment of p261 
(p261N), which we kinetically characterized in our earlier studies, the presence 
of the p261 C-terminal domain (p261C) and the three small subunits increased the 
DNA binding affinity and the base substitution fidelity. Although the small 
subunits enhanced correct nucleotide incorporation efficiency, there was a wide 
range of rate constants when incorporating a correct nucleotide over a 
single-base mismatch. Surprisingly, the 3'→5' exonuclease activity of the hPolε 
holoenzyme was significantly slower than that of p261N when editing both matched 
and mismatched DNA substrates. This suggests that the presence of p261C and the 
three small subunits regulates the 3'→5' exonuclease activity of the hPolε 
holoenzyme. Together, the 3'→5' exonuclease activity and the variable mismatch 
extension activity modulate the overall fidelity of the hPolε holoenzyme by up 
to 3 orders of magnitude. Thus, the presence of p261C and the three noncatalytic 
subunits optimizes the dual enzymatic activities of the catalytic p261 subunit 
and makes the hPolε holoenzyme an efficient and faithful replicative DNA 
polymerase.

© 2020 Zahurancik and Suo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.013903
PMCID: PMC7863874
PMID: 33051204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest in regards to this manuscript.

## Full Text

Abstract

In eukaryotic DNA replication, DNA polymerase ε (Polε) is responsible for leading strand synthesis, whereas DNA polymerases α and δ synthesize the lagging strand. The human Polε (hPolε) holoenzyme is comprised of the catalytic p261 subunit and the noncatalytic p59, p17, and p12 small subunits. So far, the contribution of the noncatalytic subunits to hPolε function is not well understood. Using pre-steady-state kinetic methods, we established a minimal kinetic mechanism for DNA polymerization and editing catalyzed by the hPolε holoenzyme. Compared with the 140-kDa N-terminal catalytic fragment of p261 (p261N), which we kinetically characterized in our earlier studies, the presence of the p261 C-terminal domain (p261C) and the three small subunits increased the DNA binding affinity and the base substitution fidelity. Although the small subunits enhanced correct nucleotide incorporation efficiency, there was a wide range of rate constants when incorporating a correct nucleotide over a single-base mismatch. Surprisingly, the 3′→5′ exonuclease activity of the hPolε holoenzyme was significantly slower than that of p261N when editing both matched and mismatched DNA substrates. This suggests that the presence of p261C and the three small subunits regulates the 3′→5′ exonuclease activity of the hPolε holoenzyme. Together, the 3′→5′ exonuclease activity and the variable mismatch extension activity modulate the overall fidelity of the hPolε holoenzyme by up to 3 orders of magnitude. Thus, the presence of p261C and the three noncatalytic subunits optimizes the dual enzymatic activities of the catalytic p261 subunit and makes the hPolε holoenzyme an efficient and faithful replicative DNA polymerase.

Results

Previously, we carried out the kinetic characterization of p261N, the N-terminal fragment (residues 1-1189) of the hPolε p261 catalytic subunit. Our initial characterization of p261N alone was motivated by the relative ease of its overexpression and purification from Escherichia coli in suitable quantities for pre-steady-state kinetic studies. Importantly, the p261N fragment contains all of the conserved polymerase and 3′→5′ exonuclease motifs ( 22 ). From our pre-steady-state kinetic analysis, we defined a minimal kinetic mechanism of nucleotide incorporation, a simplified version of which is shown in Scheme 1 A ( 19 ). We also established a kinetic basis for the high fidelity of DNA polymerization catalyzed by p261N ( 21 ). In a study that followed, we examined WT hPolε holoenzyme prepared from baculovirus-infected insect cells and performed burst assays with both hPolε and p261N under identical conditions. We observed that both exhibited a fast burst phase and a slow linear phase of product formation ( 23 ). The multiphasic kinetics of correct nucleotide incorporation suggests that hPolε likely utilizes a similar minimal kinetic mechanism as p261N ( Scheme 1 A ) for DNA polymerization. To provide more evidence for the kinetic mechanism and to further kinetically characterize the hPolε holoenzyme, we overexpressed and purified an exonuclease-deficient variant (D275A/E277A/D368A, hPolε exo − ) and carried out the following kinetic analysis at 20 °C:
