---
pmid: '18498356'
title: Efficient production of monoclonal antibodies recognizing specific structures
  in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos using an antigen subtraction method.
authors:
- Takeda K
- Watanabe C
- Qadota H
- Hanazawa M
- Sugimoto A
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01195.x
---

# Efficient production of monoclonal antibodies recognizing specific structures in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos using an antigen subtraction method.
**Authors:** Takeda K, Watanabe C, Qadota H, Hanazawa M, Sugimoto A
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01195.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01195.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2008 Jul;13(7):653-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01195.x.
Epub  2008 May 21.

Efficient production of monoclonal antibodies recognizing specific structures in 
Caenorhabditis elegans embryos using an antigen subtraction method.

Takeda K(1), Watanabe C, Qadota H, Hanazawa M, Sugimoto A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genomics, RIKEN Center for Developmental 
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have been widely used to probe molecular components 
of specific cell types or cellular structures. We have developed a method to 
enrich antigens of low abundance in heterogeneous molecule mixtures by 
subtracting abundant antigens. The subtracted immunogen mixture is then used for 
immunization, which significantly increases the production of mAbs that exhibit 
specific staining patterns. By applying this "antigen subtraction" method to the 
embryonic extract of Caenorhabditis elegans, we have successfully isolated 35 
mAbs that recognize specific structures, including P granules, muscles, the 
pharynx, and subsets of hypodermal cells; some of the mAbs revealed previously 
unreported cellular structures. This antigen subtraction approach can be used in 
various applications to produce mAbs against relatively scarce antigens in 
complex molecular mixtures. The mAbs will be useful tools for developmental and 
cell biological studies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01195.x
PMID: 18498356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
