---
pmid: '11827972'
title: MICAL, a novel CasL interacting molecule, associates with vimentin.
authors:
- Suzuki T
- Nakamoto T
- Ogawa S
- Seo S
- Matsumura T
- Tachibana K
- Morimoto C
- Hirai H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111842200
---

# MICAL, a novel CasL interacting molecule, associates with vimentin.
**Authors:** Suzuki T, Nakamoto T, Ogawa S, Seo S, Matsumura T, Tachibana K, Morimoto C, Hirai H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111842200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111842200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14933-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111842200. Epub 
2002 Feb 4.

MICAL, a novel CasL interacting molecule, associates with vimentin.

Suzuki T(1), Nakamoto T, Ogawa S, Seo S, Matsumura T, Tachibana K, Morimoto C, 
Hirai H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

CasL/HEF1 belongs to the p130(Cas) family. It is tyrosine-phosphorylated 
following beta(1) integrin and/or T cell receptor stimulation and is thus 
considered to be important for immunological reactions. CasL has several 
structural motifs such as an SH3 domain and a substrate domain and interacts 
with many molecules through these motifs. To obtain more insights on the 
CasL-mediated signal transduction, we sought proteins that interact with the 
CasL SH3 domain by far Western screening, and we identified a novel human 
molecule, MICAL (a Molecule Interacting with CasL). MICAL is a protein of 118 
kDa and is expressed in the thymus, lung, spleen, kidney, testis, and 
hematopoietic cells. MICAL has a calponin homology domain, a LIM domain, a 
putative leucine zipper motif, and a proline-rich PPKPP sequence. MICAL 
associates with CasL through this PPKPP sequence. MICAL is a cytoplasmic protein 
and colocalizes with CasL at the perinuclear area. Through the COOH-terminal 
region, MICAL also associates with vimentin that is a major component of 
intermediate filaments. Immunostaining revealed that MICAL localizes along with 
vimentin intermediate filaments. These results suggest that MICAL may be a 
cytoskeletal regulator that connects CasL to intermediate filaments.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111842200
PMID: 11827972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
