---
pmid: '19029245'
title: The protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits B'beta and B'delta mediate sustained
  TrkA neurotrophin receptor autophosphorylation and neuronal differentiation.
authors:
- Van Kanegan MJ
- Strack S
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2630673
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01242-08
---

# The protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits B'beta and B'delta mediate sustained TrkA neurotrophin receptor autophosphorylation and neuronal differentiation.
**Authors:** Van Kanegan MJ, Strack S
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01242-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01242-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2630673](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2630673/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;29(3):662-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01242-08. Epub 2008 Nov
 24.

The protein phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits B'beta and B'delta mediate 
sustained TrkA neurotrophin receptor autophosphorylation and neuronal 
differentiation.

Van Kanegan MJ(1), Strack S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is critical for the differentiation and maintenance of 
neurons in the peripheral and central nervous system. Sustained 
autophosphorylation of the TrkA receptor tyrosine kinase and long-lasting 
activation of downstream kinase cascades are hallmarks of NGF signaling, yet our 
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying prolonged TrkA activity is 
incomplete. Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a heterotrimeric Ser/Thr 
phosphatase composed of a scaffolding, catalytic, and regulatory subunit (B, B', 
and B" gene families). Here, we employ a combination of pharmacological 
inhibitors, regulatory subunit overexpression, PP2A scaffold subunit exchange, 
and RNA interference to show that PP2A containing B' family regulatory subunits 
participates in sustained NGF signaling in PC12 cells. Specifically, two 
neuron-enriched regulatory subunits, B'beta and B'delta, recruit PP2A into a 
complex with TrkA to dephosphorylate the NGF receptor on Ser/Thr residues and to 
potentiate its intrinsic Tyr kinase activity. Acting at the receptor level, 
PP2A/ B'beta and B'delta enhance NGF (but not epidermal growth factor or 
fibroblast growth factor) signaling through the Akt and Ras-mitogen-activated 
protein kinase cascades and promote neuritogenesis and differentiation of PC12 
cells. Thus, select PP2A heterotrimers oppose desensitization of the TrkA 
receptor tyrosine kinase, perhaps through dephosphorylation of inhibitory 
Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites on the receptor itself, to maintain 
neurotrophin-mediated developmental and survival signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01242-08
PMCID: PMC2630673
PMID: 19029245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
