---
pmid: '24412244'
title: Charting the molecular links between driver and susceptibility genes in colorectal
  cancer.
authors:
- Arroyo R
- Duran-Frigola M
- Berenguer C
- Soler-López M
- Aloy P
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.012
---

# Charting the molecular links between driver and susceptibility genes in colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Arroyo R, Duran-Frigola M, Berenguer C, Soler-López M, Aloy P
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.012)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 21;445(4):734-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.012. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

Charting the molecular links between driver and susceptibility genes in 
colorectal cancer.

Arroyo R(1), Duran-Frigola M(1), Berenguer C(1), Soler-López M(1), Aloy P(2).

Author information:
(1)Joint IRB-BSC Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), c/Baldiri Reixac 10-12, Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(2)Joint IRB-BSC Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), c/Baldiri Reixac 10-12, Barcelona 08028, Spain; 
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Passeig Lluís 
Companys 23, Barcelona 08010, Spain. Electronic address: 
patrick.aloy@irbbarcelona.org.

Despite significant advances in the identification of specific genes and 
pathways important in the onset and progression of colorectal cancer (CRC), 
mechanistic insight into the relationship between driver and susceptibility 
genes is needed. In this paper, we systematically explore physical interactions 
between causative and putative CRC susceptibility genes to reveal the molecular 
mechanisms involved in tumor biology. In total, we identify 622 high-confidence 
protein-protein interactions between 42 CRC causative and 65 candidate 
susceptibility genes. Among the latter, 28 are located in the CRCS9 loci, 
related to the etiology of CRC, and 17 are co-expressed with well-established 
CRC drivers, which makes them excellent candidates for further functional 
studies. Moreover, we find a high degree of functional coherence between 
connected driver and susceptibility genes, which indicates that our 
network-based strategy is useful to gain insight into the underlying mechanisms 
of those proteins with unknown roles in CRC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.012
PMID: 24412244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
