---
pmid: '1856189'
title: Human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. Characterization of the catalytic site.
authors:
- Hermans MM
- Kroos MA
- van Beeumen J
- Oostra BA
- Reuser AJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. Characterization of the catalytic site.
**Authors:** Hermans MM, Kroos MA, van Beeumen J, Oostra BA, Reuser AJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jul 25;266(21):13507-12.

Human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. Characterization of the catalytic site.

Hermans MM(1), Kroos MA, van Beeumen J, Oostra BA, Reuser AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

The substrate analogue conduritol B epoxide (CBE) is demonstrated to be an 
active site-directed inhibitor of human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. A 
competitive mode of inhibition is obtained with glycogen as natural and 
4-methylumbelliferyl-alpha-D-glucopyranoside as artificial substrate. The 
inactivation of the enzyme is time and concentration dependent and results in 
the covalent binding of CBE. Catalytic activity is required for binding to 
occur. CBE-labeled peptides containing the catalytic residue of lysosomal 
alpha-glucosidase were isolated and identified by microsequencing and amino acid 
analysis. The peptides appeared to originate from a protein domain which is 
highly conserved among alpha-amylases, maltase, glucoamylases, and 
transglucanosylases. Based on the sequence similarity and the mechanism of CBE 
binding, Asp-518 is predicted to be the essential carboxylate in the active site 
of lysosomal alpha-glucosidase. The functional importance of Asp-518 and other 
residues around the catalytic site was studied by expression of in vitro 
mutagenized alpha-glucosidase cDNA in transiently transfected COS cells. 
Substitution of Asp-513 by Glu-513 is shown to interfere with the 
posttranslational modification and the intracellular transport of the 
alpha-glucosidase precursor. The residues Trp-516 and Asp-518 are demonstrated 
to be critical for catalytic function.

PMID: 1856189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
