---
pmid: '15879105'
title: Tid1 is required for T cell transition from double-negative 3 to double-positive
  stages.
authors:
- Lo JF
- Zhou H
- Fearns C
- Reisfeld RA
- Yang Y
- Lee JD
journal: J Immunol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6105
---

# Tid1 is required for T cell transition from double-negative 3 to double-positive stages.
**Authors:** Lo JF, Zhou H, Fearns C, Reisfeld RA, Yang Y, Lee JD
**Journal:** J Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6105](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6105)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6105-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6105.

Tid1 is required for T cell transition from double-negative 3 to double-positive 
stages.

Lo JF(1), Zhou H, Fearns C, Reisfeld RA, Yang Y, Lee JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

Tid1, a DnaJ cochaperone protein, is the mammalian homologue of the Drosophila 
tumor suppressor Tid56 whose antitumor function is most likely mediated through 
its capacity to regulate cell differentiation in imaginal discs. We suspected 
that the mammalian counterpart, tid1, may also be involved in regulating cell 
differentiation. To investigate this, we exploited the system of T cell 
development to examine whether tid1 plays a role in this well-defined process. 
Mice with tid1 specifically deleted in T cells developed thymic atrophy, with 
dramatic reduction of double-positive and single-positive thymocytes in the 
tid1(-/-) thymus. Although the subpopulations of tid1(-/-) double-negative (DN) 
1-3 thymocytes were normal, the subpopulation of DN4 thymocytes was measurably 
smaller because of reduced proliferation and significant cell death. Immature 
tid1(-/-) thymocytes show normal VDJ beta-chain rearrangement and pre-TCR and 
CD3 expression in both DN3 and DN4 thymocytes, but in DN4 thymocytes, there was 
significantly reduced expression of the antiapoptotic bcl-2 gene. Restoring the 
expression level of Bcl-2 protein in tid1(-/-) thymus by introduction of a 
transgenic human bcl-2 gene resulted in reversal of the developmental defects in 
tid1(-/-) thymus. Together, these results demonstrate that tid1 is critical in 
early thymocyte development, especially during transition from the DN3 to 
double-positive stages, possibly through its regulation of bcl-2 expression, 
which provides survival signals.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.174.10.6105
PMID: 15879105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
