---
pmid: '9529348'
title: Mutations in the liver glycogen phosphorylase gene (PYGL) underlying glycogenosis
  type VI.
authors:
- Burwinkel B
- Bakker HD
- Herschkovitz E
- Moses SW
- Shin YS
- Kilimann MW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1377030
doi: 10.1086/301790
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the liver glycogen phosphorylase gene (PYGL) underlying glycogenosis type VI.
**Authors:** Burwinkel B, Bakker HD, Herschkovitz E, Moses SW, Shin YS, Kilimann MW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/301790](https://doi.org/10.1086/301790)
**PMC:** [PMC1377030](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1377030/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Apr;62(4):785-91. doi: 10.1086/301790.

Mutations in the liver glycogen phosphorylase gene (PYGL) underlying 
glycogenosis type VI.

Burwinkel B(1), Bakker HD, Herschkovitz E, Moses SW, Shin YS, Kilimann MW.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.

Deficiency of glycogen phosphorylase in the liver gives rise to glycogen-storage 
disease type VI (Hers disease; MIM 232700). We report the identification of the 
first mutations in PYGL, the gene encoding the liver isoform of glycogen 
phosphorylase, in three patients with Hers disease. These are two splice-site 
mutations and two missense mutations. A mutation of the 5' splice-site consensus 
of intron 14 causes the retention of intron 14 and the utilization of two 
illegitimate 5' splice sites, whereas a mutation of the 3' splice-site consensus 
of intron 4 causes the skipping of exon 5. Two missense mutations, N338S and 
N376K, both cause nonconservative replacements of amino acids that are 
absolutely conserved even in yeast and bacterial phosphorylases. We also report 
corrections of the PYGL coding sequence, sequence polymorphisms, and a partial 
PYGL gene structure with introns in the same positions as in PYGM, the gene of 
the muscle isoform of phosphorylase. Our findings demonstrate that PYGL 
mutations cause Hers disease, and they may improve laboratory diagnosis of 
deficiencies of the liver phosphorylase system.

DOI: 10.1086/301790
PMCID: PMC1377030
PMID: 9529348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
