---
pmid: '10332042'
title: Defective intracellular transport of CLN3 is the molecular basis of Batten
  disease (JNCL).
authors:
- Järvelä I
- Lehtovirta M
- Tikkanen R
- Kyttälä A
- Jalanko A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.6.1091
---

# Defective intracellular transport of CLN3 is the molecular basis of Batten disease (JNCL).
**Authors:** Järvelä I, Lehtovirta M, Tikkanen R, Kyttälä A, Jalanko A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/8.6.1091](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/8.6.1091)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Jun;8(6):1091-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/8.6.1091.

Defective intracellular transport of CLN3 is the molecular basis of Batten 
disease (JNCL).

Järvelä I(1), Lehtovirta M, Tikkanen R, Kyttälä A, Jalanko A.

Author information:
(1)National Public Health Institute, Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, 
Helsinki, Finland. irma.jarvela@ktl.fi

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet 1999 Aug;8(8):1585.

Batten disease [juvenile-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (JNCL)], the most 
common progressive encephalopathy of childhood, is caused by mutations in a 
novel lysosomal membrane protein (CLN3) with unknown function. In this study, we 
have confirmed the lysosomal localization of the CLN3 protein by immunoelectron 
microscopy by co-localizing it with soluble and membrane-associated lysosomal 
proteins. We have analysed the intracellular processing and localization of two 
mutants, 461-677del, which is present in 85% of CLN3 alleles and causes the 
classical JNCL, and E295K [corrected], which is a rare missense mutation 
associated with an atypical form of JNCL. Pulse-chase labelling and 
immunoprecipitation of the two mutant proteins in COS-1-cells indicated that 
461-677del is synthesized as an approximately 24 kDa truncated polypeptide, 
whereas the maturation of E295K [corrected] resembles that of the wild-type CLN3 
polypeptide. Transient expression of the two mutants in BHK cells showed that 
461-677del is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas E295K [corrected] 
was capable of reaching the lysosomal compartment. The CLN3 polypeptides were 
expressed further in mouse primary neurons where the wild-type CLN3 protein was 
localized both in the cell soma and in neuronal extensions, whereas the 
461-677del mutant was arrested in the cell soma. Interestingly, co-localization 
of the wild-type CLN3 and E295K [corrected] proteins with a synaptic vesicle 
marker indicates that the CLN3 protein might participate in synaptic vesicle 
transport/transmission. The data presented here provide clear evidence for a 
cellular distinction between classical and atypical forms of Batten disease both 
in neural and non-neural cells.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/8.6.1091
PMID: 10332042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
