---
pmid: '35178858'
title: Wsp system oppositely modulates antibacterial activity and biofilm formation
  via FleQ-FleN complex in Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- Nie H
- Xiao Y
- Song M
- Wu N
- Peng Q
- Duan W
- Chen W
- Huang Q
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15905
---

# Wsp system oppositely modulates antibacterial activity and biofilm formation via FleQ-FleN complex in Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Nie H, Xiao Y, Song M, Wu N, Peng Q, Duan W, Chen W, Huang Q
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1462-2920.15905](https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.15905)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2022 Mar;24(3):1543-1559. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15905.
Epub 2022 Feb 17.

Wsp system oppositely modulates antibacterial activity and biofilm formation via
FleQ-FleN complex in Pseudomonas putida.

Nie H(#)(1), Xiao Y(#)(1), Song M(1), Wu N(1), Peng Q(1), Duan W(1), Chen W(1),
Huang Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, 430070, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Soil Environment and Pollution Remediation, College
of Resources and Environment, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070,
China.
(#)Contributed equally

Type VI secretion systems (T6SS) are specific antibacterial weapons employed by
diverse bacteria to protect themselves from competitors. Pseudomonas putida
KT2440 possesses a functional T6SS (K1-T6SS) and exhibits antibacterial activity
towards a broad range of bacteria. Here we found that the Wsp signal
transduction system regulated K1-T6SS expression via synthesizing the second
messenger cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP), thus mediating antibacterial activity in P.
putida. High-level c-di-GMP produced by Wsp system repressed the transcription
of K1-T6SS genes in structural operon and vgrG1 operon. Transcriptional
regulator FleQ and ATPase FleN functioned as repressors in the Wsp
system-modulated K1-T6SS transcription. However, FleQ and FleN functioned as
activators in biofilm formation, and Wsp system promoted biofilm formation
largely in a FleQ/FleN-dependent manner. Furthermore, FleQ-FleN complex bound
directly to the promoter of K1-T6SS structural operon in vitro, and c-di-GMP
promoted the binding. Besides, P. putida biofilm cells showed higher c-di-GMP
levels and lower antibacterial activity than planktonic cells. Overall, our
findings reveal a mechanism by which Wsp system oppositely modulates
antibacterial activity and biofilm formation via FleQ-FleN, and demonstrate the
relationship between plankton/biofilm lifestyles and antibacterial activity in
P. putida.

© 2022 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15905
PMID: 35178858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
