---
pmid: '20085707'
title: Aire's partners in the molecular control of immunological tolerance.
authors:
- Abramson J
- Giraud M
- Benoist C
- Mathis D
journal: Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030
---

# Aire's partners in the molecular control of immunological tolerance.
**Authors:** Abramson J, Giraud M, Benoist C, Mathis D
**Journal:** Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):123-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030.

Aire's partners in the molecular control of immunological tolerance.

Abramson J(1), Giraud M, Benoist C, Mathis D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Jan 8;140(1):24-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.036.

Aire induces the expression of a battery of peripheral-tissue self-antigens 
(PTAs) in thymic stromal cells, promoting the clonal deletion of differentiating 
T cells that recognize them. Just how Aire targets and induces PTA transcripts 
remains largely undefined. Screening via Aire-targeted coimmunoprecipitation 
followed by mass spectrometry, and validating by multiple RNAi-mediated 
knockdown approaches, we identified a large set of proteins that associate with 
Aire. They fall into four major functional classes: nuclear transport, chromatin 
binding/structure, transcription and pre-mRNA processing. One set of Aire 
interactions centered on DNA protein kinase and a group of proteins it partners 
with to resolve DNA double-stranded breaks or promote transcriptional 
elongation. Another set of interactions was focused on the pre-mRNA splicing and 
maturation machinery, potentially explaining the markedly more effective 
processing of PTA transcripts in the presence of Aire. These findings suggest a 
model to explain Aire's widespread targeting and induction of weakly transcribed 
chromatin regions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.030
PMID: 20085707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
