---
reference_id: PMID:33289792
title: "The PEP-pyruvate-oxaloacetate node: variation at the heart of metabolism."
authors:
- Koendjbiharie JG
- van Kranenburg R
- Kengen SWM
journal: FEMS Microbiol Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuaa061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The PEP-pyruvate-oxaloacetate node: variation at the heart of metabolism.
**Authors:** Koendjbiharie JG, van Kranenburg R, Kengen SWM
**Journal:** FEMS Microbiol Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/femsre/fuaa061](https://doi.org/10.1093/femsre/fuaa061)

## Content

1. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2021 May 5;45(3):fuaa061. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuaa061.

The PEP-pyruvate-oxaloacetate node: variation at the heart of metabolism.

Koendjbiharie JG(1), van Kranenburg R(1)(2), Kengen SWM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Stippeneng4, 6708 WE 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Corbion, Arkelsedijk 46, 4206 AC Gorinchem, The Netherlands.

At the junction between the glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle-as well 
as various other metabolic pathways-lies the phosphoenolpyruvate 
(PEP)-pyruvate-oxaloacetate node (PPO-node). These three metabolites form the 
core of a network involving at least eleven different types of enzymes, each 
with numerous subtypes. Obviously, no single organism maintains each of these 
eleven enzymes; instead, different organisms possess different subsets in their 
PPO-node, which results in a remarkable degree of variation, despite connecting 
such deeply conserved metabolic pathways as the glycolysis and the tricarboxylic 
acid cycle. The PPO-node enzymes play a crucial role in cellular energetics, 
with most of them involved in (de)phosphorylation of nucleotide phosphates, 
while those responsible for malate conversion are important redox enzymes. 
Variations in PPO-node therefore reflect the different energetic niches that 
organisms can occupy. In this review, we give an overview of the biochemistry of 
these eleven PPO-node enzymes. We attempt to highlight the variation that 
exists, both in PPO-node compositions, as well as in the roles that the enzymes 
can have within those different settings, through various recent discoveries in 
both bacteria and archaea that reveal deviations from canonical functions.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsre/fuaa061
PMCID: PMC8100219
PMID: 33289792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]