---
pmid: '15834940'
title: AGR2, an androgen-inducible secretory protein overexpressed in prostate cancer.
authors:
- Zhang JS
- Gong A
- Cheville JC
- Smith DI
- Young CY
journal: Genes Chromosomes Cancer
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/gcc.20188
---

# AGR2, an androgen-inducible secretory protein overexpressed in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Zhang JS, Gong A, Cheville JC, Smith DI, Young CY
**Journal:** Genes Chromosomes Cancer (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gcc.20188](https://doi.org/10.1002/gcc.20188)

## Abstract

1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2005 Jul;43(3):249-59. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20188.

AGR2, an androgen-inducible secretory protein overexpressed in prostate cancer.

Zhang JS(1), Gong A, Cheville JC, Smith DI, Young CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

AGR2, the human homologue of Xenopus anterior gradient 2 (XAG2), was identified 
by a suppression subtractive hybridization-based technique as an 
androgen-inducible gene. There are two AGR2 transcripts, which encode the same 
secretory protein of 175 amino acids. The androgen induction was time- and 
dose-dependent, with more than a 10-fold increase in the level of AGR2 mRNA 
after 48 hr of treatment with 10(-9) M R1881. Expression of AGR2 mRNA was 
specifically detected in limited human tissue rich in epithelial cells, 
including the prostate gland. Analysis of 46 microdissected primary prostate 
adenocarcinoma samples showed that AGR2 mRNA expression was markedly elevated in 
the majority of tumors as compared to matched adjacent benign tissues. 
Androgen-induced AGR2 protein expression was demonstrated in LNCaP cells by 
Western blot analysis with an anti-AGR2 antibody. Immunohistochemistry analysis 
indicated that AGR2 protein expression was highly restricted to the secretory 
epithelial cells in the prostate gland. In tissue sections from radical 
prostatectomy specimens, immunohistochemical staining of AGR2 showed markedly 
increased expression in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and 
Gleason pattern 3-4 prostatic adenocarcinoma. Therefore, the androgen-induced 
secretory protein AGR2 may serve as a potential therapeutic target and/or 
molecular marker for prostate cancer.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gcc.20188
PMID: 15834940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
