---
pmid: '15860664'
title: The Shwachman-Diamond SBDS protein localizes to the nucleolus.
authors:
- Austin KM
- Leary RJ
- Shimamura A
journal: Blood
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1895203
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-02-0807
---

# The Shwachman-Diamond SBDS protein localizes to the nucleolus.
**Authors:** Austin KM, Leary RJ, Shimamura A
**Journal:** Blood (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-02-0807](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-02-0807)
**PMC:** [PMC1895203](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1895203/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2005 Aug 15;106(4):1253-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-02-0807. Epub 2005
Apr  28.

The Shwachman-Diamond SBDS protein localizes to the nucleolus.

Austin KM(1), Leary RJ, Shimamura A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, MA, 
USA.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder 
characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow failure. The 
gene for this syndrome, SBDS, encodes a highly conserved novel protein. We 
characterized Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome (SBDS) protein expression and 
intracellular localization in 7 patients with SDS and healthy controls. As 
predicted by gene mutation, 4 patients with SDS exhibited no detectable 
full-length SBDS protein. Patient DF277, who was homozygous for the IVS2 + 2 T>C 
splice donor mutation, expressed scant levels of SBDS protein. Patient SD101 
expressed low levels of SBDS protein harboring an R169C missense mutation. 
Patient DF269, who carried no detectable gene mutations, expressed wild-type 
levels of SBDS protein to add further support to the growing body of evidence 
for additional gene(s) that might contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease 
phenotype. The SBDS protein was detected in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm 
of normal control fibroblasts, but was particularly concentrated within the 
nucleolus. SBDS localization was cell-cycle dependent, with nucleolar 
localization during G1 and G2 and diffuse nuclear localization during S phase. 
SBDS nucleolar localization was intact in SD101 and DF269. The intranucleolar 
localization of SBDS provides further supportive evidence for its postulated 
role in rRNA processing.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-02-0807
PMCID: PMC1895203
PMID: 15860664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
