---
pmid: '19706519'
title: Measurement of amyloid fibril mass-per-length by tilted-beam transmission electron
  microscopy.
authors:
- Chen B
- Thurber KR
- Shewmaker F
- Wickner RB
- Tycko R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2732815
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907821106
---

# Measurement of amyloid fibril mass-per-length by tilted-beam transmission electron microscopy.
**Authors:** Chen B, Thurber KR, Shewmaker F, Wickner RB, Tycko R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907821106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907821106)
**PMC:** [PMC2732815](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2732815/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14339-44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907821106. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

Measurement of amyloid fibril mass-per-length by tilted-beam transmission 
electron microscopy.

Chen B(1), Thurber KR, Shewmaker F, Wickner RB, Tycko R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Physics, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We demonstrate that accurate values of mass-per-length (MPL), which serve as 
strong constraints on molecular structure, can be determined for amyloid fibrils 
by quantification of intensities in dark-field electron microscope images 
obtained in the tilted-beam mode of a transmission electron microscope. MPL 
values for fibrils formed by residues 218-289 of the HET-s fungal prion protein, 
for 2-fold- and 3-fold-symmetric fibrils formed by the 40-residue beta-amyloid 
peptide, and for fibrils formed by the yeast prion protein Sup35NM are in good 
agreement with previous results from scanning transmission electron microscopy. 
Results for fibrils formed by the yeast prion protein Rnq1, for which the MPL 
value has not been previously reported, support an in-register parallel 
beta-sheet structure, with one Rnq1 molecule per 0.47-nm beta-sheet repeat 
spacing. Since tilted-beam dark-field images can be obtained on many 
transmission electron microscopes, this work should facilitate MPL determination 
by a large number of research groups engaged in studies of amyloid fibrils and 
similar supramolecular assemblies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907821106
PMCID: PMC2732815
PMID: 19706519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
