---
pmid: '23973487'
title: Two β-strands of RAGE participate in the recognition and transport of amyloid-β
  peptide across the blood brain barrier.
authors:
- Kim SJ
- Ahn JW
- Kim H
- Ha HJ
- Lee SW
- Kim HK
- Lee S
- Hong HS
- Kim YH
- Choi CY
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.047
---

# Two β-strands of RAGE participate in the recognition and transport of amyloid-β peptide across the blood brain barrier.
**Authors:** Kim SJ, Ahn JW, Kim H, Ha HJ, Lee SW, Kim HK, Lee S, Hong HS, Kim YH, Choi CY
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.047](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.047)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 20;439(2):252-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.047. Epub 2013 Aug 23.

Two β-strands of RAGE participate in the recognition and transport of amyloid-β 
peptide across the blood brain barrier.

Kim SJ(1), Ahn JW, Kim H, Ha HJ, Lee SW, Kim HK, Lee S, Hong HS, Kim YH, Choi 
CY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, 
Republic of Korea.

Amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is central to the development of brain pathology in 
Alzheimer disease (AD) patients. Association with receptors for advanced 
glycation end-products (RAGE) enables the transport of Aβ peptide from 
circulating blood to human brain, and also causes the activation of the NF-κB 
signaling pathway. Here we show that two β-strands of RAGE participate in the 
interaction with Aβ peptide. Serial deletion analysis of the RAGE V domain 
indicates that the third and eighth β-strands are required for interaction with 
Aβ peptide. Site-directed mutagenesis of amino acids located in the third and 
eighth β-strands abolish the interaction of RAGE with Aβ peptide. Wild-type RAGE 
activates the NF-κB signaling pathway in response to Aβ peptide treatment, while 
a RAGE mutant defective in Aβ binding does not. Furthermore, use of peptide for 
the third β-strand or a RAGE monoclonal antibody that targets the RAGE-Aβ 
interaction interface inhibited transport of the Aβ peptide across the blood 
brain barrier in a mice model. These results provide information crucial to the 
development of RAGE-derived therapeutic reagents for Alzheimer disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.047
PMID: 23973487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
