---
pmid: '21524996'
title: 'Biochemical, proteomic, structural, and thermodynamic characterizations of
  integrin-linked kinase (ILK): cross-validation of the pseudokinase.'
authors:
- Fukuda K
- Knight JD
- Piszczek G
- Kothary R
- Qin J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3122243
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240093
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical, proteomic, structural, and thermodynamic characterizations of integrin-linked kinase (ILK): cross-validation of the pseudokinase.
**Authors:** Fukuda K, Knight JD, Piszczek G, Kothary R, Qin J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.240093](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.240093)
**PMC:** [PMC3122243](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3122243/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21886-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240093. Epub 
2011 Apr 26.

Biochemical, proteomic, structural, and thermodynamic characterizations of 
integrin-linked kinase (ILK): cross-validation of the pseudokinase.

Fukuda K(1), Knight JD, Piszczek G, Kothary R, Qin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is one of the few evolutionarily conserved focal 
adhesion proteins involved in diverse cell adhesion-dependent physiological and 
pathological responses. Despite more than a decade of studies and extensive 
literature, the kinase function of ILK is controversial. ILK contains a highly 
degraded kinase active site but it has been argued that ILK may be an unusual 
manganese (Mn)-dependent serine-threonine kinase that targets specific 
substrates such as glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β). In this study, we have 
tackled this issue by a systematic bottom-up biochemical, proteomic, structural, 
and thermodynamic analysis of ILK. We show that recombinant ILK from either 
bacteria or mammalian cells exhibits no kinase activity on GSK-3β in the 
presence of either Mn(2+) or the conventional kinase co-factor Mg(2+). A 
comprehensive and unbiased whole cell-based kinase assay using entire mammalian 
CG-4 and C2C12 cell lysate did not identify any specific ILK substrates. High 
resolution crystallographic structure analysis further confirmed that the 
Mn-bound ILK adopts the same pseudo active site conformation as that of the 
Mg-bound ILK. More importantly, thermodynamic analysis revealed that the K220M 
mutation, previously thought to inactivate ILK by disrupting ATP binding, 
significantly impairs the structural integrity and stability of ILK, which 
provides a new basis for understanding how this mutation caused renal agenesis, 
a failure of fetal kidney development. Collectively, our data provide strong 
evidence that ILK lacks intrinsic kinase function. It is a bona fide 
pseudokinase that likely evolved from an ancestral catalytic counterpart to act 
as a distinct scaffold to mediate protein-protein interactions during focal 
adhesion assembly and many other cellular events.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240093
PMCID: PMC3122243
PMID: 21524996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) is one of the few evolutionarily conserved focal adhesion proteins involved in diverse cell adhesion-dependent physiological and pathological responses. Despite more than a decade of studies and extensive literature, the kinase function of ILK is controversial. ILK contains a highly degraded kinase active site but it has been argued that ILK may be an unusual manganese (Mn)-dependent serine-threonine kinase that targets specific substrates such as glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β). In this study, we have tackled this issue by a systematic bottom-up biochemical, proteomic, structural, and thermodynamic analysis of ILK. We show that recombinant ILK from either bacteria or mammalian cells exhibits no kinase activity on GSK-3β in the presence of either Mn 2+ or the conventional kinase co-factor Mg 2+ . A comprehensive and unbiased whole cell-based kinase assay using entire mammalian CG-4 and C2C12 cell lysate did not identify any specific ILK substrates. High resolution crystallographic structure analysis further confirmed that the Mn-bound ILK adopts the same pseudo active site conformation as that of the Mg-bound ILK. More importantly, thermodynamic analysis revealed that the K220M mutation, previously thought to inactivate ILK by disrupting ATP binding, significantly impairs the structural integrity and stability of ILK, which provides a new basis for understanding how this mutation caused renal agenesis, a failure of fetal kidney development. Collectively, our data provide strong evidence that ILK lacks intrinsic kinase function. It is a bona fide pseudokinase that likely evolved from an ancestral catalytic counterpart to act as a distinct scaffold to mediate protein-protein interactions during focal adhesion assembly and many other cellular events.

Introduction

The adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM) 3 is primarily mediated by heterodimeric integrin transmembrane receptors. Upon activation, the integrin extracellular domain adheres to the ECM by binding to numerous ligands such as fibronectin and fibrinogen. However, for cells to firmly adhere to the ECM, integrins must connect to the backbone of the cell, the actin cytoskeleton, via its cytoplasmic tails (CTs) ( 1 – 2 ). Such connection is mediated by the supramolecular focal adhesion (FAs) complex. The reassembly/disassembly of FAs can lead to dynamic cell adhesion processes such as cell migration and spreading, which are fundamental for a variety of physiological responses. Over the past decades, major effort has been made to search for proteins involved in FA assembly and regulation. Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) was discovered in 1996 as a binding partner of integrin β CTs ( 3 ) and was found to critically regulate FAs ( 4 ). Genetic and genomic analyses have established that ILK is one of the few essential and evolutionarily conserved proteins coupling integrins to actin ( 5 – 7 ), and its dysregulation has been linked to major human diseases such as heart failure ( 8 – 10 ) and cancer ( 11 ). ILK has a molecular mass of ∼51 kDa containing an ankyrin repeat domain at the N terminus ( 3 , 12 – 13 ) and a kinase-like domain (KD) at the C terminus ( 3 , 14 ). The latter led to the classification of ILK as a serine-threonine kinase upon its discovery ( 3 ). Since then, it has been widely thought that the kinase activity of ILK may be involved in integrin signaling and many other cellular activities ( 15 ). However, ILK has some significant variations in the putative catalytic site, suggesting that ILK may be a pseudokinase ( 16 – 18 ). Consistently, extensive genetic analyses demonstrated that the kinase activity of ILK is not required for normal tissue development and function ( 5 – 7 , 19 – 21 ). By contrast, a number of biochemical and cell-based analyses did report that ILK was capable of directly phosphorylating diverse substrates including a generic substrate myelin basic protein and physiological targets including integrin β1 CT ( 3 ), myosin light chain kinase LC20 ( 22 ), β-parvin ( 23 ), cell survival kinase AKT/PKB ( 24 ), and glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) ( 24 – 26 ). Thus, the kinase function of ILK has remained as a controversial but important topic in integrin signaling and cell biology ( 15 , 18 , 27 ).

Approximately 10% of the human kinome encodes for proteins that lack one or more catalytic residues, suggesting a class of pseudokinases ( 16 ). While multiple laboratories have independently confirmed some representative pseudokinases such as STRADα ( 28 ), VRK3 ( 17 ), and ROP2 ( 29 ), a few previously proposed pseudokinases have been recently shown to still exhibit kinase activity possibly by some alternative structural mechanisms ( 30 ). For example, WNK kinase lacks a conserved catalytic lysine residue that is spatially compensated for by another nearby lysine that promotes catalysis ( 31 ). Therefore, combined structural and functional analyses should be performed to definitively define a pseudokinase. In the case of ILK, a high resolution structural analysis has recently shown that its catalytic site is highly degraded, which cannot be compensated for by any alternative residues ( 14 ). Biochemical characterizations further demonstrated that either bacteria-purified recombinant ILK or endogenous ILK was incapable of phosphorylating integrin β CTs, parvin, AKT, and the generic kinase substrate myelin basic protein, and it was suggested that the ILK purported activity might be due to heterogeneous components present in the partially purified ILK materials or indirect effects from cell-based experiments ( 14 ). Consensus seems to emerge from the perspective of both ILK function ( 18 ) and enzymology ( 30 , 32 ) that ILK is a pseudokinase. Nevertheless, controversy continues with growing studies still indicating that ILK is a kinase ( 26 , 33 – 36 ). In particular, a recent biochemical study ( 26 ) reported that ILK is a manganese (Mn)-dependent serine-threonine kinase that phosphorylates GSK-3β. This is completely inconsistent with the recent genetic and mutagenesis studies, which showed that ILK harboring a putative hyperactive mutation (S343D) or a putative kinase inactive mutation (K220A; K220M) had no effect on GSK-3β phosphorylation ( 21 ). It also contradicts the structural data that revealed a severely degraded catalytic core in ILK incapable of conferring the phosphor-transfer reaction, as is required for a bona fide GSK-3 kinase such as AKT ( 37 ).

To gain a clear insight into the function of ILK, we have undertaken a rigorous investigation of ILK by using a multidisciplinary approach. Here we show that either ILK expressed in bacteria or mammalian cells did not exhibit kinase activity on GSK-3β. Moreover, a comprehensive whole cell-based search did not identify any potential substrates for ILK. Using structural and thermodynamic approaches, we also found that the conserved ATP-binding lysine 220, which was previously thought to perform a catalytic function, plays a vital role in the structural integrity and stability of ILK, which explains why the mutation caused a defect in kidney development ( 21 ). Our results thus provide conclusive evidence that ILK is a bona fide pseudokinase and points to a new direction for elucidating the role of ILK in diverse physiological and pathological processes.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we have undertaken a comprehensive biochemical, proteomic, structural, and thermodynamic analysis on the kinase function of ILK, a topic that has been under significant debate over the past decade. Our data strongly demonstrate that phosphorylation of GSK-3 is not directly mediated by ILK under a variety of conditions, with no preference for the non-physiological cofactor manganese as suggested by a recent biochemical study ( 26 ). Crystal structures of several AGC subfamily kinases that phosphorylate GSK-3 are available, and the active site and substrate binding residues in these AGC family kinases, such as AKT and PKA, are highly conserved and yet drastically different from the dramatically degraded active site of ILK KD ( 14 ), explaining fundamentally why ILK cannot directly phosphorylate GSK-3. The structure of Mn-bound ILK is indistinguishable from that of Mg-bound ILK, ruling out the possibility that ILK is a distinct Mn-specific kinase, which is also confirmed by our biochemical data. It is difficult to reconcile the discrepancy between our structural/biochemical findings and the biochemical studies by Maydan et al. ( 26 ) who showed that ILK has kinase activity and a preference for manganese when phosphorylating GSK-3. Because we used ILK expressed in both bacteria and a eukaryotic system, the discrepancy is apparently not due to the post-translational modification issue. One likely source of discrepancy is an unrelated contaminating kinase or a functionally related ILK binding kinase that was co-purified during the affinity purification. This scenario happened in the alternative biochemical assay we performed using GST affinity co-purified Myc-tagged ILK. Whereas the original ILK sample from OriGene ( supplemental Fig. S1 ) showed a weak phosphorylation effect of GSK-3, further purification of ILK by GST-PINCH LIM1–2 completely eliminated this weak effect. Also, addition of α-parvin CH2 had no effect on the weak phosphorylation, further indicating that the phosphorylation is due to an uncharacterized kinase. We note that it is very difficult to pinpoint the exact contaminating kinase because a very tiny amount of kinase (even invisible by Western blotting, e.g. supplemental Fig. S3 ) can still exert an observable phosphorylation effect. Such low level contamination may be beyond detection by common techniques such as Western blot analysis and mass spectroscopy. In the study by Maydan et al. ( 26 ) a major component of ILK plus 95 minor components were detectable by mass spectroscopy including one arginine kinase. Perhaps some unknown kinases are undetectable by mass spectroscopy but still may be functional as demonstrated by our Western blot analysis ( supplemental Fig. S3 ).

In addition to the tests on GSK-3 phosphorylation by ILK, we also show in a proteomic fashion that ILK cannot phosphorylate any potential substrate. These data, combined with our structural analysis, strongly demonstrate that ILK is a pseudokinase. Is it possible that ILK exerts the kinase activity in the presence of some protein regulators or co-factors? The lack of so many active site features in ILK does not seem to support this possibility ( 12 ). Furthermore, genetic studies ( 21 ) have shown clearly that putative ILK active or dead mutants had no effect on the putative ILK substrates GSK-3 or AKT activation, thus providing evidence that ILK kinase activity is not required in vivo . How would ILK then exert its cellular function as a pseudokinase? ILK has been shown to bind to many proteins including integrin β CTs, PINCH, parvin, and kindlin ( 18 , 50 ). In particular, ILK forms a tight ternary complex with PINCH via its ankyrin repeat domain and parvin via its KD, respectively. This ternary complex is emerging as a major hub for shuffling protein traffic during FA assembly and ECM-integrin-actin signaling ( 18 , 50 ). Thus, like several key cytoskeletal adaptors in regulating integrin-mediated cell adhesion and migration including talin, filamin, and kindlin, ILK simply acts as a scaffold to mediate distinct protein-protein interactions via its ankyrin repeat domain and KD. Disruption of ILK-mediated interactions may thus impair cytoskeleton function and the integrin-actin network, and possibly indirectly affect multiple signaling pathways such as AKT activation ( 18 , 50 ). In this regard, it is of particular interest to note the non-catalytic role of the conserved ATP-binding lysine 220 residue in the ILK KD. Unlike the corresponding lysine that is disordered in ATP-free kinases, we found that Lys-220 plays a critical role in the structural integrity of ILK and its mutation to methionine (K220M) substantially impaired the stability of ILK. Thus, although Lys-220 is remote from the α-parvin binding interface, the decreased structural stability of the ILK mutant may in turn affect ILK binding to α-parvin as indicated by Lange et al. ( 21 ) and possibly other ILK-binding proteins. This finding provides a basis for understanding why the K220M mutation caused a significant phenotype, i.e. renal agenesis during kidney development ( 21 ). One can similarly explain two other phenotypic single amino acid substitution mutations identified in ILK KD, L308P that causes a lethal heart failure in zebrafish ( 8 ) and A262V that causes a severe dilated cardiomyopathy in humans ( 9 ). As shown in supplemental Fig. S4 , residue L308 is positioned in the αE-helix and its side chain is buried inside a hydrophobic core formed by I244, V250, M305, L311, H318, I335, and M337. Therefore, the L308P substitution would clearly cause a disruption of the αE-helix, which in turn perturbs the structural integrity of the ILK KD, which was found to impair ILK binding to β-parvin ( 8 ), a homologue to α-parvin. Similarly, A262 is located in a loop in the N-lobe in the ILK KD near a bulky F190 and hydrophilic residue of C257 and T266 ( supplemental Fig. S4 ). The A262V substitution would insert an extra methyl group to cause a steric clash with these surrounding residues, thus impairing the structural integrity of ILK KD and its target binding. Thus, it is the disruption of the structural integrity rather than a loss of kinase activity that causes the dysfunction of ILK and the related pathological disorders.

It is becoming increasingly clear that regulated protein-protein interactions mediated by scaffolding proteins play crucial roles in many signal transduction pathways. Assembly of signaling components mediated by scaffolding proteins can enhance spatial coordination to the signaling target for an efficient feedback mechanism ( 51 ). Given the significance of the ILK-mediated membrane-cytoskeleton linkage associated with signaling pathways in many biological processes, such as cardiovascular development, identification of the signaling molecules that directly interact with ILK and/or its binding partners will be necessary to provide new insights into the coordinated molecular and signaling mechanisms in ILK-mediated integrin biology.
