---
pmid: '17259263'
title: ARF7 and ARF19 regulate lateral root formation via direct activation of LBD/ASL
  genes in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Okushima Y
- Fukaki H
- Onoda M
- Theologis A
- Tasaka M
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1820965
doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.047761
---

# ARF7 and ARF19 regulate lateral root formation via direct activation of LBD/ASL genes in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Okushima Y, Fukaki H, Onoda M, Theologis A, Tasaka M
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.106.047761](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.106.047761)
**PMC:** [PMC1820965](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1820965/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2007 Jan;19(1):118-30. doi: 10.1105/tpc.106.047761. Epub 2007 Jan 
26.

ARF7 and ARF19 regulate lateral root formation via direct activation of LBD/ASL 
genes in Arabidopsis.

Okushima Y(1), Fukaki H, Onoda M, Theologis A, Tasaka M.

Author information:
(1)Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Graduate School of Biological 
Sciences, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Lateral root formation in Arabidopsis thaliana is regulated by two related AUXIN 
RESPONSE FACTORs, ARF7 and ARF19, which are transcriptional activators of early 
auxin response genes. The arf7 arf19 double knockout mutant is severely impaired 
in lateral root formation. Target-gene analysis in arf7 arf19 transgenic plants 
harboring inducible forms of ARF7 and ARF19 revealed that ARF7 and ARF19 
directly regulate the auxin-mediated transcription of LATERAL ORGAN 
BOUNDARIES-DOMAIN16/ASYMMETRIC LEAVES2-LIKE18 (LBD16/ASL18) and/or LBD29/ASL16 
in roots. Overexpression of LBD16/ASL18 and LBD29/ASL16 induces lateral root 
formation in the absence of ARF7 and ARF19. These LBD/ASL proteins are localized 
in the nucleus, and dominant repression of LBD16/ASL18 activity inhibits lateral 
root formation and auxin-mediated gene expression, strongly suggesting that 
these LBD/ASLs function downstream of ARF7- and ARF19-dependent auxin signaling 
in lateral root formation. Our results reveal that ARFs regulate lateral root 
formation via direct activation of LBD/ASLs in Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.106.047761
PMCID: PMC1820965
PMID: 17259263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
