---
pmid: '16218961'
title: Human mitochondrial complex I assembly is mediated by NDUFAF1.
authors:
- Vogel RO
- Janssen RJ
- Ugalde C
- Grovenstein M
- Huijbens RJ
- Visch HJ
- van den Heuvel LP
- Willems PH
- Zeviani M
- Smeitink JA
- Nijtmans LG
journal: FEBS J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04928.x
---

# Human mitochondrial complex I assembly is mediated by NDUFAF1.
**Authors:** Vogel RO, Janssen RJ, Ugalde C, Grovenstein M, Huijbens RJ, Visch HJ, van den Heuvel LP, Willems PH, Zeviani M, Smeitink JA, Nijtmans LG
**Journal:** FEBS J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04928.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04928.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2005 Oct;272(20):5317-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04928.x.

Human mitochondrial complex I assembly is mediated by NDUFAF1.

Vogel RO(1), Janssen RJ, Ugalde C, Grovenstein M, Huijbens RJ, Visch HJ, van den 
Heuvel LP, Willems PH, Zeviani M, Smeitink JA, Nijtmans LG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Netherlands.

Complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) is the largest multiprotein enzyme of 
the oxidative phosphorylation system. Its assembly in human cells is poorly 
understood and no proteins assisting this process have yet been described. A 
good candidate is NDUFAF1, the human homologue of Neurospora crassa complex I 
chaperone CIA30. Here, we demonstrate that NDUFAF1 is a mitochondrial protein 
that is involved in the complex I assembly process. Modulating the 
intramitochondrial amount of NDUFAF1 by knocking down its expression using RNA 
interference leads to a reduced amount and activity of complex I. NDUFAF1 is 
associated to two complexes of 600 and 700 kDa in size of which the relative 
distribution is altered in two complex I deficient patients. Analysis of NDUFAF1 
expression in a conditional complex I assembly system shows that the 700 kDa 
complex may represent a key step in the complex I assembly process. Based on 
these data, we propose that NDUFAF1 is an important protein for the 
assembly/stability of complex I.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04928.x
PMID: 16218961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
