---
pmid: '17310983'
title: 'Ribosomal protein S7 as a novel modulator of p53-MDM2 interaction: binding
  to MDM2, stabilization of p53 protein, and activation of p53 function.'
authors:
- Chen D
- Zhang Z
- Li M
- Wang W
- Li Y
- Rayburn ER
- Hill DL
- Wang H
- Zhang R
journal: Oncogene
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210327
---

# Ribosomal protein S7 as a novel modulator of p53-MDM2 interaction: binding to MDM2, stabilization of p53 protein, and activation of p53 function.
**Authors:** Chen D, Zhang Z, Li M, Wang W, Li Y, Rayburn ER, Hill DL, Wang H, Zhang R
**Journal:** Oncogene (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210327](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210327)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 2;26(35):5029-37. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210327. Epub 2007
Feb  19.

Ribosomal protein S7 as a novel modulator of p53-MDM2 interaction: binding to 
MDM2, stabilization of p53 protein, and activation of p53 function.

Chen D(1), Zhang Z, Li M, Wang W, Li Y, Rayburn ER, Hill DL, Wang H, Zhang R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

As a major negative regulator of p53, the MDM2 oncogene plays an important role 
in carcinogenesis and tumor progression. MDM2 promotes p53 proteasomal 
degradation and negatively regulates p53 function. The mechanisms by which the 
MDM2-p53 interaction is regulated are not fully understood, although several 
MDM2-interacting molecules have recently been identified. To search for novel 
MDM2-binding partners, we screened a human prostate cDNA library by the yeast 
two-hybrid assay using full-length MDM2 protein as the bait. Among the candidate 
proteins, ribosomal protein S7 was identified and confirmed as a novel 
MDM2-interacting protein. Herein, we demonstrate that S7 binds to MDM2, in vitro 
and in vivo, and that the interaction between MDM2 and S7 leads to modulation of 
MDM2-p53 binding by forming a ternary complex among MDM2, p53 and S7. This 
results in the stabilization of p53 protein through abrogation of MDM2-mediated 
p53 ubiquitination. Consequently, S7 overexpression increases p53 
transactivational activities, induces apoptosis, and inhibits cell 
proliferation. The identification of S7 as a novel MDM2-interacting partner 
contributes to elucidation of the complex regulation of the MDM2-p53 interaction 
and has implications in cancer prevention and therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210327
PMID: 17310983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
