---
pmid: '9055077'
title: Dissection of filamentous growth by transposon mutagenesis in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Mösch HU
- Fink GR
journal: Genetics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1207852
doi: 10.1093/genetics/145.3.671
---

# Dissection of filamentous growth by transposon mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Mösch HU, Fink GR
**Journal:** Genetics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/145.3.671](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/145.3.671)
**PMC:** [PMC1207852](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1207852/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1997 Mar;145(3):671-84. doi: 10.1093/genetics/145.3.671.

Dissection of filamentous growth by transposon mutagenesis in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Mösch HU(1), Fink GR.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Microbiology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Germany.

Diploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains starved for nitrogen undergo a 
developmental transition from growth as single yeast form (YF) cells to a 
multicellular form consisting of filaments of pseudohyphal (PH) cells. 
Filamentous growth is regulated by an evolutionarily conserved signaling pathway 
that includes the small GTP-binding proteins Ras2p and Cdc42p, the protein 
kinases Ste20p, Ste11p and Ste7p, and the transcription factor Ste12p. Here, we 
designed a genetic screen for mutant strains defective for filamentous growth 
(dfg) to identify novel targets of the filamentation signaling pathway, and we 
thereby identified 16 different genes, CDC39, STE12, TEC1, WHI3, NAB1, DBR1, 
CDC55, SRV2, TPM1, SPA2, BNI1, DFG5, DFG9, DFG10, BUD8 and DFG16, mutations that 
block filamentous growth. Phenotypic analysis of dfg mutant strains genetically 
dissects filamentous growth into the cellular processes of signal transduction, 
bud site selection, cell morphogenesis and invasive growth. Epistasis tests 
between dfg mutant alleles and dominant activated alleles of the RAS2 and STE11 
genes, RAS2Val19 and STE11-4, respectively, identify putative targets for the 
filamentation signaling pathway. Several of the genes described here have 
homologues in filamentous fungi, where they also regulate fungal development.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/145.3.671
PMCID: PMC1207852
PMID: 9055077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
