---
pmid: '22727667'
title: Intrinsic nucleic acid-binding activity of Chp1 chromodomain is required for
  heterochromatic gene silencing.
authors:
- Ishida M
- Shimojo H
- Hayashi A
- Kawaguchi R
- Ohtani Y
- Uegaki K
- Nishimura Y
- Nakayama J
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.017
---

# Intrinsic nucleic acid-binding activity of Chp1 chromodomain is required for heterochromatic gene silencing.
**Authors:** Ishida M, Shimojo H, Hayashi A, Kawaguchi R, Ohtani Y, Uegaki K, Nishimura Y, Nakayama J
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.017)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2012 Jul 27;47(2):228-41. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.017. Epub
2012  Jun 21.

Intrinsic nucleic acid-binding activity of Chp1 chromodomain is required for 
heterochromatic gene silencing.

Ishida M(1), Shimojo H, Hayashi A, Kawaguchi R, Ohtani Y, Uegaki K, Nishimura Y, 
Nakayama J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Chromatin Dynamics, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2012 Jul 27;47(2):153-5. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.07.007.

Centromeric heterochromatin assembly in fission yeast requires the RNAi pathway. 
Chp1, a chromodomain (CD) protein, forms the Ago1-containing RNA-induced 
transcriptional silencing (RITS) complex and recruits siRNA-bound RITS to 
methylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9me) via its CD. Here, we show that the CD of 
Chp1 (Chp1-CD) possesses unique nucleic acid-binding activities that are 
essential for heterochromatic gene silencing. Detailed electrophoretic-mobility 
shift analyses demonstrated that Chp1 binds to RNA via the CD in addition to its 
central RNA-recognition motif. Interestingly, robust RNA- and DNA-binding 
activity of Chp1-CD was strongly enhanced when it was bound to H3K9me, which was 
revealed to involve a positively charged domain within the Chp1-CD by structural 
analyses. These results demonstrate a role for the CD that provides a link 
between RNA, DNA, and methylated histone tails to ensure heterochromatic gene 
silencing.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.017
PMID: 22727667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
