---
pmid: '16023112'
title: Identification of ADP-ribosylation site in human glutamate dehydrogenase isozymes.
authors:
- Choi MM
- Huh JW
- Yang SJ
- Cho EH
- Choi SY
- Cho SW
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.041
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of ADP-ribosylation site in human glutamate dehydrogenase isozymes.
**Authors:** Choi MM, Huh JW, Yang SJ, Cho EH, Choi SY, Cho SW
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.041)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Aug 1;579(19):4125-30. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.041.

Identification of ADP-ribosylation site in human glutamate dehydrogenase 
isozymes.

Choi MM(1), Huh JW, Yang SJ, Cho EH, Choi SY, Cho SW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Ulsan College 
of Medicine, 388-1 Poongnap-2dong, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, South Korea.

When the influence of ADP-ribosylation on the activities of the purified human 
glutamate dehydrogenase isozymes (hGDH1 and hGDH2) was measured in the presence 
of 100 microM NAD+ for 60 min, hGDH isozymes were inhibited by up to 75%. If 
incubations were performed for longer time periods up to 3 h, the inhibition of 
hGDH isozymes did not increased further. This phenomenon may be related to the 
reversibility of ADP-ribosylation in mitochondria. ADP-ribosylated hDGH isozymes 
were reactivated by Mg2+-dependent mitochondrial ADP-ribosylcysteine hydrolase. 
The stoichiometry between incorporated ADP-ribose and GDH subunits shows a 
modification of one subunit per catalytically active homohexamer. Since ADP and 
GTP had no effects on the extent of modification, it would appear that the 
ADP-ribosylation is unlikely to occur in allosteric sites. It has been proposed 
that Cys residue may be involved in the ADP-ribosylation of GDH, although 
identification of the reactive Cys residue has not been reported. To identify 
the reactive Cys residue involved in the ADP-ribosylation, we performed cassette 
mutagenesis at three different positions (Cys59, Cys119, and Cys274) using 
synthetic genes of hGDH isozymes. Among the Cys residues tested, only Cys119 
mutants showed a significant reduction in the ADP-ribosylation. These results 
suggest a possibility that the Cys119 residue has an important role in the 
regulation of hGDH isozymes by ADP-ribosylation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.041
PMID: 16023112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
