---
pmid: '1150650'
title: Regulation of glycogen phosphorylase. Role of the peptide region surrounding
  the phosphoserine residue in determining enzyme properties.
authors:
- Carty TJ
- Tu J-I
- Graves DJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1975'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of glycogen phosphorylase. Role of the peptide region surrounding the phosphoserine residue in determining enzyme properties.
**Authors:** Carty TJ, Tu J-I, Graves DJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1975)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1975 Jul 10;250(13):4980-5.

Regulation of glycogen phosphorylase. Role of the peptide region surrounding the 
phosphoserine residue in determining enzyme properties.

Carty TJ, Tu J-I, Graves DJ.

A phosphopeptide which contains 14 residues including phosphoserine and which is 
derived from the NH2-terminal region of skeletal muscle glycogen phosphorylase 
(Nolan, C., Novoa, W. B., Krebs, E. G., and Fischer, E. H. (1964) Biochemistry 
3, 542-551) has been shown to induce the enzymic properties of phosphorylase a 
in phosphorylase b and b'. When phosphorylase b is incubated with the 
phosphorylated tetradecapeptide, the following changes occur: (1) the enzyme 
becomes partially catalytically active in the absence of AMP; (2) the allosteric 
interactions of the enzyme are altered, as evidenced by the fact that 
phosphorylase b does not bind AMP cooperatively, and is no longer inhibited by 
glucose-6-P; and (3) the enzyme, normally present as a dimer, associates to a 
tetramer. Phosphorylase b' is a modified form of phosphorylase in which the 
phosphorylation site has been removed by limited tryptic attack. In the presence 
of phosphopeptide, 86% of the total enzyme activity can be induced in the 
absence of AMP. The properties of phosphorylases b and b' with phosphopeptide, 
cited above, are all characteristics of the phosphonenzyme, phosphorylase a. In 
addition, evidence is presented that these effects are specific. They are not 
the result of the polycationic nature of the peptide since they cannot be 
duplicated by spermine, and the phosphate group must also be present for the 
peptide to effect changes on the enzyme.

PMID: 1150650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
