---
pmid: '24535599'
title: Phosphorylation of Grb14 BPS domain by GSK-3 correlates with complex forming
  of Grb14 and insulin receptor.
authors:
- Taira J
- Higashimoto Y
journal: J Biochem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvu011
---

# Phosphorylation of Grb14 BPS domain by GSK-3 correlates with complex forming of Grb14 and insulin receptor.
**Authors:** Taira J, Higashimoto Y
**Journal:** J Biochem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvu011](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvu011)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2014 Jun;155(6):353-60. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvu011. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Phosphorylation of Grb14 BPS domain by GSK-3 correlates with complex forming of 
Grb14 and insulin receptor.

Taira J(1), Higashimoto Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Kurume University School of Medicine, 67 
Asahi-machi, Kurume 830-0011, Japan taira_junichi@med.kurume-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Kurume University School of Medicine, 67 
Asahi-machi, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.

Growth factor receptor-bound protein 14 (Grb14) interacts with insulin receptor 
(IR) through the between PH and SH2 (BPS) domain. Grb14-IR complex formation is 
initiated by insulin stimulation, and the binding event results in the 
inhibition of insulin signalling. Thus, Grb14 is regarded as an endogenous 
suppressor of insulin signal transduction; however, there are no studies 
describing the mechanism whereby Grb14-IR complex formation is suppressed in the 
absence of insulin stimulation. In the present study, multiple phosphorylation 
motifs for glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) were identified within the Grb14 
BPS domain (Ser(358), Ser(362) and Ser(366) of human Grb14). Pharmacological 
inhibition as well as knockdown of GSK-3 facilitated complex formation between 
Grb14 and IR, implicating GSK-3 activity in regulating Grb14-IR binding. In situ 
proximity ligation assay and in vitro kinase assays of phosphopeptides suggested 
that serine residues in the BPS domain would be substrates for GSK-3. The kinase 
assays also indicated phosphoserine 370 (in human Grb14) was required for the 
phosphorylation of Ser(358), Ser(362) and Ser(366) by GSK-3. Grb14-IR binding 
was also facilitated by replacement of the serines with Ala. We also observed 
that Ser(366) of endogenous Grb14 in Hep G2 cell was phosphorylated and the 
phosphorylation was influenced by treatments with insulin, as well as the GSK-3 
inhibitor.

© The Authors 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvu011
PMID: 24535599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
