---
pmid: '12167698'
title: A20 inhibits tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha-induced apoptosis by disrupting
  recruitment of TRADD and RIP to the TNF receptor 1 complex in Jurkat T cells.
authors:
- He KL
- Ting AT
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC133997
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.17.6034-6045.2002
---

# A20 inhibits tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha-induced apoptosis by disrupting recruitment of TRADD and RIP to the TNF receptor 1 complex in Jurkat T cells.
**Authors:** He KL, Ting AT
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.17.6034-6045.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.17.6034-6045.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC133997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133997/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Sep;22(17):6034-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.17.6034-6045.2002.

A20 inhibits tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha-induced apoptosis by disrupting 
recruitment of TRADD and RIP to the TNF receptor 1 complex in Jurkat T cells.

He KL(1), Ting AT.

Author information:
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 
10029, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) can trigger distinct signaling pathways 
leading to either the activation of NF-kappaB transcription factors or 
apoptosis. NF-kappaB activation results in the expression of antiapoptotic genes 
that inhibit the apoptosis pathway that is activated in parallel. However, the 
molecular mechanism of this inhibition remains poorly characterized. We have 
isolated a Jurkat T-cell mutant that exhibits enhanced sensitivity to 
TNF-induced apoptosis as a result of a deficiency in I-kappaB kinase gamma 
(IKKgamma)/NEMO, an essential component of the IKK complex and NF-kappaB 
pathway. We show here that the zinc finger protein A20 is an NF-kappaB-inducible 
gene that can protect the IKKgamma-deficient cells from TNF-induced apoptosis by 
disrupting the recruitment of the death domain signaling molecules TRADD and RIP 
to the receptor signaling complex. Our study, together with reports on the role 
of other antiapoptotic proteins such as c-FLIP and c-IAP, suggests that, in 
order to ensure an effective shutdown of the apoptotic pathway, TNF induces 
multiple NF-kappaB-dependent genes that inhibit successive steps in the TNFR1 
death signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.17.6034-6045.2002
PMCID: PMC133997
PMID: 12167698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
