---
reference_id: PMID:38128568
title: Biallelic BORCS8 variants cause an infantile-onset neurodegenerative disorder with altered lysosome dynamics.
authors:
- De Pace R
- Maroofian R
- Paimboeuf A
- Zamani M
- Zaki MS
- Sadeghian S
- Azizimalamiri R
- Galehdari H
- Zeighami J
- Williamson CD
- Fleming E
- Zhou D
- Gannon JL
- Thiffault I
- Roze E
- Suri M
- Zifarelli G
- Bauer P
- Houlden H
- Severino M
- Patten SA
- Farrow E
- Bonifacino JS
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awad427
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Biallelic BORCS8 variants cause an infantile-onset neurodegenerative disorder with altered lysosome dynamics.
**Authors:** De Pace R, Maroofian R, Paimboeuf A, Zamani M, Zaki MS, Sadeghian S, Azizimalamiri R, Galehdari H, Zeighami J, Williamson CD, Fleming E, Zhou D, Gannon JL, Thiffault I, Roze E, Suri M, Zifarelli G, Bauer P, Houlden H, Severino M, Patten SA, Farrow E, Bonifacino JS
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awad427](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awad427)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 May 3;147(5):1751-1767. doi: 10.1093/brain/awad427.

Biallelic BORCS8 variants cause an infantile-onset neurodegenerative disorder
with altered lysosome dynamics.

De Pace R(1), Maroofian R(2), Paimboeuf A(3), Zamani M(4)(5), Zaki MS(6),
Sadeghian S(7), Azizimalamiri R(7), Galehdari H(4), Zeighami J(5), Williamson
CD(1), Fleming E(8), Zhou D(8)(9), Gannon JL(9)(10), Thiffault I(8)(11), Roze
E(12), Suri M(13), Zifarelli G(14), Bauer P(14), Houlden H(2), Severino M(15),
Patten SA(3)(16), Farrow E(9)(17), Bonifacino JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences and Cellular and Structural Biology Division, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child, Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen Square Institute of
Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(3)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Centre Armand Frappier
Santé Biotechnologie, Laval, QC H7V 1B7, Canada.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shahid Chamran University of
Ahvaz, Ahvaz 83151-61355, Iran.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, Narges Medical Genetics and Prenatal
Diagnosis Laboratory, Ahvaz 61556-89467, Iran.
(6)Human Genetics and Genome Research Institute, Clinical Genetics Department,
National Research Centre, Cairo 12622, Egypt.
(7)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Golestan Medical, Educational, and
Research Center, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz
61357-33184, Iran.
(8)Department of Genetics, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64108,
USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Missouri-Kansas City School of
Medicine, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.
(10)Division of Clinical Genetics, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO
64108, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO
64108, USA.
(12)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, INSERM, Institut du Cerveau (ICM), and Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Department of Neurology, Hôpital de la
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris 75013, France.
(13)Nottingham Clinical Genetics Service, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS
Trust, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham NG5 1PB, UK.
(14)CENTOGENE GmbH, 18055 Rostock, Germany.
(15)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa 16147, Italy.
(16)Départementde Neurosciences, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H3C 3J7,
Canada.
(17)Genomic Medicine Center, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO
64108, USA.

BLOC-one-related complex (BORC) is a multiprotein complex composed of eight
subunits named BORCS1-8. BORC associates with the cytosolic face of lysosomes,
where it sequentially recruits the small GTPase ARL8 and kinesin-1 and -3
microtubule motors to promote anterograde transport of lysosomes toward the
peripheral cytoplasm in non-neuronal cells and the distal axon in neurons. The
physiological and pathological importance of BORC in humans, however, remains to
be determined. Here, we report the identification of compound heterozygous
variants [missense c.85T>C (p.Ser29Pro) and frameshift c.71-75dupTGGCC
(p.Asn26Trpfs*51)] and homozygous variants [missense c.196A>C (p.Thr66Pro) and
c.124T>C (p.Ser42Pro)] in BORCS8 in five children with a severe early-infantile
neurodegenerative disorder from three unrelated families. The children exhibit
global developmental delay, severe-to-profound intellectual disability,
hypotonia, limb spasticity, muscle wasting, dysmorphic facies, optic atrophy,
leuko-axonopathy with hypomyelination, and neurodegenerative features with
prevalent supratentorial involvement. Cellular studies using a heterologous
transfection system show that the BORCS8 missense variants p.Ser29Pro,
p.Ser42Pro and p.Thr66Pro are expressed at normal levels but exhibit reduced
assembly with other BORC subunits and reduced ability to drive lysosome
distribution toward the cell periphery. The BORCS8 frameshift variant
p.Asn26Trpfs*51, on the other hand, is expressed at lower levels and is
completely incapable of assembling with other BORC subunits and promoting
lysosome distribution toward the cell periphery. Therefore, all the BORCS8
variants are partial or total loss-of-function alleles and are thus likely
pathogenic. Knockout of the orthologous borcs8 in zebrafish causes decreased
brain and eye size, neuromuscular anomalies and impaired locomotion,
recapitulating some of the key traits of the human disease. These findings thus
identify BORCS8 as a novel genetic locus for an early-infantile
neurodegenerative disorder and highlight the critical importance of BORC and
lysosome dynamics for the development and function of the central nervous
system.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Guarantors of Brain 2023.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awad427
PMCID: PMC11068110
PMID: 38128568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.