---
pmid: '15590654'
title: Structure of a cell polarity regulator, a complex between atypical PKC and
  Par6 PB1 domains.
authors:
- Hirano Y
- Yoshinaga S
- Takeya R
- Suzuki NN
- Horiuchi M
- Kohjima M
- Sumimoto H
- Inagaki F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409823200
---

# Structure of a cell polarity regulator, a complex between atypical PKC and Par6 PB1 domains.
**Authors:** Hirano Y, Yoshinaga S, Takeya R, Suzuki NN, Horiuchi M, Kohjima M, Sumimoto H, Inagaki F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M409823200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M409823200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):9653-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M409823200. Epub
2004  Dec 7.

Structure of a cell polarity regulator, a complex between atypical PKC and Par6 
PB1 domains.

Hirano Y(1), Yoshinaga S, Takeya R, Suzuki NN, Horiuchi M, Kohjima M, Sumimoto 
H, Inagaki F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, N-12, W-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

A complex of atypical PKC and Par6 is a common regulator for cell 
polarity-related processes, which is an essential clue to evolutionary conserved 
cell polarity regulation. Here, we determined the crystal structure of the 
complex of PKCiota and Par6alpha PB1 domains to a resolution of 1.5 A. Both PB1 
domains adopt a ubiquitin fold. PKCiota PB1 presents an OPR, PC, and AID (OPCA) 
motif, 28 amino acid residues with acidic and hydrophobic residues, which 
interacts with the conserved lysine residue of Par6alpha PB1 in a front and back 
manner. On the interface, several salt bridges are formed including the 
conserved acidic residues on the OPCA motif of PKCiota PB1 and the conserved 
lysine residue on the Par6alpha PB1. Structural comparison of the PKCiota and 
Par6alpha PB1 complex with the p40phox and p67phox PB1 domain complex, subunits 
of neutrophil NADPH oxidase, reveals that the specific interaction is achieved 
by tilting the interface so that the insertion or extension in the sequence is 
engaged in the specificity determinant. The PB1 domain develops the interaction 
surface on the ubiquitin fold to increase the versatility of molecular 
interaction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M409823200
PMID: 15590654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
