---
pmid: '24426151'
title: ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter B4 Anchors the Cell Adhesion Molecule DdCAD-1
  to Cell Membrane in Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Yang C
- Hou L
- Yang Q
- Siu CH
journal: Indian J Microbiol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3779300
doi: 10.1007/s12088-013-0393-0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter B4 Anchors the Cell Adhesion Molecule DdCAD-1 to Cell Membrane in Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Yang C, Hou L, Yang Q, Siu CH
**Journal:** Indian J Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12088-013-0393-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12088-013-0393-0)
**PMC:** [PMC3779300](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3779300/)

## Abstract

1. Indian J Microbiol. 2013 Dec;53(4):460-6. doi: 10.1007/s12088-013-0393-0. Epub
 2013 Mar 22.

ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter B4 Anchors the Cell Adhesion Molecule DdCAD-1 
to Cell Membrane in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Yang C(1), Hou L(1), Yang Q(2), Siu CH(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science, East China Normal University, 200062 Shanghai, China.
(2)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research and the Department of 
Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8 Canada.

In Dictyostelium, soluble cell adhesion molecule, DdCAD-1, regulates cell-cell 
interaction through an unknown anchoring protein on the plasma membrane. Far 
western blot analysis using different probes revealed that the potential DdCAD-1 
interacting protein was between 64 and 98 kDa. To isolate and identify the 
anchoring protein, GST-DdCAD-1 and anchoring protein were cross-linked in vivo 
by chemical cross-linker and stable protein complex was isolated by 
co-immunoprecipitation assays. The protein cross-linked to DdCAD-1 was extracted 
from the gel slice and trypsinized. The peptides were subjected to analysis by 
mass spectrometry, which showed that the putative anchoring protein belongs to 
ATP-binding cassette transporter family.

DOI: 10.1007/s12088-013-0393-0
PMCID: PMC3779300
PMID: 24426151

## Full Text

Abstract

In Dictyostelium , soluble cell adhesion molecule, DdCAD-1, regulates cell–cell interaction through an unknown anchoring protein on the plasma membrane. Far western blot analysis using different probes revealed that the potential DdCAD-1 interacting protein was between 64 and 98 kDa. To isolate and identify the anchoring protein, GST-DdCAD-1 and anchoring protein were cross-linked in vivo by chemical cross-linker and stable protein complex was isolated by co-immunoprecipitation assays. The protein cross-linked to DdCAD-1 was extracted from the gel slice and trypsinized. The peptides were subjected to analysis by mass spectrometry, which showed that the putative anchoring protein belongs to ATP-binding cassette transporter family.

Introduction

As a simple social amoeba, one of the essentials of Dictyostelium development is the formation of the multicellular structures through the interaction of single cells. In this process, several cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are expressed to regulate cell–cell contact and cell movement. As the first expressed CAM, DdCAD-1 is synthesized at the onset of development by cadA gene [ 1 ]. Although DdCAD-1 has been identified to play its function as a cell adhesion molecule on plasma membrane, the sequence analysis revealed that it was a soluble protein, because N-terminal of DdCAD-1 does not contain a hydrophobic signal peptide or transmembrane domain [ 2 ]. Subcellular localization shows that DdCAD-1 was distributed in cytoplasm in the initial of development and is transferred to plasma membrane quickly within 3 h [ 3 ]. DdCAD-1 contains two domains, N-terminal domain has homophilic binding function, while C-terminal domain is responsible for tethering DdCAD-1 on cell membrane [ 4 , 5 ]. DdCAD-1 is transported to cell surface by contractile vacuoles [ 6 ], and time-lapse images show that some of DdCAD-1 is imported to contractile vacuoles by membrane invagination [ 7 ]. Moreover, DdCAD-1 can form capping structure on the cell surface by antibodies cross-linking experiment, which also demonstrates that DdCAD-1 is anchored on cell surface by certain membrane receptor(s) [ 8 ].

To investigate the anchoring protein which tethers DdCAD-1 to cell membrane, in vitro experiments were performed using far western blot to examine the location, and exogenous DdCAD-1 protein was cross-linked to anchoring protein by in vivo cross-linking. Then, the protein complex was isolated by co-immunoprecipitation and the anchoring protein was analyzed by mass spectrometry.

Conclusion

We have employed far western blot analysis and chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry to identify ABCB4 as the anchor protein of DdCAD-1. In addition to serving the function of presenting DdCAD-1 on the cell surface so it may fulfill its function as a cell–cell adhesion molecule, ABCB4 may be involved in the import and export DdCAD-1 in order to regulate the relative level of DdCAD-1 on the cell surface, which in turn modulates the adhesive strength contributed by the trans -homophilic interaction of DdCAD-1 between adjacent cells.
