---
pmid: '25601083'
title: A novel link between Fic (filamentation induced by cAMP)-mediated adenylylation/AMPylation
  and the unfolded protein response.
authors:
- Sanyal A
- Chen AJ
- Nakayasu ES
- Lazar CS
- Zbornik EA
- Worby CA
- Koller A
- Mattoo S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4375499
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618348
---

# A novel link between Fic (filamentation induced by cAMP)-mediated adenylylation/AMPylation and the unfolded protein response.
**Authors:** Sanyal A, Chen AJ, Nakayasu ES, Lazar CS, Zbornik EA, Worby CA, Koller A, Mattoo S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.618348](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.618348)
**PMC:** [PMC4375499](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4375499/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8482-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618348. Epub 
2015 Jan 19.

A novel link between Fic (filamentation induced by cAMP)-mediated 
adenylylation/AMPylation and the unfolded protein response.

Sanyal A(1), Chen AJ(1), Nakayasu ES(2), Lazar CS(3), Zbornik EA(1), Worby 
CA(3), Koller A(4), Mattoo S(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biological Sciences and.
(2)Bindley Biosciences Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907.
(3)the Department of Pharmacology, University of California at San Diego, La 
Jolla, California 92093, and.
(4)the Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 
11794.
(5)From the Department of Biological Sciences and smattoo@purdue.edu.

The maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis is a critical aspect 
of determining cell fate and requires a properly functioning unfolded protein 
response (UPR). We have discovered a previously unknown role of a 
post-translational modification termed adenylylation/AMPylation in regulating 
signal transduction events during UPR induction. A family of enzymes, defined by 
the presence of a Fic (filamentation induced by cAMP) domain, catalyzes this 
adenylylation reaction. The human genome encodes a single Fic protein, called 
HYPE (Huntingtin yeast interacting protein E), with adenylyltransferase activity 
but unknown physiological target(s). Here, we demonstrate that HYPE localizes to 
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum via its hydrophobic N terminus and 
adenylylates the ER molecular chaperone, BiP, at Ser-365 and Thr-366. BiP 
functions as a sentinel for protein misfolding and maintains ER homeostasis. We 
found that adenylylation enhances BiP's ATPase activity, which is required for 
refolding misfolded proteins while coping with ER stress. Accordingly, HYPE 
expression levels increase upon stress. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of 
HYPE prevents the induction of an unfolded protein response. Thus, we identify 
HYPE as a new UPR regulator and provide the first functional data for 
Fic-mediated adenylylation in mammalian signaling.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618348
PMCID: PMC4375499
PMID: 25601083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis is a critical aspect of determining cell fate and requires a properly functioning unfolded protein response (UPR). We have discovered a previously unknown role of a post-translational modification termed adenylylation/AMPylation in regulating signal transduction events during UPR induction. A family of enzymes, defined by the presence of a Fic ( f ilamentation i nduced by c AMP) domain, catalyzes this adenylylation reaction. The human genome encodes a single Fic protein, called HYPE ( H untingtin y east interacting p rotein E ), with adenylyltransferase activity but unknown physiological target(s). Here, we demonstrate that HYPE localizes to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum via its hydrophobic N terminus and adenylylates the ER molecular chaperone, BiP, at Ser-365 and Thr-366. BiP functions as a sentinel for protein misfolding and maintains ER homeostasis. We found that adenylylation enhances BiP's ATPase activity, which is required for refolding misfolded proteins while coping with ER stress. Accordingly, HYPE expression levels increase upon stress. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of HYPE prevents the induction of an unfolded protein response. Thus, we identify HYPE as a new UPR regulator and provide the first functional data for Fic-mediated adenylylation in mammalian signaling.

Introduction

Protein folding and maturation take place in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 2 where proteins enter as unfolded polypeptides and are either folded into mature proteins or misfolded into aggregates for degradation. When there is an imbalance between the rate of unfolded proteins entering the ER and the rate of protein folding by ER chaperones, ER stress is induced. Under such a condition, the ER activates an unfolded protein response (UPR), mediated by the following three ER transmembrane receptors: inositol-requiring protein-1 (IRE1), activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6). and protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK) ( 1 , 2 ). The UPR signaling cascade works at three different levels. First, it lowers protein synthesis and translocation into the ER, helping the cell to transiently adapt to the stress. Second, it up-regulates the transcription of ER chaperones and other protein folding machinery to increase the rate of protein folding. Third, when these responses cannot establish homeostasis, programmed cell death is triggered.

Here, we show that the human Fic protein, HYPE ( H untingtin y east interacting p rotein E ), is a player in the UPR cascade. HYPE belongs to the Fic ( f ilamentation i nduced by c AMP) family of enzymes that uses cellular sources of nucleotides to carry out various post-translational modifications ( 3 – 5 ). Predominant among these post-translational modifications is the covalent addition of AMP to target substrates such as mammalian Rho GTPases ( 4 – 8 ). Fic proteins are now known to utilize ATP, UTP, GTP, and CTP and their derivatives to adenylylate (AMPylate), uridinylate (UMPylate), phosphocholinate (PCylate), as well as phosphorylate protein targets in vitro and/or in vivo ( 3 – 14 ). Fic proteins are defined by an H X F X (D/E)(G/A)N(G/K)R XX R motif, with the invariant His being required for enzymatic activity ( 3 , 7 ). Their activity is often regulated by an inhibitory helix, defined by a conserved (S/T) XXX E(G/N) sequence, that occupies the Fic active site to prevent nucleotide docking ( 15 ). Removal of the helix from the active site by mutating the conserved Glu relieves inhibition.

The human genome encodes a single Fic protein, called HYPE/FicD ( 5 ). HYPE was identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen where it interacted with the polyQ region of huntingtin, mutations within which cause Huntington disease ( 16 ). HYPE is highly conserved among eukaryotes, with human HYPE displaying high amino acid sequence similarity to its eukaryotic orthologs as follows: mouse ( Mus musculus ), 89.5%; zebrafish ( Danio rerio ), 76%; fruit fly ( Drosophila melanogaster ), 55%; and worm ( Caenorhabditis elegans ), 45.4%.

Using Rho GTPases, RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42, as artificial substrates in an in vitro adenylylation assay, we previously showed that HYPE preferentially uses ATP as a nucleotide source and functions as an adenylyltransferase ( 4 ). However, compared with bacterial Fic proteins like Histophilus somni IbpA that adenylylate Rho GTPases, enzymatic activity associated with WT HYPE was extremely weak ( 4 , 5 ). Accordingly, overexpression of HYPE in HeLa cells failed to induce a cytotoxic phenotype typical of that seen with IbpA ( 5 ). We reasoned that HYPE's weak enzymatic activity against Rho GTPases suggests that Rho GTPases may not be its physiological targets and/or that HYPE's active site was blocked by its inhibitory helix. Accordingly, a mutation of HYPE's Glu-234 to Gly in the context of HYPE's Fic domain alone (aa 187–437) was shown to relieve this inhibition by removing the inhibitory helix from the Fic active site ( 15 ).

Here, we have characterized HYPE's enzymatic activity in vitro and in tissue culture cells, and we show that uncontrolled HYPE activity induces apoptosis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that HYPE localizes to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and adenylylates an ER resident chaperone, BiP, at Ser-365 and Thr-366. BiP is critical for protein quality control and maintaining ER homeostasis ( 1 , 2 , 17 ). Our findings indicate that HYPE expression is up-regulated upon induction of UPR, and knockdown of HYPE prevents activation of UPR. We postulate that HYPE regulates UPR progression by adenylylating BiP. Our study is the first functional demonstration of the physiological significance of Fic-mediated adenylylation in mammalian cell signaling.

DISCUSSION

We have identified a previously unknown role for Fic-mediated adenylylation in regulating the UPR pathway. Our data show that HYPE is up-regulated upon UPR induction ( Fig. 5 , B and C ). Furthermore, our siRNA-mediated knockdown of HYPE reveals that HYPE is required for normal induction and progression of UPR likely via the ATF6 and PERK pathways ( Fig. 5 E ). Consequently, cells knocked down for HYPE fail to cope with ER stress and show decreased survival ( Fig. 6 ). Additionally, sustained expression of HYPE activity induces caspase-mediated apoptosis ( Fig. 2 ), in keeping with the programmed cell death seen in response to sustained UPR activation.

We ruled out cytoplasmic Rho GTPases, which have been used as in vitro substrates for HYPE, as physiological targets for HYPE by showing that activation of HYPE in the context of both its TPR and Fic domains does not enhance modification of Rac1 ( Fig. 2 F ). Additionally, we show that HYPE is targeted via its N terminus to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum ( Figs. 3 and 4 ), providing additional proof that the physiological target of HYPE must also localize to the ER lumen. By this same logic, histone H3, which has previously been used as an in vitro substrate for HYPE, is also not likely to be a physiologically relevant target ( 29 ). In agreement with HYPE's ER localization, we show for the first time that HYPE is glycosylated predominantly at Asn-275 ( Fig. 4 C ). Furthermore, we identify BiP, a sentinel chaperone in the activation of UPR, as a substrate for HYPE and identify Ser-365 and Thr-366 as sites of adenylylation on BiP ( Fig. 7 ).

We propose that HYPE regulates UPR via its interactions with BiP. Accordingly, HYPE-mediated adenylylation of BiP enhances its ATPase activity ( Fig. 8 C ), which is required for refolding misfolded proteins to cope with ER stress ( 30 ). These data suggest a positive role for HYPE in the UPR pathway, in keeping with our qRT-PCR data showing up-regulation of HYPE upon ER stress and the role of HYPE in cell survival under sustained ER stress.

During the course of submitting this manuscript, a report describing the Drosophila homolog of HYPE, dFicD, was published ( 28 ). In agreement with our findings, dFicD is also up-regulated in response to UPR induction and adenylylates BiP at Thr-366. However, there are some differences in the experimental strategies and results obtained between our study and the report on dFicD. For instance, although both HYPE and dFicD use divalent cations for their activity, unlike what is reported for dFicD ( 28 ), we failed to see an increase in BiP adenylylation by HYPE in the presence of Ca 2+ . Instead, Mn 2+ and Mg 2+ served as optimal cations, at physiologically relevant concentrations, for BiP adenylylation ( Fig. 7 H ). The ability to use both Mg 2+ and Mn 2+ may give HYPE an advantage over other Mg 2+ -dependent enzymes; a similar property is seen for other proteins of the secretory pathways, such as the Fam20C kinase ( 26 ). Next, using the ATPase domain of BiP with or without its linker region as an adenylylation target and to measure ATPase activity, Ham et al. suggest that adenylylation disrupts the ATPase activity of BiP ( 28 ). This observation is surprising, because both HYPE and BiP are up-regulated during UPR and inhibiting BiP function would be detrimental to coping with stress. A more likely explanation is that the ATPase assays with Drosophila Fic were not done with full-length BiP, and the inhibitory effect of adenylylation was inferred indirectly. In contrast, using proteins purified and separated by ion exchange and size exclusion, to ensure purity and lack of ATPase activity from contaminating bacterial chaperones from the purification process, we show that adenylylation enhances the ATPase activity of BiP ( Fig. 8 C ), which fits with our observation that HYPE positively regulates UPR.

Our studies further reveal that adenylylation of BiP does not alter its ability to bind to misfolded proteins ( Fig. 8 , A and B ). Interestingly, however, we find that HYPE itself is able to bind to misfolded proteins, a function that is independent of its adenylyltransferase activity ( Fig. 8 A ). Furthermore, its binding to misfolded proteins is enhanced in the presence of BiP ( Fig. 8 B ). These findings provide useful insight to speculate that HYPE may form a complex with BiP and misfolded proteins under UPR stress.

During UPR activation, misfolded proteins are first bound by TPR domain containing proteins like Hsp40 before handing them off to BiP ( 31 ). This mechanism stalls unnecessary activation of UPR cascades, offering the cell a chance to recover from ER stress. These co-chaperones also regulate interaction between Hsp70 and Hsp90 via their TPR domains and coordinate the cycle of binding of misfolded proteins and release of folded polypeptides from the chaperone machinery ( 30 , 32 ). Based on our structural analysis of IbpA Fic in complex with its Cdc42 substrate, domains outside the Fic enzymatic core are likely to be important for substrate recognition ( 25 ). To this end, HYPE contains a TPR domain, which may be important for its protein-protein interactions. It is possible that HYPE interacts with misfolded proteins in complex with BiP and other co-chaperones, and adenylylation may be important for stabilizing this interaction.

We are currently mapping exactly which branches of UPR are directly affected by HYPE's activity. Our data so far show a more dramatic effect on PERK and ATF6. Why HYPE appears to affect predominantly the PERK and ATF6 pathways remains to be determined. One possibility is that HYPE may have targets other than BiP. This idea is supported by the fact that even though HYPE adenylylates BiP, the presence of BiP enhances HYPE's autoadenylylation levels ( Fig. 7 D ). It is therefore possible that in addition to being adenylylated by HYPE, BiP may also function as a cofactor for HYPE. We are currently assessing other ER-localized members of the UPR pathway as adenylylation targets of HYPE.

Recently, the ER protein PARP16 was shown to regulate PERK and Ire1α-mediated UPR activation by ADP-ribosylating these proteins and improving their disassociation from BiP ( 33 ). One possible explanation for HYPE's effect on the PERK and ATF6 pathways, but not Ire1α pathway, is that adenylylation of BiP specifically alters its ability to interact with PERK and ATF6. We hypothesize that adenylylation promotes BiP's disassociation from PERK and ATF6, thus activating these pathways ( Fig. 8 D ). This also explains why sustained activation of HYPE, such as with expression of E234G-HYPE, induces apoptosis, which is controlled by PERK activation. The observed increase in BiP's ATPase activity upon adenylylation would also promote induction of this pathway.

The physiological signal that activates HYPE remains a critical question. BiP could be adenylylated in vitro only when incubated with E234G-HYPE but not WT-HYPE ( Fig. 7 , D and E ). This observation suggests that simply an interaction between WT-HYPE and its substrate is not sufficient to relieve HYPE's intrinsic inhibition. Thus, substrate binding is not the signal for the enzymatic activation of HYPE. Autoadenylylation also does not appear to be a signal for regulating HYPE activity, as autoadenylylation mutants were minimally affected in their ability to induce apoptosis and adenylylate BiP ( Figs. 2 D and 7 E ).

Our study is the first characterization of the human Fic protein, and the first functional demonstration of the physiological significance of this enigmatic protein in eukaryotic signaling. Our knockdown studies and determination of the consequence of BiP modification further provide mechanistic insight into the role of Fic-mediated adenylylation in mammalian signal transduction.

Several lines of evidence support the activation of UPR during disease, for which BiP's ability to monitor and recover from these stress perturbations is critical. As a protein that modifies and activates BiP under stress conditions, HYPE poses as an attractive candidate for disease therapeutics.
