---
pmid: '20940048'
title: Phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) in leukocyte signaling and function.
authors:
- Fung-Leung WP
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.002
---

# Phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) in leukocyte signaling and function.
**Authors:** Fung-Leung WP
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.002)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2011 Apr;23(4):603-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.002. Epub
2010  Oct 16.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta (PI3Kδ) in leukocyte signaling and function.

Fung-Leung WP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research & 
Development LLC, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. wleung@its.jnj.com

PI3Kδ is a lipid kinase of the PI3K class IA family involved in early signaling 
events of leukocytes responding to a wide variety of stimuli. The leukocyte 
specificity of PI3Kδ is defined by its expression, whereas its signaling 
function is via the production of phosphoinositide 3,4,5-triphosphates at the 
proximity of activated receptors for recruiting other signaling molecules. The 
importance of PI3Kδ in B cell development and function is most apparent, and its 
role in other leukocyte cell types can be easily demonstrated as well. PI3Kδ 
participates in the development, activation and migration of T cells and NK 
cells. The role of PI3Kδ in myeloid cell activities, such as inflammation driven 
cell infiltration, neutrophil oxidative burst, immune complex mediated 
macrophage activation, as well as mast cell maturation and degranulation, has 
been well illustrated in various studies. As a result of the broad effects of 
PI3Kδ in leukocyte functions, the disruption of PI3Kδ expression or activity 
leads to decreased inflammatory and immune responses in vivo. The protective 
role of PI3Kδ inactivation in animal models of arthritis, asthma or obstructive 
respiratory diseases has been demonstrated. These findings suggest the potential 
efficacy achievable with PI3Kδ inhibitors in the treatment of autoimmune and 
respiratory diseases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.10.002
PMID: 20940048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
