---
pmid: '11986327'
title: Cloning and characterization of human Siglec-11. A recently evolved signaling
  molecule that can interact with SHP-1 and SHP-2 and is expressed by tissue macrophages,
  including brain microglia.
authors:
- Angata T
- Kerr SC
- Greaves DR
- Varki NM
- Crocker PR
- Varki A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202833200
---

# Cloning and characterization of human Siglec-11. A recently evolved signaling molecule that can interact with SHP-1 and SHP-2 and is expressed by tissue macrophages, including brain microglia.
**Authors:** Angata T, Kerr SC, Greaves DR, Varki NM, Crocker PR, Varki A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M202833200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M202833200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24466-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202833200. Epub
2002  May 1.

Cloning and characterization of human Siglec-11. A recently evolved signaling 
molecule that can interact with SHP-1 and SHP-2 and is expressed by tissue 
macrophages, including brain microglia.

Angata T(1), Kerr SC, Greaves DR, Varki NM, Crocker PR, Varki A.

Author information:
(1)Glycobiology Research and Training Center, Department of Medicine, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0687, USA.

Siglecs are sialic acid-recognizing animal lectins of the immunoglobulin 
superfamily. We have cloned and characterized a novel human molecule, Siglec-11, 
that belongs to the subgroup of CD33/Siglec-3-related Siglecs. As with others in 
this subgroup, the cytosolic domain of Siglec-11 is phosphorylated at tyrosine 
residue(s) upon pervanadate treatment of cells and then recruits the 
protein-tyrosine phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2. However, Siglec-11 has several 
novel features relative to the other CD33/Siglec-3-related Siglecs. First, it 
binds specifically to alpha2-8-linked sialic acids. Second, unlike other 
CD33/Siglec-3-related Siglecs, Siglec-11 was not found on peripheral blood 
leukocytes. Instead, we observed its expression on macrophages in various 
tissues, such as liver Kupffer cells. Third, it was also expressed on brain 
microglia, thus becoming the second Siglec to be found in the nervous system. 
Fourth, whereas the Siglec-11 gene is on human chromosome 19, it lies outside 
the previously described CD33/Siglec-3-related Siglec cluster on this 
chromosome. Fifth, analyses of genome data bases indicate that Siglec-11 has no 
mouse ortholog and that it is likely to be the last canonical human Siglec to be 
reported. Finally, although Siglec-11 shows marked sequence similarity to human 
Siglec-10 in its extracellular domain, the cytosolic tail appears only distantly 
related. Analysis of genomic regions surrounding the Siglec-11 gene suggests 
that it is actually a chimeric molecule that arose from relatively recent gene 
duplication and recombination events, involving the extracellular domain of a 
closely related ancestral Siglec gene (which subsequently became a pseudogene) 
and a transmembrane and cytosolic tail derived from another ancestral Siglec.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M202833200
PMID: 11986327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
