---
pmid: '9733515'
title: Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53.
authors:
- Canman CE
- Lim DS
- Cimprich KA
- Taya Y
- Tamai K
- Sakaguchi K
- Appella E
- Kastan MB
- Siliciano JD
journal: Science
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.281.5383.1677
---

# Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53.
**Authors:** Canman CE, Lim DS, Cimprich KA, Taya Y, Tamai K, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Kastan MB, Siliciano JD
**Journal:** Science (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.281.5383.1677](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.281.5383.1677)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1998 Sep 11;281(5383):1677-9. doi: 10.1126/science.281.5383.1677.

Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing radiation and phosphorylation of p53.

Canman CE(1), Lim DS, Cimprich KA, Taya Y, Tamai K, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, 
Kastan MB, Siliciano JD.

Author information:
(1)The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Oncology Center, Baltimore, MD 21205, 
USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein is activated and phosphorylated on serine-15 in 
response to various DNA damaging agents. The gene product mutated in ataxia 
telangiectasia, ATM, acts upstream of p53 in a signal transduction pathway 
initiated by ionizing radiation. Immunoprecipitated ATM had intrinsic protein 
kinase activity and phosphorylated p53 on serine-15 in a manganese-dependent 
manner. Ionizing radiation, but not ultraviolet radiation, rapidly enhanced this 
p53-directed kinase activity of endogenous ATM. These observations, along with 
the fact that phosphorylation of p53 on serine-15 in response to ionizing 
radiation is reduced in ataxia telangiectasia cells, suggest that ATM is a 
protein kinase that phosphorylates p53 in vivo.

DOI: 10.1126/science.281.5383.1677
PMID: 9733515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
