---
pmid: '22851693'
title: β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 degradation releases TAK1-TRAF6 from the membrane to
  the cytosol for TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation.
authors:
- Cui W
- Xiao N
- Xiao H
- Zhou H
- Yu M
- Gu J
- Li X
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3457527
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00722-12
---

# β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 degradation releases TAK1-TRAF6 from the membrane to the cytosol for TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation.
**Authors:** Cui W, Xiao N, Xiao H, Zhou H, Yu M, Gu J, Li X
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00722-12](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00722-12)
**PMC:** [PMC3457527](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3457527/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3990-4000. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00722-12. Epub 2012
 Jul 30.

β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 degradation releases TAK1-TRAF6 from the membrane to the 
cytosol for TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation.

Cui W(1), Xiao N, Xiao H, Zhou H, Yu M, Gu J, Li X.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, LSC, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase (IRAK1) is phosphorylated, 
ubiquitinated, and degraded upon IL-1 stimulation. IRAK1 can be ubiquitinated 
through both K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains upon IL-1 stimulation. 
While the Pellino proteins have been shown to meditate K63-linked 
polyubiquitination on IRAK1, the E3 ligase for K48-linked ubiquitination of 
IRAK1 has not been identified. In this study, we report that the SCF 
(Skp1-Cullin1-F-box)-β-TrCP complex functions as the K48-linked ubiquitination 
E3 ligase for IRAK1. IL-1 stimulation induced the interaction of IRAK1 with 
Cullin1 and β-TrCP. Knockdown of β-TrCP1 and β-TrCP2 attenuated the K48-linked 
ubiquitination and degradation of IRAK1. Importantly, β-TrCP deficiency 
abolished the translocation TAK1-TRAF6 complex from the membrane to the cytosol, 
resulting in a diminishment of the IL-1-induced TAK1-dependent pathway. Taken 
together, these results implicate a positive role of β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 
degradation in IL-1-induced TAK1 activation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00722-12
PMCID: PMC3457527
PMID: 22851693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor-associated kinase (IRAK1) is phosphorylated, ubiquitinated, and degraded upon IL-1 stimulation. IRAK1 can be ubiquitinated through both K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains upon IL-1 stimulation. While the Pellino proteins have been shown to meditate K63-linked polyubiquitination on IRAK1, the E3 ligase for K48-linked ubiquitination of IRAK1 has not been identified. In this study, we report that the SCF (Skp1–Cullin1–F-box)–β-TrCP complex functions as the K48-linked ubiquitination E3 ligase for IRAK1. IL-1 stimulation induced the interaction of IRAK1 with Cullin1 and β-TrCP. Knockdown of β-TrCP1 and β-TrCP2 attenuated the K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of IRAK1. Importantly, β-TrCP deficiency abolished the translocation TAK1-TRAF6 complex from the membrane to the cytosol, resulting in a diminishment of the IL-1-induced TAK1-dependent pathway. Taken together, these results implicate a positive role of β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 degradation in IL-1-induced TAK1 activation.

INTRODUCTION

Interleukin-1 (IL-1), a major proinflammatory cytokine, has a wide range of pathophysiological functions in autoimmune and inflammatory responses. Genetic and biochemical studies revealed that IL-1 receptor (IL-1R)-mediated signaling involves a cascade of kinases organized by multiple adapter molecules into signaling complexes, leading to activation of the transcription factor NF-κB. Based on studies by our group and others, we postulated a model for the IL-1 pathway ( 4 , 6 , 8 – 10 , 14 , 22 ). Upon IL-1 stimulation, the IL-1 receptor recruits the adaptor molecule MyD88 ( 1 ) and mediates the formation of complex I (IL-1R–MyD88–IRAK4–IRAK1/2–TRAF6), where IRAK4 (IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 4) ( 12 ) is activated, leading to hyperphosphorylation of IRAK1 ( 2 ). The phosphorylated IRAK1 interacts with Pellino proteins ( 7 ), which are E3 ubiquitin ligases, to mediate K63-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination. The receptor-proximal components are then released from the receptor to form complex II (IRAK-TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2-TAB3) on the membrane, leading to phosphorylation of TAK1 (tumor growth factor beta [TGF-β]-activated kinase, a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase [MAP3K]), TAB2 (TAK1 binding protein 2), and TAB3 on the membrane ( 4 , 6 , 8 – 10 , 14 , 22 ). While the membrane-associated, modified IRAK1 is ubiquitinated and degraded, complex III (TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2-TAB3) is then dissociated from complex II and translocated from the membrane to the cytosol, where TAK1 is activated, followed by the activation of IKK (IκB kinase) and NF-κB ( 8 ).

One hallmark in IL-1 signaling is ligand-induced IRAK1 phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation ( 13 , 24 , 25 ). In addition, other groups have found that IRAK1 could also undergo sumoylation besides phosphorylation and ubiquitination in Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling ( 21 ). A point mutation changing lysine 134 to arginine (K134R) in IRAK1 abolished IL-1-induced IRAK ubiquitination and degradation ( 26 ). The IRAK1 ubiquitination mutant is no longer degraded upon IL-1 stimulation and loses the ability to mediate TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation. Furthermore, the proteasome inhibitor MG132 blocked IL-1-induced, TAK1-dependent signaling, suggesting that IL-1-induced IRAK1 degradation is a necessary step in the activation of the TAK1-dependent pathway. IRAK1 is ubiquitinated through both K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains upon IL-1 induction. While Pellino proteins have been shown to meditate K63-linked polyubiquitination on IRAK1, the E3 ligase for K48-linked ubiquitination of IRAK1 has not been identified.

In this study, we found that the F-box protein β-transducin repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP), which functions as a substrate recognition subunit of the SCF-β-TrCP E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase, mediates K48-linked polyubiquitination on IRAK1 and subsequent IRAK1 degradation. Knockdown of endogenous β-TrCP1 and β-TrCP2 reduced K48-linked ubiquitination (but not non-K48-linked ubiquitination) on IRAK1 and attenuated degradation of IRAK1 in response to IL-1 stimulation. It is important to note that the modified IRAK1 is always membrane associated and detected in membrane-bound receptor complex I and II (IRAK-TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2-TAB3). One key step in IL-1 signaling is that while the membrane-associated, modified IRAK1 is ubiquitinated and degraded, complex III (TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2-TAB3) is translocated from the membrane to the cytosol, where TAK1 and IKK are activated, resulting in NF-κB activation ( 8 ). Importantly, we found that β-TrCP deficiency inhibited the IL-1-induced translocation of TAK1 and TRAF6 from the membrane to the cytosol, which correlated with the attenuated IRAK1 degradation. Consistent with this, IL-1-induced, TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation was substantially diminished in β-TrCP knockdown cells. Taking these findings together, we propose that SCF-β-TrCP-mediated, K48-linked IRAK1 ubiquitination and degradation are required for the release of TRAF6-TAK1 from complex II (IRAK-TRAF6-TAK1-TAB2-TAB3), resulting in the translocation of complex III (TAK1-TRAF6) from the membrane to the cytosol, leading to TAK1 activation followed by activation of IKK and NF-κB.

DISCUSSION

In this work, we report that SCF (Skp1–Cullin1–F-box)–β-TrCP complex functions as the K48-linked ubiquitination E3 ligase for IRAK1. IL-1 stimulation induced the interaction of IRAK1 with Cullin1 and β-TrCP. By overexpressing and knocking down β-TrCP1 and β-TrCP2, we demonstrated that β-TrCP plays a key role in mediating K48-linked ubiquitination and degradation of IRAK1, which correlates with the translocation of TAK1-TRAF6 complex from the membrane to the cytosol and IL-1-induced, TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation. Taken together, these results suggest that β-TrCP-mediated IRAK1 degradation releases TAK1-TRAF6 to the cytosol, resulting in IL-1-induced TAK1, IKK, and NF-κB activation.

Although it was speculated that IRAK1 degradation is one of the mechanisms to shut down IL-1 signaling to control inflammatory responses, our studies suggest that IRAK1 degradation is required for the activation of the TAK1-dependent pathway. We have previously shown that TAK1-TABs are preassociated as a complex on the membrane before IL-1 stimulation ( 8 ). Upon IL-1 stimulation, the modified IRAK1-TRAF6 complex dissociates from the receptor complex (complex I) and forms complex II with the preassociated TAK1-TABs on the membrane. The membrane-bound, modified IRAK1 is eventually ubiquitinated and degraded, which is accompanied by the release of the TAK1 complex (TRAF6-TAK1-TABs) from the membrane to the cytosol, where TAK1 is activated ( 8 ). We have now shown that IL-1-induced, β-TrCP-mediated, K48-linked IRAK1 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation play a critical role in the release of TAK1 complex from the membrane to the cytosol. Future studies are required to define the molecular nature and subcellular localization of the membrane association of complex II.

It is important to note that IRAK1 can be ubiquitinated through both K48- and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains upon IL-1 induction. We and others have previously shown that Pellino proteins meditate K63-linked polyubiquitination on IRAK1 ( 7 , 15 , 16 ). We recently found that Pellino 2 is required for IL-1- and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced, K63-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination. In Pellino 2 knockdown cells, the K63-linked polyubiquitination of IRAK1 was greatly reduced, which correlated with reduced IRAK1-TAK1 complex formation, suggesting that Pellino 2-mediated, K63-linked polyubiquitination of IRAK1 positively affects TLR-IL-1R signaling ( 10a ). Furthermore, when Pellino 2 was ablated, TLR–IL-1R-induced, TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation was compromised. Since Pellino 2 has been shown to play a positive role in IL-1-induced NF-κB activation, it is possible that Pellino 2-mediated, K63-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination plays an important role in the interaction of IRAK1 with the TAK1-TAB2-TAB3 complex. It has been shown that TAB2 and TAB3 specifically bind to K63-linked polyubiquitin chains through the highly conserved C-terminal zinc finger domain ( 10 ).

We previously reported that a point mutation changing lysine 134 to arginine (K134R) in IRAK1 abolished IL-1-induced IRAK1 ubiquitination and degradation ( 24 , 26 ). While Pellino proteins failed to mediate K63-linked polyubiquitination on the K134R mutant, β-TrCP-mediated, K48-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination was also abolished by K134R mutation. These results suggest that K134 is the site for both K48-linked and K63-linked polyubiquitin chains on IRAK1. Therefore, K63-linked polyubiquitin chains on IRAK1 need to be removed by a deubiquitination enzyme followed by K48-linked IRAK1 ubiquitination to target IRAK1 degradation. It has been reported that the deubiquitinase A20 can inhibit the NF-κB signaling by A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. However, A20 or TAX1BP1 deficiency had no effect on the ubiquitination or degradation of IRAK1 ( 17 , 18 ). Thus, the deubiquitinase for IRAK1 still needs further investigation. We propose that Pellino 2-mediated, K63-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination precedes β-TrCP-mediated, K48-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination and degradation. To add more complexity to IRAK1 ubiquitination, in contrast to Pellino 2, we previously reported that Pellino 3b has a negative impact on IL-1-induced, TAK1-dependent NF-κB activation ( 24 ). Pellino 3b-mediated, K63-linked IRAK polyubiquitination competed with K48-linked IRAK1 polyubiquitination for the same ubiquitination site, Lys 134 of IRAK, leading to the inhibition of IL-1-induced IRAK1 degradation. Interestingly, IL-1 stimulation upregulated the expression of endogenous Pellino 3b, suggesting a negative feedback on IRAK1-mediated signaling. It is important to note that since both K63- and K48-linked ubiquitination of IRAK1 were accumulated when IRAK1 degradation was blocked by pretreatment with proteasome inhibitor MG132. It is possible that K63-linked polyubiquitination takes place on other lysines besides K134. Future studies are required to clarify the multiple steps of IRAK1 polyubiquitination and their specific roles in IRAK1-mediated signaling.
