---
pmid: '23331060'
title: 'Endosomal recruitment of the WASH complex: active sequences and mutations
  impairing interaction with the retromer.'
authors:
- Helfer E
- Harbour ME
- Henriot V
- Lakisic G
- Sousa-Blin C
- Volceanov L
- Seaman MNJ
- Gautreau A
journal: Biol Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/boc.201200038
---

# Endosomal recruitment of the WASH complex: active sequences and mutations impairing interaction with the retromer.
**Authors:** Helfer E, Harbour ME, Henriot V, Lakisic G, Sousa-Blin C, Volceanov L, Seaman MNJ, Gautreau A
**Journal:** Biol Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/boc.201200038](https://doi.org/10.1111/boc.201200038)

## Abstract

1. Biol Cell. 2013 May;105(5):191-207. doi: 10.1111/boc.201200038. Epub 2013 Mar
7.

Endosomal recruitment of the WASH complex: active sequences and mutations 
impairing interaction with the retromer.

Helfer E(1), Harbour ME(2), Henriot V(1), Lakisic G(1), Sousa-Blin C(1), 
Volceanov L(1), Seaman MNJ(2), Gautreau A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche de Gif, Laboratoire d'Enzymologie et Biochimie 
Structurales, CNRS UPR3082, Avenue de la Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex 91198, 
France.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Cambridge Institute for Medical 
Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0XY, 
UK.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and scar homolog 
(WASH) complex is the major Arp2/3 activator at the surface of endosomes. The 
branched actin network, that the WASH complex induces, contributes to cargo 
sorting and scission of transport intermediates destined for most endosomal 
routes. A major challenge is to understand how the WASH molecular machine is 
recruited to the surface of endosomes. The retromer endosomal machinery has been 
proposed by us and others to play a role in this process.
RESULTS: In this work, we used an unbiased approach to identify the endosomal 
receptor of the WASH complex. We have delineated a short fragment of the FAM21 
subunit that is able to displace the endogenous WASH complex from endosomes. 
Using a proteomic approach, we have identified the retromer cargo selective 
complex (CSC) as a partner of the active FAM21 sequence displacing the 
endogenous WASH complex. A point mutation in FAM21 that abolishes CSC 
interaction also impairs WASH complex displacement activity. The CSC is composed 
of three subunits, VPS35, VPS29 and VPS26. FAM21 directly binds the VPS35 
subunit of the retromer CSC. Additionally, we show that a point mutant of VPS35 
that blocks binding to VPS29 also prevents association with FAM21 and the WASH 
complex revealing a novel role for the VPS35-VPS29 interaction in regulating 
retromer association with the WASH complex.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel approach of endogenous WASH displacement confirms 
previous suggestions that the retromer is the receptor of the WASH complex at 
the surface of endosomes and identify key residues that mediate this 
interaction. The interaction between these two endosomal machineries, the WASH 
complex and the retromer, is likely to play a critical role in forming platforms 
at the surface of endosomes for efficient sorting of cargoes.

© 2013 Société Française des Microscopies and Société de Biologie Cellulaire de 
France.

DOI: 10.1111/boc.201200038
PMID: 23331060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
