---
pmid: '10225946'
title: Light-dependent translocation of a phytochrome B-GFP fusion protein to the
  nucleus in transgenic Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Yamaguchi R
- Nakamura M
- Mochizuki N
- Kay SA
- Nagatani A
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2185089
doi: 10.1083/jcb.145.3.437
---

# Light-dependent translocation of a phytochrome B-GFP fusion protein to the nucleus in transgenic Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi R, Nakamura M, Mochizuki N, Kay SA, Nagatani A
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.145.3.437](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.145.3.437)
**PMC:** [PMC2185089](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2185089/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1999 May 3;145(3):437-45. doi: 10.1083/jcb.145.3.437.

Light-dependent translocation of a phytochrome B-GFP fusion protein to the 
nucleus in transgenic Arabidopsis.

Yamaguchi R(1), Nakamura M, Mochizuki N, Kay SA, Nagatani A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8502, Japan.

Phytochrome is a ubiquitous photoreceptor of plants and is encoded by a small 
multigene family. We have shown recently that a functional nuclear localization 
signal may reside within the COOH-terminal region of a major member of the 
family, phytochrome B (phyB) (Sakamoto, K., and A. Nagatani. 1996. Plant J. 
10:859-868). In the present study, a fusion protein consisting of full-length 
phyB and the green fluorescent protein (GFP) was overexpressed in the phyB 
mutant of Arabidopsis to examine subcellular localization of phyB in intact 
tissues. The resulting transgenic lines exhibited pleiotropic phenotypes 
reported previously for phyB overexpressing plants, suggesting that the fusion 
protein is biologically active. Immunoblot analysis with anti-phyB and anti-GFP 
monoclonal antibodies confirmed that the fusion protein accumulated to high 
levels in these lines. Fluorescence microscopy of the seedlings revealed that 
the phyB-GFP fusion protein was localized to the nucleus in light grown tissues. 
Interestingly, the fusion protein formed speckles in the nucleus. Analysis of 
confocal optical sections confirmed that the speckles were distributed within 
the nucleus. In contrast, phyB-GFP fluorescence was observed throughout the cell 
in dark-grown seedlings. Therefore, phyB translocates to specific sites within 
the nucleus upon photoreceptor activation.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.145.3.437
PMCID: PMC2185089
PMID: 10225946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
