---
pmid: '12408804'
title: Receptor-dependent and tyrosine phosphatase-mediated inhibition of GSK3 regulates
  cell fate choice.
authors:
- Kim L
- Harwood A
- Kimmel AR
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00269-1
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Receptor-dependent and tyrosine phosphatase-mediated inhibition of GSK3 regulates cell fate choice.
**Authors:** Kim L, Harwood A, Kimmel AR
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00269-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00269-1)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2002 Oct;3(4):523-32. doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00269-1.

Receptor-dependent and tyrosine phosphatase-mediated inhibition of GSK3 
regulates cell fate choice.

Kim L(1), Harwood A, Kimmel AR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Building 50/3351, NIDDK, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Asymmetric body axis formation is central to metazoan development. Dictyostelium 
establishes an anterior/posterior axis utilizing seven-transmembrane cAMP 
morphogen receptors (CARs) and GSK3-mediated signal transductions that has a 
parallel with metazoan Wnt/Frizzled-GSK3 pathways. In Dictyostelium, GSK3 
promotes posterior cell patterning but inhibits anterior cell differentiation. 
Tyrosine kinase ZAK1 mediates GSK3 activation. We now show that CAR4 regulates a 
tyrosine phosphatase that inhibits GSK3 activity. We have also identified 
essential phosphotyrosines in GSK3, confirmed their role in 
activated/deactivated regulation and cell fate decisions, and relate them to the 
predicted 3D structure of GSK3beta. CARs differentially regulate GSK3 activity 
by selectively activating a tyrosine phosphatase or kinase for pattern 
formation. The findings may provide a comparative understanding of CAR-GSK3 and 
Wnt/Frizzled-GSK3 pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/s1534-5807(02)00269-1
PMID: 12408804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
