---
pmid: '21460846'
title: The client protein p53 adopts a molten globule-like state in the presence of
  Hsp90.
authors:
- Park SJ
- Borin BN
- Martinez-Yamout MA
- Dyson HJ
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC3087862
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2045
---

# The client protein p53 adopts a molten globule-like state in the presence of Hsp90.
**Authors:** Park SJ, Borin BN, Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2045](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2045)
**PMC:** [PMC3087862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3087862/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 May;18(5):537-41. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2045. Epub 2011 
Apr 3.

The client protein p53 adopts a molten globule-like state in the presence of 
Hsp90.

Park SJ(1), Borin BN, Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
California, USA.

It is not currently known in what state (folded, unfolded or alternatively 
folded) client proteins interact with the chaperone Hsp90. We show that one 
client, the p53 DNA-binding domain, undergoes a structural change in the 
presence of Hsp90 to adopt a molten globule-like state. Addition of one- and 
two-domain constructs of Hsp90, as well as the full-length three-domain protein, 
to isotopically labeled p53 led to reduction in NMR signal intensity throughout 
p53, particularly in its central β-sheet. This reduction seems to be associated 
with a change of structure of p53 without formation of a distinct complex with 
Hsp90. Fluorescence and hydrogen-exchange measurements support a loosening of 
the structure of p53 in the presence of Hsp90 and its domains. We propose that 
Hsp90 interacts with p53 by multiple transient interactions, forming a dynamic 
heterogeneous manifold of conformational states that resembles a molten globule.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2045
PMCID: PMC3087862
PMID: 21460846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The ~90 kDa heat shock protein Hsp90 is a highly conserved molecular chaperone
found in great abundance in eukaryotic cells (~1% of cytosolic protein)1–3.
It is involved in a large number of cellular processes, mainly related to the
conformational stabilization and regulation of a specific set of client proteins,
including steroid hormone receptors, kinases and polymerases. The specificity of Hsp90
for its various clients appears to be mediated through the interactions of co-chaperones
such as p23 and Cdc37, and the cycle of binding and release of client proteins generally
requires ATP. Hsp90 is a homodimer, with three domains per monomer, the N-terminal
domain (N), a middle domain (M) and a C-terminal dimerization domain (C) (Figure 1a). Structures are available for the complete dimers
of Escherichia coli HtpG4 and
yeast Hsp825, but the conformations of the client
proteins when bound to Hsp90 are unknown. There are no published reports of
high-resolution structures of Hsp90-client protein complexes; an electron microscopic
reconstruction of a complex between Hsp90, the co-chaperone Cdc37 and the client kinase
Cdk4 has been reported6. The complexes between
Hsp90 and different clients may be quite different, and may even involve different sites
on the chaperone7.

One Hsp90 client that has been extensively studied is the tumor suppressor p53, a
393-amino acid transcription factor that is mutated in over 50% of human
cancers8,9. Most of the mutations seen in cancers occur in the DNA-binding domain of
p53 (Figure 1b), which is also the site of
interaction with Hsp9010–12. The Hsp90 binding affinity of the DNA-binding domain
alone is similar to that of full-length p5312. We
set out to determine the state of folding of the human p53 DNA-binding domain (residues
94–312) in the presence of the chaperone human Hsp90α using
spectroscopic methods in solution.

RESULTSDesign of Hsp90 Domain ConstructsA series of constructs of human Hsp90α were prepared:
single-domain constructs representing the N-terminal (N) and middle (M) domains
(the single C-domain construct is not well-behaved in solution) and two-domain
constructs containing the N + M (NM) and M + C (MC) domains. A
shortened construct of full-length Hsp90, where part of a long charged linker
between the N and M domains characteristic of eukaryotic Hsp90s had been deleted
(Hsp90Δ) was used in preference to the full length protein, which was
much more difficult to express and purify from bacterial cell culture in
quantities suitable for NMR spectroscopy. Based on size-exclusion
chromatography, the N, M, and NM constructs are monomeric in solution, and the
MC domain and Hsp90Δ are homodimers.Effect of Hsp90 on the NMR Spectrum of p53 DNA-Binding DomainThe major effect of addition of any of the Hsp90 constructs to
15N-labeled p53 DNA-binding domain is the lowered intensity of a
large proportion of the cross peaks in the 1H-15N HSQC or
TROSY NMR spectrum. This intensity loss occurs even for the stabilized mutant
p53 that was used to obtain the solution structure13, as shown in Figure
1c. Some cross peaks (yellow in Figure
1c) remain at the same intensity in the p53 spectrum after addition
of excess Hsp90 protein, indicating that the corresponding residues in the
protein are likely independently mobile and not closely associated with the main
body of the protein. Many of these persistent resonances correspond to the C-
and N-terminal residues and to exterior mobile loops of the p53 domain. An
expansion of one part of the p53 spectrum is shown in Figure 2, illustrating the effects of the various
added Hsp90 proteins (full spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1). The lowering
of the cross peak intensity varies in extent as different Hsp90 constructs are
added: addition of the two-domain and full-length constructs (Figure 2c–e) results in reduced intensity and
eventual disappearance of resonances at lower titrant concentrations than for
either of the single-domain constructs (Figure 2a,
b). Interestingly, the same cross peaks in the p53 spectrum lose
intensity with the addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs, all of which
contain the N and/or M domain.Resonance assignments have been reported for the p53 DNA-binding
domain14; we have used these data as
a basis for the backbone assignment of p53(94–312). The effect of
addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs on the 1H-15N
HSQC spectrum of the p53 DNA binding domain was quantified by measuring the
volumes and intensities of the cross peaks in the spectrum. As in previous
studies of this kind15, we may
hypothesize that sites on p53 where resonance intensity is affected at the
lowest concentrations of Hsp90 titrant may represent the binding site(s) of
Hsp90 on p53. To identify such sites, we determined for each cross peak the
concentration ratio of Hsp90 titrant added to the p53 that resulted in reduction
of the cross peak to half its original volume or intensity. These values
(conc1/2) are plotted as a function of residue number for each
Hsp90 titrant in Figure 3. The average
conc1/2 value for all of the affected resonances (horizontal
lines in Figure 3) can also be used to
derive a crude estimate of the affinity of p53 for each of the Hsp90 constructs,
assuming that the remaining intensity of the cross peaks is due solely to the
remaining free p53 and that the spectrum of the bound p53 is invisible.
Approximate dissociation constants calculated in this way give the following
values: 130μM for N, 250μM for M, 30μM for NM,
50μM for MC and 30μM for Hsp90Δ. Values for
Kd could also be calculated directly from the intensity data,
assuming the formation of a 1:1 complex in each case, giving average values of
133 μM for N and 232 μM for M. The NM titration could not be
fitted by this method, and the MC and Hsp90Δ titrations did not fit well
to the assumption of a 1:1 complex. This result is likely consistent with our
observation that the MC and Hsp90Δ proteins are present as dimers, which
might be expected to have two or more potential client binding sites.Mapping of the sites where cross peaks were preferentially affected onto
the published structure of the p53 DNA-binding domain13 showed that no matter which titrant is used, the
affected resonances are distributed throughout the folded core of the protein,
including the central β-sheet (Figure
3f). If the affected sites represent contact sites between the Hsp90
and the p53 DNA-binding domain, we would expect to see the major effects on the
surface, rather than on the interior of the protein. We thus conclude that the
observation of reduced resonance intensity in the NMR spectrum of p53 upon
addition of Hsp90 and its component domains indicates a general change in the
environment of protons and nitrogens throughout the folded portion of the p53
DNA-binding domain, an effect that occurs as a result of the presence of domains
of Hsp90.A close examination of the spectra reveals the presence of small shifts
on certain surface resonances that can be used to locate points of contact
between the Hsp90 domains and p53 (examples are circled in Figure 1c) and such observations have been used as a
basis for the elucidation of a binding surface between the Hsp90 M domain and
the p53 DNA-binding domain (SJP and HJD, unpublished). However, the major effect
of Hsp90 on the spectrum of p53 remains the intensity reduction and
disappearance of p53 cross peaks. We suggest that this effect is due to the
formation of a structurally heterogeneous molten globule-like state in p53 in
the presence of Hsp90 or its domains. The intensity and linewidth of NMR
resonances of biological macromolecules can be affected by the molecular size
and by exchange between states (for example between free p53 and a complex with
Hsp90) at rates that cause resonance broadening. We believe that these factors
do not provide the major source of the intensity reduction we observe for p53 in
the presence of Hsp90, primarily because the spectra of Hsp90 and its domains
are not affected in the same way as those of p53 (shown in Supplementary Fig. 2). A detailed
explanation of the reasoning leading to this conclusion is given in a Supplementary
Discussion.Molten Globule-Like Behavior of p53 in the Presence of Hsp90Lowered resonance intensity in protein NMR spectra can be caused by the
presence of a heterogeneous ensemble of structures, such as a molten globule.
Although a number of molten globules have been characterized by NMR16–21, sample preparation and spectroscopy are invariably extremely
challenging. The defining characteristic of molten globule NMR spectra is the
presence of broadened and low-intensity resonances, which are thought to arise
due to the fluid nature of the interior of the molten globule. Most if not all
of the native-state secondary structure is present in a molten globule state,
but the tertiary structure is not fixed; this state can be thought of as an
ensemble of conformations that interconvert on the intermediate time scale that
causes broadening of NMR resonances, sometimes to the point of disappearance.
The formation of a state resembling a molten globule in p53 in the presence of
Hsp90 could explain why the p53 resonances are affected in the presence of Hsp90
(Figure 1, 2, Supplementary Fig. 1) but the Hsp90 domains are relatively
unaffected when p53 is added (Supplementary Fig. 2). It also provides a rationale for the wide
extent of the effect over the entire structured core of the p53 DNA binding
domain. This hypothesis assumes that the intensity observed in any of the p53
spectra in the presence of Hsp90 domains arises almost solely from the remaining
free p53, and that the spectrum of the “bound” form (apart from
the residues in the termini, which appear to be unstructured) is invisible. A
schematic diagram illustrating this hypothesis is shown in Figure 4, specifically in Fig. 4a.Evidence for the p53 molten globule: ANS FluorescenceThe hypothesis that p53 forms a molten globule-like structure consisting
of an ensemble of loosely folded structures is difficult to test directly by
NMR, since we postulate that the spectrum of this form is largely invisible.
Indeed, our NMR observations are problematic in terms of standard ideas of
“fast exchange” and “slow exchange” (described
more fully in a Supplementary
Discussion). Alternatively, the hypothesis can be tested in two other
ways: by observing the effect of the protein on the fluorescence spectrum of a
dye, 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS) and by observing the effect of
Hsp90 on the H/D exchange rates of amide protons in p53.In the presence of fully folded or fully unfolded proteins, the
fluorescence of ANS is unchanged from that of the free dye, but in the presence
of molten globule structures the fluorescence is increased and the emission
maximum is shifted towards the low-wavelength (blue) end of the spectrum. If p53
forms a molten globule-like state when it interacts with Hsp90, we should
observe an increased and blue-shifted fluorescence of ANS when both proteins are
present, compared to its behavior in the presence of the free proteins. The
result of such an experiment are shown in Figure
5a. The fluorescence emission of ANS alone is relatively weak, with
an emission maximum at 522 nm. In the presence of p53 alone, the fluorescence
emission is barely changed, indicating that the p53 DNA-binding domain construct
that we have employed is well folded in solution. Somewhat unexpectedly, since
they appear to be fully folded by NMR and CD spectroscopies, each of the Hsp90
N, M, NM and MC constructs, as well as the full-length protein Hsp90Δ,
shows increased intensity and blue-shift of the ANS fluorescence (emission
maximum ~ 480 nm). Such an increase can arise due to the binding of ANS in
hydrophobic pockets that may be present in folded proteins, and has been
observed, for example, with bovine serum albumin22. A solution containing a 1:1 mixture of p53 and Hsp90 shows a
further marked blue shift of the emission maximum (to 472 nm) compared to the
Hsp90 protein alone (Figure 5a). The change
in fluorescence intensity from free Hsp90 to the complex is quite small at pH
7.1, but the intensity is markedly increased at a slightly lower pH, 6.0 (Figure 5a), with a further blue shift of the
emission maximum relative to that of free Hsp90 (475 nm for Hsp90 vs 467 for the
complex at this pH). NMR spectra of the component proteins are unchanged with
the change of pH from 7.1 to 6.0 (Supplementary Fig. 3), indicating
that there is no major change in the overall protein structure. We conclude that
the slightly lowered pH intensifies the loosening of the structure of p53 in the
presence of Hsp90, allowing the binding of more ANS and the subsequent greater
increase in fluorescence intensity. The blue shift of the spectra of the mixture
compared to those of the free Hsp90 at both pH 7.1 and pH 6 is consistent with
the binding of additional ANS to p53, over and above the amount bound to the
free Hsp90, suggesting that p53 contains molten globule-like structure over and
above that of the Hsp90.Evidence for the p53 molten globule: H/D ExchangeFurther evidence that the structure of the p53 DBD is loosened in the
presence of Hsp90 comes from hydrogen exchange measurements. The p53 DNA binding
domain forms a well-structured folded domain in isolation, with a central
β-sheet. Many of the amide protons in this central β-sheet form
stable cross-sheet hydrogen bonds, which, combined with the buried nature of the
sheet, serve to protect the amide protons from exchange with solvent water13. In an experiment where the solvent is
changed to deuterium oxide (D2O), these protected amides will be
exchanged slowly for D, while unprotected amides, for example on the surface of
the molecule, will be rapidly exchanged, resulting in the loss of the
corresponding cross peaks from the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum
(illustrated in Figure 4b). The effect can
be quantitated site-specifically by observing the intensity of the signal that
remains in the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum after buffer exchange
into D2O23. Amide proton
exchange has also been used to demonstrate the formation of intermolecular
complexes24: the usual observation is
that the exchange rates of surface amides in the vicinity of the binding site
are slowed when the complex is formed, as the site becomes protected from
solvent upon complex formation. In the case of the p53–Hsp90 complex, if
the p53 structure is loosened upon complex formation we should observe the
reverse effect: the protected amides in the center of the molecule should
actually exchange faster in the complex than in the free state, as illustrated
in Figure 4c. The HD exchange experiment is
difficult to design for the p53–Hsp90 system. Common methods of
measuring HD exchange involve the rapid accumulation of multiple 2D spectra to
determine exchange rates by analysis of the peak intensities of specific cross
peaks in successive spectra. This approach is not ideal for the
p53–Hsp90 system: because the sample concentrations are low, the pulse
power to accumulate the multiple NMR spectra (using the SOFAST method25) must be high, resulting in sample
heating, which invalidates the results. We are most interested in the exchange
rates of the persistent amides, many of which are also those cross peaks whose
intensity is lowered in the spectrum of p53 upon addition of Hsp90. Therefore,
the H/D exchange experiment must be carefully controlled to determine any change
in the intensity of these amide cross peaks that might be due to HD exchange
rather than to the effect of the added Hsp90. In order to design this
experiment, we took advantage of the fact that many of the persistent amides in
the p53 DBD persist for a substantial time in D2O without a major
change in intensity13. It was therefore
possible to estimate the differences in the exchange rates under various
conditions by acquiring a single NMR spectrum on four p53 samples, variously
containing H2O, D2O and an Hsp90 domain, keeping all other
factors exactly the same. A selection of corresponding cross peaks from the four
spectra is shown as an inset in Figure 5b.
The complete spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The amount of
M domain added to the p53 (a 1:1 ratio, about equivalent to that of the red
spectrum in Figure 2b) is not sufficient to
cause severe intensity loss (comparing black and green cross peaks in Figure 5b). Upon exchange into D2O
buffer, cross peaks corresponding to solvent-exposed amides disappear from the
spectrum of the free p53, but a substantial number remain, some at intensities
comparable to those of the free protein in H2O (orange cross peaks).
The intensity of many of these cross peaks is further diminished, sometimes
almost completely, when the D2O buffer exchange is performed in the
presence of Hsp90 M (pink cross peaks). The differences in the intensities and
volumes of the cross peaks representing the persistent amide proton signals are
plotted in Figure 5b. There are a few
resonances that show an apparent small increase in intensity in the presence of
Hsp90 M, but the vast majority of the cross peaks show a decrease in intensity.
This is an important result, consistent with the outcome expected if our
hypothesis about the molten globule-like state of p53 in the presence of Hsp90
is correct (Figure 4c), and completely the
opposite of the increased protection that would normally be expected upon
formation of a complex.

Design of Hsp90 Domain ConstructsA series of constructs of human Hsp90α were prepared:
single-domain constructs representing the N-terminal (N) and middle (M) domains
(the single C-domain construct is not well-behaved in solution) and two-domain
constructs containing the N + M (NM) and M + C (MC) domains. A
shortened construct of full-length Hsp90, where part of a long charged linker
between the N and M domains characteristic of eukaryotic Hsp90s had been deleted
(Hsp90Δ) was used in preference to the full length protein, which was
much more difficult to express and purify from bacterial cell culture in
quantities suitable for NMR spectroscopy. Based on size-exclusion
chromatography, the N, M, and NM constructs are monomeric in solution, and the
MC domain and Hsp90Δ are homodimers.

Design of Hsp90 Domain Constructs

A series of constructs of human Hsp90α were prepared:
single-domain constructs representing the N-terminal (N) and middle (M) domains
(the single C-domain construct is not well-behaved in solution) and two-domain
constructs containing the N + M (NM) and M + C (MC) domains. A
shortened construct of full-length Hsp90, where part of a long charged linker
between the N and M domains characteristic of eukaryotic Hsp90s had been deleted
(Hsp90Δ) was used in preference to the full length protein, which was
much more difficult to express and purify from bacterial cell culture in
quantities suitable for NMR spectroscopy. Based on size-exclusion
chromatography, the N, M, and NM constructs are monomeric in solution, and the
MC domain and Hsp90Δ are homodimers.

Effect of Hsp90 on the NMR Spectrum of p53 DNA-Binding DomainThe major effect of addition of any of the Hsp90 constructs to
15N-labeled p53 DNA-binding domain is the lowered intensity of a
large proportion of the cross peaks in the 1H-15N HSQC or
TROSY NMR spectrum. This intensity loss occurs even for the stabilized mutant
p53 that was used to obtain the solution structure13, as shown in Figure
1c. Some cross peaks (yellow in Figure
1c) remain at the same intensity in the p53 spectrum after addition
of excess Hsp90 protein, indicating that the corresponding residues in the
protein are likely independently mobile and not closely associated with the main
body of the protein. Many of these persistent resonances correspond to the C-
and N-terminal residues and to exterior mobile loops of the p53 domain. An
expansion of one part of the p53 spectrum is shown in Figure 2, illustrating the effects of the various
added Hsp90 proteins (full spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1). The lowering
of the cross peak intensity varies in extent as different Hsp90 constructs are
added: addition of the two-domain and full-length constructs (Figure 2c–e) results in reduced intensity and
eventual disappearance of resonances at lower titrant concentrations than for
either of the single-domain constructs (Figure 2a,
b). Interestingly, the same cross peaks in the p53 spectrum lose
intensity with the addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs, all of which
contain the N and/or M domain.Resonance assignments have been reported for the p53 DNA-binding
domain14; we have used these data as
a basis for the backbone assignment of p53(94–312). The effect of
addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs on the 1H-15N
HSQC spectrum of the p53 DNA binding domain was quantified by measuring the
volumes and intensities of the cross peaks in the spectrum. As in previous
studies of this kind15, we may
hypothesize that sites on p53 where resonance intensity is affected at the
lowest concentrations of Hsp90 titrant may represent the binding site(s) of
Hsp90 on p53. To identify such sites, we determined for each cross peak the
concentration ratio of Hsp90 titrant added to the p53 that resulted in reduction
of the cross peak to half its original volume or intensity. These values
(conc1/2) are plotted as a function of residue number for each
Hsp90 titrant in Figure 3. The average
conc1/2 value for all of the affected resonances (horizontal
lines in Figure 3) can also be used to
derive a crude estimate of the affinity of p53 for each of the Hsp90 constructs,
assuming that the remaining intensity of the cross peaks is due solely to the
remaining free p53 and that the spectrum of the bound p53 is invisible.
Approximate dissociation constants calculated in this way give the following
values: 130μM for N, 250μM for M, 30μM for NM,
50μM for MC and 30μM for Hsp90Δ. Values for
Kd could also be calculated directly from the intensity data,
assuming the formation of a 1:1 complex in each case, giving average values of
133 μM for N and 232 μM for M. The NM titration could not be
fitted by this method, and the MC and Hsp90Δ titrations did not fit well
to the assumption of a 1:1 complex. This result is likely consistent with our
observation that the MC and Hsp90Δ proteins are present as dimers, which
might be expected to have two or more potential client binding sites.Mapping of the sites where cross peaks were preferentially affected onto
the published structure of the p53 DNA-binding domain13 showed that no matter which titrant is used, the
affected resonances are distributed throughout the folded core of the protein,
including the central β-sheet (Figure
3f). If the affected sites represent contact sites between the Hsp90
and the p53 DNA-binding domain, we would expect to see the major effects on the
surface, rather than on the interior of the protein. We thus conclude that the
observation of reduced resonance intensity in the NMR spectrum of p53 upon
addition of Hsp90 and its component domains indicates a general change in the
environment of protons and nitrogens throughout the folded portion of the p53
DNA-binding domain, an effect that occurs as a result of the presence of domains
of Hsp90.A close examination of the spectra reveals the presence of small shifts
on certain surface resonances that can be used to locate points of contact
between the Hsp90 domains and p53 (examples are circled in Figure 1c) and such observations have been used as a
basis for the elucidation of a binding surface between the Hsp90 M domain and
the p53 DNA-binding domain (SJP and HJD, unpublished). However, the major effect
of Hsp90 on the spectrum of p53 remains the intensity reduction and
disappearance of p53 cross peaks. We suggest that this effect is due to the
formation of a structurally heterogeneous molten globule-like state in p53 in
the presence of Hsp90 or its domains. The intensity and linewidth of NMR
resonances of biological macromolecules can be affected by the molecular size
and by exchange between states (for example between free p53 and a complex with
Hsp90) at rates that cause resonance broadening. We believe that these factors
do not provide the major source of the intensity reduction we observe for p53 in
the presence of Hsp90, primarily because the spectra of Hsp90 and its domains
are not affected in the same way as those of p53 (shown in Supplementary Fig. 2). A detailed
explanation of the reasoning leading to this conclusion is given in a Supplementary
Discussion.

Effect of Hsp90 on the NMR Spectrum of p53 DNA-Binding Domain

The major effect of addition of any of the Hsp90 constructs to
15N-labeled p53 DNA-binding domain is the lowered intensity of a
large proportion of the cross peaks in the 1H-15N HSQC or
TROSY NMR spectrum. This intensity loss occurs even for the stabilized mutant
p53 that was used to obtain the solution structure13, as shown in Figure
1c. Some cross peaks (yellow in Figure
1c) remain at the same intensity in the p53 spectrum after addition
of excess Hsp90 protein, indicating that the corresponding residues in the
protein are likely independently mobile and not closely associated with the main
body of the protein. Many of these persistent resonances correspond to the C-
and N-terminal residues and to exterior mobile loops of the p53 domain. An
expansion of one part of the p53 spectrum is shown in Figure 2, illustrating the effects of the various
added Hsp90 proteins (full spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1). The lowering
of the cross peak intensity varies in extent as different Hsp90 constructs are
added: addition of the two-domain and full-length constructs (Figure 2c–e) results in reduced intensity and
eventual disappearance of resonances at lower titrant concentrations than for
either of the single-domain constructs (Figure 2a,
b). Interestingly, the same cross peaks in the p53 spectrum lose
intensity with the addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs, all of which
contain the N and/or M domain.

Resonance assignments have been reported for the p53 DNA-binding
domain14; we have used these data as
a basis for the backbone assignment of p53(94–312). The effect of
addition of each of the Hsp90 constructs on the 1H-15N
HSQC spectrum of the p53 DNA binding domain was quantified by measuring the
volumes and intensities of the cross peaks in the spectrum. As in previous
studies of this kind15, we may
hypothesize that sites on p53 where resonance intensity is affected at the
lowest concentrations of Hsp90 titrant may represent the binding site(s) of
Hsp90 on p53. To identify such sites, we determined for each cross peak the
concentration ratio of Hsp90 titrant added to the p53 that resulted in reduction
of the cross peak to half its original volume or intensity. These values
(conc1/2) are plotted as a function of residue number for each
Hsp90 titrant in Figure 3. The average
conc1/2 value for all of the affected resonances (horizontal
lines in Figure 3) can also be used to
derive a crude estimate of the affinity of p53 for each of the Hsp90 constructs,
assuming that the remaining intensity of the cross peaks is due solely to the
remaining free p53 and that the spectrum of the bound p53 is invisible.
Approximate dissociation constants calculated in this way give the following
values: 130μM for N, 250μM for M, 30μM for NM,
50μM for MC and 30μM for Hsp90Δ. Values for
Kd could also be calculated directly from the intensity data,
assuming the formation of a 1:1 complex in each case, giving average values of
133 μM for N and 232 μM for M. The NM titration could not be
fitted by this method, and the MC and Hsp90Δ titrations did not fit well
to the assumption of a 1:1 complex. This result is likely consistent with our
observation that the MC and Hsp90Δ proteins are present as dimers, which
might be expected to have two or more potential client binding sites.

Mapping of the sites where cross peaks were preferentially affected onto
the published structure of the p53 DNA-binding domain13 showed that no matter which titrant is used, the
affected resonances are distributed throughout the folded core of the protein,
including the central β-sheet (Figure
3f). If the affected sites represent contact sites between the Hsp90
and the p53 DNA-binding domain, we would expect to see the major effects on the
surface, rather than on the interior of the protein. We thus conclude that the
observation of reduced resonance intensity in the NMR spectrum of p53 upon
addition of Hsp90 and its component domains indicates a general change in the
environment of protons and nitrogens throughout the folded portion of the p53
DNA-binding domain, an effect that occurs as a result of the presence of domains
of Hsp90.

A close examination of the spectra reveals the presence of small shifts
on certain surface resonances that can be used to locate points of contact
between the Hsp90 domains and p53 (examples are circled in Figure 1c) and such observations have been used as a
basis for the elucidation of a binding surface between the Hsp90 M domain and
the p53 DNA-binding domain (SJP and HJD, unpublished). However, the major effect
of Hsp90 on the spectrum of p53 remains the intensity reduction and
disappearance of p53 cross peaks. We suggest that this effect is due to the
formation of a structurally heterogeneous molten globule-like state in p53 in
the presence of Hsp90 or its domains. The intensity and linewidth of NMR
resonances of biological macromolecules can be affected by the molecular size
and by exchange between states (for example between free p53 and a complex with
Hsp90) at rates that cause resonance broadening. We believe that these factors
do not provide the major source of the intensity reduction we observe for p53 in
the presence of Hsp90, primarily because the spectra of Hsp90 and its domains
are not affected in the same way as those of p53 (shown in Supplementary Fig. 2). A detailed
explanation of the reasoning leading to this conclusion is given in a Supplementary
Discussion.

Molten Globule-Like Behavior of p53 in the Presence of Hsp90Lowered resonance intensity in protein NMR spectra can be caused by the
presence of a heterogeneous ensemble of structures, such as a molten globule.
Although a number of molten globules have been characterized by NMR16–21, sample preparation and spectroscopy are invariably extremely
challenging. The defining characteristic of molten globule NMR spectra is the
presence of broadened and low-intensity resonances, which are thought to arise
due to the fluid nature of the interior of the molten globule. Most if not all
of the native-state secondary structure is present in a molten globule state,
but the tertiary structure is not fixed; this state can be thought of as an
ensemble of conformations that interconvert on the intermediate time scale that
causes broadening of NMR resonances, sometimes to the point of disappearance.
The formation of a state resembling a molten globule in p53 in the presence of
Hsp90 could explain why the p53 resonances are affected in the presence of Hsp90
(Figure 1, 2, Supplementary Fig. 1) but the Hsp90 domains are relatively
unaffected when p53 is added (Supplementary Fig. 2). It also provides a rationale for the wide
extent of the effect over the entire structured core of the p53 DNA binding
domain. This hypothesis assumes that the intensity observed in any of the p53
spectra in the presence of Hsp90 domains arises almost solely from the remaining
free p53, and that the spectrum of the “bound” form (apart from
the residues in the termini, which appear to be unstructured) is invisible. A
schematic diagram illustrating this hypothesis is shown in Figure 4, specifically in Fig. 4a.

Molten Globule-Like Behavior of p53 in the Presence of Hsp90

Lowered resonance intensity in protein NMR spectra can be caused by the
presence of a heterogeneous ensemble of structures, such as a molten globule.
Although a number of molten globules have been characterized by NMR16–21, sample preparation and spectroscopy are invariably extremely
challenging. The defining characteristic of molten globule NMR spectra is the
presence of broadened and low-intensity resonances, which are thought to arise
due to the fluid nature of the interior of the molten globule. Most if not all
of the native-state secondary structure is present in a molten globule state,
but the tertiary structure is not fixed; this state can be thought of as an
ensemble of conformations that interconvert on the intermediate time scale that
causes broadening of NMR resonances, sometimes to the point of disappearance.
The formation of a state resembling a molten globule in p53 in the presence of
Hsp90 could explain why the p53 resonances are affected in the presence of Hsp90
(Figure 1, 2, Supplementary Fig. 1) but the Hsp90 domains are relatively
unaffected when p53 is added (Supplementary Fig. 2). It also provides a rationale for the wide
extent of the effect over the entire structured core of the p53 DNA binding
domain. This hypothesis assumes that the intensity observed in any of the p53
spectra in the presence of Hsp90 domains arises almost solely from the remaining
free p53, and that the spectrum of the “bound” form (apart from
the residues in the termini, which appear to be unstructured) is invisible. A
schematic diagram illustrating this hypothesis is shown in Figure 4, specifically in Fig. 4a.

Evidence for the p53 molten globule: ANS FluorescenceThe hypothesis that p53 forms a molten globule-like structure consisting
of an ensemble of loosely folded structures is difficult to test directly by
NMR, since we postulate that the spectrum of this form is largely invisible.
Indeed, our NMR observations are problematic in terms of standard ideas of
“fast exchange” and “slow exchange” (described
more fully in a Supplementary
Discussion). Alternatively, the hypothesis can be tested in two other
ways: by observing the effect of the protein on the fluorescence spectrum of a
dye, 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS) and by observing the effect of
Hsp90 on the H/D exchange rates of amide protons in p53.In the presence of fully folded or fully unfolded proteins, the
fluorescence of ANS is unchanged from that of the free dye, but in the presence
of molten globule structures the fluorescence is increased and the emission
maximum is shifted towards the low-wavelength (blue) end of the spectrum. If p53
forms a molten globule-like state when it interacts with Hsp90, we should
observe an increased and blue-shifted fluorescence of ANS when both proteins are
present, compared to its behavior in the presence of the free proteins. The
result of such an experiment are shown in Figure
5a. The fluorescence emission of ANS alone is relatively weak, with
an emission maximum at 522 nm. In the presence of p53 alone, the fluorescence
emission is barely changed, indicating that the p53 DNA-binding domain construct
that we have employed is well folded in solution. Somewhat unexpectedly, since
they appear to be fully folded by NMR and CD spectroscopies, each of the Hsp90
N, M, NM and MC constructs, as well as the full-length protein Hsp90Δ,
shows increased intensity and blue-shift of the ANS fluorescence (emission
maximum ~ 480 nm). Such an increase can arise due to the binding of ANS in
hydrophobic pockets that may be present in folded proteins, and has been
observed, for example, with bovine serum albumin22. A solution containing a 1:1 mixture of p53 and Hsp90 shows a
further marked blue shift of the emission maximum (to 472 nm) compared to the
Hsp90 protein alone (Figure 5a). The change
in fluorescence intensity from free Hsp90 to the complex is quite small at pH
7.1, but the intensity is markedly increased at a slightly lower pH, 6.0 (Figure 5a), with a further blue shift of the
emission maximum relative to that of free Hsp90 (475 nm for Hsp90 vs 467 for the
complex at this pH). NMR spectra of the component proteins are unchanged with
the change of pH from 7.1 to 6.0 (Supplementary Fig. 3), indicating
that there is no major change in the overall protein structure. We conclude that
the slightly lowered pH intensifies the loosening of the structure of p53 in the
presence of Hsp90, allowing the binding of more ANS and the subsequent greater
increase in fluorescence intensity. The blue shift of the spectra of the mixture
compared to those of the free Hsp90 at both pH 7.1 and pH 6 is consistent with
the binding of additional ANS to p53, over and above the amount bound to the
free Hsp90, suggesting that p53 contains molten globule-like structure over and
above that of the Hsp90.

Evidence for the p53 molten globule: ANS Fluorescence

The hypothesis that p53 forms a molten globule-like structure consisting
of an ensemble of loosely folded structures is difficult to test directly by
NMR, since we postulate that the spectrum of this form is largely invisible.
Indeed, our NMR observations are problematic in terms of standard ideas of
“fast exchange” and “slow exchange” (described
more fully in a Supplementary
Discussion). Alternatively, the hypothesis can be tested in two other
ways: by observing the effect of the protein on the fluorescence spectrum of a
dye, 1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS) and by observing the effect of
Hsp90 on the H/D exchange rates of amide protons in p53.

In the presence of fully folded or fully unfolded proteins, the
fluorescence of ANS is unchanged from that of the free dye, but in the presence
of molten globule structures the fluorescence is increased and the emission
maximum is shifted towards the low-wavelength (blue) end of the spectrum. If p53
forms a molten globule-like state when it interacts with Hsp90, we should
observe an increased and blue-shifted fluorescence of ANS when both proteins are
present, compared to its behavior in the presence of the free proteins. The
result of such an experiment are shown in Figure
5a. The fluorescence emission of ANS alone is relatively weak, with
an emission maximum at 522 nm. In the presence of p53 alone, the fluorescence
emission is barely changed, indicating that the p53 DNA-binding domain construct
that we have employed is well folded in solution. Somewhat unexpectedly, since
they appear to be fully folded by NMR and CD spectroscopies, each of the Hsp90
N, M, NM and MC constructs, as well as the full-length protein Hsp90Δ,
shows increased intensity and blue-shift of the ANS fluorescence (emission
maximum ~ 480 nm). Such an increase can arise due to the binding of ANS in
hydrophobic pockets that may be present in folded proteins, and has been
observed, for example, with bovine serum albumin22. A solution containing a 1:1 mixture of p53 and Hsp90 shows a
further marked blue shift of the emission maximum (to 472 nm) compared to the
Hsp90 protein alone (Figure 5a). The change
in fluorescence intensity from free Hsp90 to the complex is quite small at pH
7.1, but the intensity is markedly increased at a slightly lower pH, 6.0 (Figure 5a), with a further blue shift of the
emission maximum relative to that of free Hsp90 (475 nm for Hsp90 vs 467 for the
complex at this pH). NMR spectra of the component proteins are unchanged with
the change of pH from 7.1 to 6.0 (Supplementary Fig. 3), indicating
that there is no major change in the overall protein structure. We conclude that
the slightly lowered pH intensifies the loosening of the structure of p53 in the
presence of Hsp90, allowing the binding of more ANS and the subsequent greater
increase in fluorescence intensity. The blue shift of the spectra of the mixture
compared to those of the free Hsp90 at both pH 7.1 and pH 6 is consistent with
the binding of additional ANS to p53, over and above the amount bound to the
free Hsp90, suggesting that p53 contains molten globule-like structure over and
above that of the Hsp90.

Evidence for the p53 molten globule: H/D ExchangeFurther evidence that the structure of the p53 DBD is loosened in the
presence of Hsp90 comes from hydrogen exchange measurements. The p53 DNA binding
domain forms a well-structured folded domain in isolation, with a central
β-sheet. Many of the amide protons in this central β-sheet form
stable cross-sheet hydrogen bonds, which, combined with the buried nature of the
sheet, serve to protect the amide protons from exchange with solvent water13. In an experiment where the solvent is
changed to deuterium oxide (D2O), these protected amides will be
exchanged slowly for D, while unprotected amides, for example on the surface of
the molecule, will be rapidly exchanged, resulting in the loss of the
corresponding cross peaks from the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum
(illustrated in Figure 4b). The effect can
be quantitated site-specifically by observing the intensity of the signal that
remains in the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum after buffer exchange
into D2O23. Amide proton
exchange has also been used to demonstrate the formation of intermolecular
complexes24: the usual observation is
that the exchange rates of surface amides in the vicinity of the binding site
are slowed when the complex is formed, as the site becomes protected from
solvent upon complex formation. In the case of the p53–Hsp90 complex, if
the p53 structure is loosened upon complex formation we should observe the
reverse effect: the protected amides in the center of the molecule should
actually exchange faster in the complex than in the free state, as illustrated
in Figure 4c. The HD exchange experiment is
difficult to design for the p53–Hsp90 system. Common methods of
measuring HD exchange involve the rapid accumulation of multiple 2D spectra to
determine exchange rates by analysis of the peak intensities of specific cross
peaks in successive spectra. This approach is not ideal for the
p53–Hsp90 system: because the sample concentrations are low, the pulse
power to accumulate the multiple NMR spectra (using the SOFAST method25) must be high, resulting in sample
heating, which invalidates the results. We are most interested in the exchange
rates of the persistent amides, many of which are also those cross peaks whose
intensity is lowered in the spectrum of p53 upon addition of Hsp90. Therefore,
the H/D exchange experiment must be carefully controlled to determine any change
in the intensity of these amide cross peaks that might be due to HD exchange
rather than to the effect of the added Hsp90. In order to design this
experiment, we took advantage of the fact that many of the persistent amides in
the p53 DBD persist for a substantial time in D2O without a major
change in intensity13. It was therefore
possible to estimate the differences in the exchange rates under various
conditions by acquiring a single NMR spectrum on four p53 samples, variously
containing H2O, D2O and an Hsp90 domain, keeping all other
factors exactly the same. A selection of corresponding cross peaks from the four
spectra is shown as an inset in Figure 5b.
The complete spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The amount of
M domain added to the p53 (a 1:1 ratio, about equivalent to that of the red
spectrum in Figure 2b) is not sufficient to
cause severe intensity loss (comparing black and green cross peaks in Figure 5b). Upon exchange into D2O
buffer, cross peaks corresponding to solvent-exposed amides disappear from the
spectrum of the free p53, but a substantial number remain, some at intensities
comparable to those of the free protein in H2O (orange cross peaks).
The intensity of many of these cross peaks is further diminished, sometimes
almost completely, when the D2O buffer exchange is performed in the
presence of Hsp90 M (pink cross peaks). The differences in the intensities and
volumes of the cross peaks representing the persistent amide proton signals are
plotted in Figure 5b. There are a few
resonances that show an apparent small increase in intensity in the presence of
Hsp90 M, but the vast majority of the cross peaks show a decrease in intensity.
This is an important result, consistent with the outcome expected if our
hypothesis about the molten globule-like state of p53 in the presence of Hsp90
is correct (Figure 4c), and completely the
opposite of the increased protection that would normally be expected upon
formation of a complex.

Evidence for the p53 molten globule: H/D Exchange

Further evidence that the structure of the p53 DBD is loosened in the
presence of Hsp90 comes from hydrogen exchange measurements. The p53 DNA binding
domain forms a well-structured folded domain in isolation, with a central
β-sheet. Many of the amide protons in this central β-sheet form
stable cross-sheet hydrogen bonds, which, combined with the buried nature of the
sheet, serve to protect the amide protons from exchange with solvent water13. In an experiment where the solvent is
changed to deuterium oxide (D2O), these protected amides will be
exchanged slowly for D, while unprotected amides, for example on the surface of
the molecule, will be rapidly exchanged, resulting in the loss of the
corresponding cross peaks from the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum
(illustrated in Figure 4b). The effect can
be quantitated site-specifically by observing the intensity of the signal that
remains in the 1H-15N HSQC spectrum after buffer exchange
into D2O23. Amide proton
exchange has also been used to demonstrate the formation of intermolecular
complexes24: the usual observation is
that the exchange rates of surface amides in the vicinity of the binding site
are slowed when the complex is formed, as the site becomes protected from
solvent upon complex formation. In the case of the p53–Hsp90 complex, if
the p53 structure is loosened upon complex formation we should observe the
reverse effect: the protected amides in the center of the molecule should
actually exchange faster in the complex than in the free state, as illustrated
in Figure 4c. The HD exchange experiment is
difficult to design for the p53–Hsp90 system. Common methods of
measuring HD exchange involve the rapid accumulation of multiple 2D spectra to
determine exchange rates by analysis of the peak intensities of specific cross
peaks in successive spectra. This approach is not ideal for the
p53–Hsp90 system: because the sample concentrations are low, the pulse
power to accumulate the multiple NMR spectra (using the SOFAST method25) must be high, resulting in sample
heating, which invalidates the results. We are most interested in the exchange
rates of the persistent amides, many of which are also those cross peaks whose
intensity is lowered in the spectrum of p53 upon addition of Hsp90. Therefore,
the H/D exchange experiment must be carefully controlled to determine any change
in the intensity of these amide cross peaks that might be due to HD exchange
rather than to the effect of the added Hsp90. In order to design this
experiment, we took advantage of the fact that many of the persistent amides in
the p53 DBD persist for a substantial time in D2O without a major
change in intensity13. It was therefore
possible to estimate the differences in the exchange rates under various
conditions by acquiring a single NMR spectrum on four p53 samples, variously
containing H2O, D2O and an Hsp90 domain, keeping all other
factors exactly the same. A selection of corresponding cross peaks from the four
spectra is shown as an inset in Figure 5b.
The complete spectra are shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. The amount of
M domain added to the p53 (a 1:1 ratio, about equivalent to that of the red
spectrum in Figure 2b) is not sufficient to
cause severe intensity loss (comparing black and green cross peaks in Figure 5b). Upon exchange into D2O
buffer, cross peaks corresponding to solvent-exposed amides disappear from the
spectrum of the free p53, but a substantial number remain, some at intensities
comparable to those of the free protein in H2O (orange cross peaks).
The intensity of many of these cross peaks is further diminished, sometimes
almost completely, when the D2O buffer exchange is performed in the
presence of Hsp90 M (pink cross peaks). The differences in the intensities and
volumes of the cross peaks representing the persistent amide proton signals are
plotted in Figure 5b. There are a few
resonances that show an apparent small increase in intensity in the presence of
Hsp90 M, but the vast majority of the cross peaks show a decrease in intensity.
This is an important result, consistent with the outcome expected if our
hypothesis about the molten globule-like state of p53 in the presence of Hsp90
is correct (Figure 4c), and completely the
opposite of the increased protection that would normally be expected upon
formation of a complex.

DISCUSSIONWe conclude from the NMR, H/D exchange and fluorescence data that a loosened
heterogeneous molten globule-like state is formed by the p53 DNA-binding domain in
the presence of Hsp90 and its N and M domains. (Since we cannot study the effect of
the isolated C domain, we have no information on whether this domain can also
participate in the interaction.) The interaction between p53 and Hsp90 has been
reported previously, but the results from different groups have been interpreted
inconsistently. A fluorescence and NMR study26 concluded on the basis of the temperature dependence of the NMR
spectra of the p53 DNA-binding domain in the absence and presence of full-length
Hsp90, that the p53 domain was bound to Hsp90 in an unfolded state, and that the
folded p53 DBD would not interact with Hsp90. On the other hand, extensive studies
from other groups10–12 suggested that folded p53 was also capable of
interacting with Hsp90. The fundamental difference between the conclusions of
Rüdiger et al26 and our own
observations may be a result of a difference in the Hsp90 protein used
(Hsp90β26 vs Hsp90α
(present work)) or in salt concentrations. An examination of the published NMR
spectrum26 reveals results that are
consistent with the data presented here: the NMR spectrum of the bound p53 DBD
contains far fewer resonances than would be expected for a protein of this size,
and, as pointed out by the authors26, those
that are present likely correspond to the residues in the unstructured N- and
C-termini of the domain. Lowered intensity for the majority of the resonances in the
spectrum is exactly the same as we observe for p53 in the presence of Hsp90, but we
also observe similar effects in the presence of smaller proteins representing the
constituent domains of Hsp90. These results are not consistent with the presence of
unfolded p53 in the complex, for which one might expect to see sharper resonances
with chemical shifts different from those of the (folded) free protein, if only in
the low molecular-weight complexes of the N and M domains. Instead, we observe loss
of intensity, directly proportional to the amount of added N, M, NM, MC or
Hsp90Δ, consistent with the formation of a heterogeneous conformational
ensemble resembling a molten globule in the p53 client.Our results are not consistent with the formation of a unique complex
between the Hsp90 domains and p53. We see none of the effects, such as resonance
shifts, that are expected upon complex formation, yet it is clear that p53 is
affected by the presence of Hsp90, and that the effect increases as more Hsp90 is
added. Our observations are consistent with many of the known attributes of Hsp90
– its relatively wide stable of client proteins, the effects on specificity
and affinity of added extrinsic molecules, co-chaperones and ATP, as well as the
absence of any reports of crystallization of Hsp90–client complexes. We
suggest that Hsp90 affects p53 to give the NMR behavior that we observe by
undergoing multiple transient interactions, primarily using the N and M domains.
Such a manifold of chaperone-client “complexes” could be modified
and tuned to various tasks, depending on the presence of ATP and specific
co-chaperones. However, we suggest that the basic underlying interaction of Hsp90
with its client proteins is heterogeneous and transient. In the case of p53, these
interactions result in the loosening of the structure of the protein, to a state
resembling a molten globule.If this observation proves general, it has important implications for the
understanding of Hsp90 function. Hsp90 is present in cells at up to 1% of
the total cellular protein, which argues for a central role of this protein in
cellular metabolism. A general propensity on the part of Hsp90 to cause loosening of
the structures of its client proteins would be consistent with a number of the known
functions of Hsp90. For example, Hsp90 is thought to sequester the ligand binding
domains (LBDs) of nuclear hormone receptors in a binding-competent state in the
absence of the hormone signal, and to release the protein once the hormone is
present27. Since the structures of LBDs
in the presence of their hormone ligands show the hydrophobic hormone molecules
deeply buried in the core of the domain, it is tempting to speculate that the LBD
may also form a molten globule-like state in the presence of Hsp90, a state that
would likely be loose enough for the hormone to access the hydrophobic interior.
Once the hormone is bound, the LBD becomes more structured, providing a mechanism
for the release of the protein from the chaperone.

We conclude from the NMR, H/D exchange and fluorescence data that a loosened
heterogeneous molten globule-like state is formed by the p53 DNA-binding domain in
the presence of Hsp90 and its N and M domains. (Since we cannot study the effect of
the isolated C domain, we have no information on whether this domain can also
participate in the interaction.) The interaction between p53 and Hsp90 has been
reported previously, but the results from different groups have been interpreted
inconsistently. A fluorescence and NMR study26 concluded on the basis of the temperature dependence of the NMR
spectra of the p53 DNA-binding domain in the absence and presence of full-length
Hsp90, that the p53 domain was bound to Hsp90 in an unfolded state, and that the
folded p53 DBD would not interact with Hsp90. On the other hand, extensive studies
from other groups10–12 suggested that folded p53 was also capable of
interacting with Hsp90. The fundamental difference between the conclusions of
Rüdiger et al26 and our own
observations may be a result of a difference in the Hsp90 protein used
(Hsp90β26 vs Hsp90α
(present work)) or in salt concentrations. An examination of the published NMR
spectrum26 reveals results that are
consistent with the data presented here: the NMR spectrum of the bound p53 DBD
contains far fewer resonances than would be expected for a protein of this size,
and, as pointed out by the authors26, those
that are present likely correspond to the residues in the unstructured N- and
C-termini of the domain. Lowered intensity for the majority of the resonances in the
spectrum is exactly the same as we observe for p53 in the presence of Hsp90, but we
also observe similar effects in the presence of smaller proteins representing the
constituent domains of Hsp90. These results are not consistent with the presence of
unfolded p53 in the complex, for which one might expect to see sharper resonances
with chemical shifts different from those of the (folded) free protein, if only in
the low molecular-weight complexes of the N and M domains. Instead, we observe loss
of intensity, directly proportional to the amount of added N, M, NM, MC or
Hsp90Δ, consistent with the formation of a heterogeneous conformational
ensemble resembling a molten globule in the p53 client.

Our results are not consistent with the formation of a unique complex
between the Hsp90 domains and p53. We see none of the effects, such as resonance
shifts, that are expected upon complex formation, yet it is clear that p53 is
affected by the presence of Hsp90, and that the effect increases as more Hsp90 is
added. Our observations are consistent with many of the known attributes of Hsp90
– its relatively wide stable of client proteins, the effects on specificity
and affinity of added extrinsic molecules, co-chaperones and ATP, as well as the
absence of any reports of crystallization of Hsp90–client complexes. We
suggest that Hsp90 affects p53 to give the NMR behavior that we observe by
undergoing multiple transient interactions, primarily using the N and M domains.
Such a manifold of chaperone-client “complexes” could be modified
and tuned to various tasks, depending on the presence of ATP and specific
co-chaperones. However, we suggest that the basic underlying interaction of Hsp90
with its client proteins is heterogeneous and transient. In the case of p53, these
interactions result in the loosening of the structure of the protein, to a state
resembling a molten globule.

If this observation proves general, it has important implications for the
understanding of Hsp90 function. Hsp90 is present in cells at up to 1% of
the total cellular protein, which argues for a central role of this protein in
cellular metabolism. A general propensity on the part of Hsp90 to cause loosening of
the structures of its client proteins would be consistent with a number of the known
functions of Hsp90. For example, Hsp90 is thought to sequester the ligand binding
domains (LBDs) of nuclear hormone receptors in a binding-competent state in the
absence of the hormone signal, and to release the protein once the hormone is
present27. Since the structures of LBDs
in the presence of their hormone ligands show the hydrophobic hormone molecules
deeply buried in the core of the domain, it is tempting to speculate that the LBD
may also form a molten globule-like state in the presence of Hsp90, a state that
would likely be loose enough for the hormone to access the hydrophobic interior.
Once the hormone is bound, the LBD becomes more structured, providing a mechanism
for the release of the protein from the chaperone.

METHODSPreparation of ProteinsConstructs of human Hsp90α (1–732) were the N-terminal
domain (N; 1–235), middle domain (M; 293–554), the two-domain
constructs (NM; 1–554 and MC; 293–732), and the full-length
protein without part of the N–M linker (Hsp90Δ; 1–732,
241–268 deleted). Proteins were expressed in M9 minimal medium in
E. coli BL21 (DE3) [DNAY] with induction at
15°C for 12–20 h. Cells were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris
buffer, pH 8.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 4 mM EDTA. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 60 ml Sepharose Q FF column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT and proteins eluted
with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, concentrated using Centriprep10 (Amicon) and
purified by gel filtration on a 350 ml Sephacryl S100HR or S300HR (2.6 ×
65 cm) in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.2, 0.1 M KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT.The DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human p53 (94–312), (wild-type
or double mutant Y346F/T253I)13 was
expressed in M9 minimal medium in E. coli BL21 (DE3)
[DNAY] with induction at 15°C for 12–20 h. Cells
were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 10 μM ZnSO4, 40 mM NaCl. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 10 ml Hitrap Q column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 10 μM ZnSO4, 5 mM DTT
and proteins eluted with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, and purified by Heparin
column in 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 40 mM NaCl, 5mM DTT. We chose to work in buffers
containing NaCl in order to avoid oligomerization of p53 DBD observed in low
salt conditions28.Expression of [70% 2H, 13C,
15N]-labeled proteins for resonance assignment was
carried out in M9 minimal medium in D2O containing
15NH4Cl (0.5 g L−1),
15NH4SO4 (0.5 g L−1) and
13C-labeled glucose (2 g L−1), and
[2H, 15N]-labeled proteins were
obtained using 12C-deuterated glucose (2 g L−1).
The culture was induced by 1 mM IPTG at 15°C with 16-h incubation.NMR spectroscopyThe triply labeled [70% 2H, 13C,
15N] p53 DBD sample was exchanged into NMR buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 100 mM glycine, 5 mM DTT, 10 μM
ZnSO4 in 90% H2O/10% D2O).
NMR spectra were acquired at 20°C on a Bruker DRX800 or Avance900
spectrometer with a cryoprobe. Backbone resonances were assigned using HNCA29,30, HNCO31, and NOESY-HSQC
(mixing time, 150 ms) spectra and compared to the published assignments32,14.NMR titrations of 15N labeled p53 DBD (160μM) with
each Hsp90 construct were performed at 10°C on a Bruker DRX800 or
Avance900 spectrometer. All samples were exchanged into binding buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) before titration. No appreciable
difference in the behavior of the p53 DBD was observed upon addition of ATP or
ATP analogs AMP-PNP or ATP-γ-S. A control experiment where bovine serum
albumin was added to 15N-labeled p53 DBD showed a small amount of
resonance attenuation throughout the molecule, both qualitatively and
quantitatively different from that observed for the Hsp90 constructs (Supplementary Fig.
5).Data AnalysisFor each cross peak in a series of 1H-15N HSQC
spectra containing ratios p53: Hsp90 of 1:0 up to 1:3.6, the intensity and
volume were evaluated using NMRView33 and
plotted as a function of concentration ratio. The points were fitted to a
parabola, consistent with the assumption that the intensity or volume of the
signal at any given concentration ratio reflects the concentration of free p53
DNA binding domain in the solution. To normalize for differences in intensity or
volume between different cross peaks in the spectrum, the degree of attenuation
was evaluated as the concentration ratio at which the intensity or volume was at
50% of the initial value in the absence of added Hsp90.Fluorescence SpectroscopyFluorescence spectra were recorded in a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer
(JOBIN YVON INC., NJ, USA), using the fluorescent probe
1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS). Fluorescence emission spectra
between 400 and 600 nm were obtained with a fixed excitation wavelength of 370
nm. The p53 DNA-binding domain and Hsp90 domains were prepared in the same
buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.1 or pH 6, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). For each
titration experiment, 5μM solution of p53 DNA-binding domain containing
11.3 μM ANS were prepared and a solution of one of the Hsp90 proteins
added. As a control experiment, a solution containing only 11.3 μM ANS
was titrated with each Hsp90 construct. The dilution effect upon adding the
Hsp90 constructs into the solution was negligible.H/D Exchange ExperimentsFour samples were prepared: p53 free in H2O, p53 free in
D2O, p53 in H2O in the presence of an amount of Hsp90
protein that would result in less than complete attenuation of cross peaks and
p53 in D2O in the presence of the same concentration of Hsp90
protein. The p53 concentrations were kept exactly the same in all four cases. A
stock solution of p53 in H2O buffer (353 μM p53 in 25 mM
Na2HPO4, pH 7.0. 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) was first
divided into four equal 0.5 ml volumes, two of which were added to 176.5
μl of buffer and the others to 176.5 μl of buffer containing 1
mM Hsp90 M. All samples were exchanged using NAP-5 columns, one free p53 and one
complex exchanged to H2O buffer and the other free p53 and complex
samples to D2O buffer. The pH of the D2O buffer was
adjusted to 6.6 to account for the deuterium isotope effect. After NAP-5
exchange, equal volumes of a D2O solution of 2H-DTT and
additional D2O (to provide a spectrometer lock in the H2O
samples) to a final concentration of 5% were added to all samples. The
final concentration of p53 in all samples was 123 μM. Samples were
equilibrated for exactly 20 minutes before being placed in the probe of the 800
MHz spectrometer, where they were equilibrate at 10°C for a further 15
minutes before acquisition of an HSQC spectrum for 47 minutes.

Preparation of ProteinsConstructs of human Hsp90α (1–732) were the N-terminal
domain (N; 1–235), middle domain (M; 293–554), the two-domain
constructs (NM; 1–554 and MC; 293–732), and the full-length
protein without part of the N–M linker (Hsp90Δ; 1–732,
241–268 deleted). Proteins were expressed in M9 minimal medium in
E. coli BL21 (DE3) [DNAY] with induction at
15°C for 12–20 h. Cells were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris
buffer, pH 8.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 4 mM EDTA. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 60 ml Sepharose Q FF column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT and proteins eluted
with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, concentrated using Centriprep10 (Amicon) and
purified by gel filtration on a 350 ml Sephacryl S100HR or S300HR (2.6 ×
65 cm) in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.2, 0.1 M KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT.The DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human p53 (94–312), (wild-type
or double mutant Y346F/T253I)13 was
expressed in M9 minimal medium in E. coli BL21 (DE3)
[DNAY] with induction at 15°C for 12–20 h. Cells
were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 10 μM ZnSO4, 40 mM NaCl. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 10 ml Hitrap Q column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 10 μM ZnSO4, 5 mM DTT
and proteins eluted with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, and purified by Heparin
column in 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 40 mM NaCl, 5mM DTT. We chose to work in buffers
containing NaCl in order to avoid oligomerization of p53 DBD observed in low
salt conditions28.Expression of [70% 2H, 13C,
15N]-labeled proteins for resonance assignment was
carried out in M9 minimal medium in D2O containing
15NH4Cl (0.5 g L−1),
15NH4SO4 (0.5 g L−1) and
13C-labeled glucose (2 g L−1), and
[2H, 15N]-labeled proteins were
obtained using 12C-deuterated glucose (2 g L−1).
The culture was induced by 1 mM IPTG at 15°C with 16-h incubation.

Preparation of Proteins

Constructs of human Hsp90α (1–732) were the N-terminal
domain (N; 1–235), middle domain (M; 293–554), the two-domain
constructs (NM; 1–554 and MC; 293–732), and the full-length
protein without part of the N–M linker (Hsp90Δ; 1–732,
241–268 deleted). Proteins were expressed in M9 minimal medium in
E. coli BL21 (DE3) [DNAY] with induction at
15°C for 12–20 h. Cells were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris
buffer, pH 8.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 4 mM EDTA. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 60 ml Sepharose Q FF column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT and proteins eluted
with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, concentrated using Centriprep10 (Amicon) and
purified by gel filtration on a 350 ml Sephacryl S100HR or S300HR (2.6 ×
65 cm) in 20 mM Tris, pH 7.2, 0.1 M KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT.

The DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human p53 (94–312), (wild-type
or double mutant Y346F/T253I)13 was
expressed in M9 minimal medium in E. coli BL21 (DE3)
[DNAY] with induction at 15°C for 12–20 h. Cells
were lysed by sonication in 25 mM Tris buffer, pH 7.0, 5 mM DTT, Protease
Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 10 μM ZnSO4, 40 mM NaCl. The
soluble fraction of the cell lysate was applied to a 10 ml Hitrap Q column
equilibrated with 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 10 μM ZnSO4, 5 mM DTT
and proteins eluted with a linear gradient to 1 M NaCl, and purified by Heparin
column in 25 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 40 mM NaCl, 5mM DTT. We chose to work in buffers
containing NaCl in order to avoid oligomerization of p53 DBD observed in low
salt conditions28.

Expression of [70% 2H, 13C,
15N]-labeled proteins for resonance assignment was
carried out in M9 minimal medium in D2O containing
15NH4Cl (0.5 g L−1),
15NH4SO4 (0.5 g L−1) and
13C-labeled glucose (2 g L−1), and
[2H, 15N]-labeled proteins were
obtained using 12C-deuterated glucose (2 g L−1).
The culture was induced by 1 mM IPTG at 15°C with 16-h incubation.

NMR spectroscopyThe triply labeled [70% 2H, 13C,
15N] p53 DBD sample was exchanged into NMR buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 100 mM glycine, 5 mM DTT, 10 μM
ZnSO4 in 90% H2O/10% D2O).
NMR spectra were acquired at 20°C on a Bruker DRX800 or Avance900
spectrometer with a cryoprobe. Backbone resonances were assigned using HNCA29,30, HNCO31, and NOESY-HSQC
(mixing time, 150 ms) spectra and compared to the published assignments32,14.NMR titrations of 15N labeled p53 DBD (160μM) with
each Hsp90 construct were performed at 10°C on a Bruker DRX800 or
Avance900 spectrometer. All samples were exchanged into binding buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) before titration. No appreciable
difference in the behavior of the p53 DBD was observed upon addition of ATP or
ATP analogs AMP-PNP or ATP-γ-S. A control experiment where bovine serum
albumin was added to 15N-labeled p53 DBD showed a small amount of
resonance attenuation throughout the molecule, both qualitatively and
quantitatively different from that observed for the Hsp90 constructs (Supplementary Fig.
5).

NMR spectroscopy

The triply labeled [70% 2H, 13C,
15N] p53 DBD sample was exchanged into NMR buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), 50 mM NaCl, 100 mM glycine, 5 mM DTT, 10 μM
ZnSO4 in 90% H2O/10% D2O).
NMR spectra were acquired at 20°C on a Bruker DRX800 or Avance900
spectrometer with a cryoprobe. Backbone resonances were assigned using HNCA29,30, HNCO31, and NOESY-HSQC
(mixing time, 150 ms) spectra and compared to the published assignments32,14.

NMR titrations of 15N labeled p53 DBD (160μM) with
each Hsp90 construct were performed at 10°C on a Bruker DRX800 or
Avance900 spectrometer. All samples were exchanged into binding buffer (25 mM
sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) before titration. No appreciable
difference in the behavior of the p53 DBD was observed upon addition of ATP or
ATP analogs AMP-PNP or ATP-γ-S. A control experiment where bovine serum
albumin was added to 15N-labeled p53 DBD showed a small amount of
resonance attenuation throughout the molecule, both qualitatively and
quantitatively different from that observed for the Hsp90 constructs (Supplementary Fig.
5).

Data AnalysisFor each cross peak in a series of 1H-15N HSQC
spectra containing ratios p53: Hsp90 of 1:0 up to 1:3.6, the intensity and
volume were evaluated using NMRView33 and
plotted as a function of concentration ratio. The points were fitted to a
parabola, consistent with the assumption that the intensity or volume of the
signal at any given concentration ratio reflects the concentration of free p53
DNA binding domain in the solution. To normalize for differences in intensity or
volume between different cross peaks in the spectrum, the degree of attenuation
was evaluated as the concentration ratio at which the intensity or volume was at
50% of the initial value in the absence of added Hsp90.

Data Analysis

For each cross peak in a series of 1H-15N HSQC
spectra containing ratios p53: Hsp90 of 1:0 up to 1:3.6, the intensity and
volume were evaluated using NMRView33 and
plotted as a function of concentration ratio. The points were fitted to a
parabola, consistent with the assumption that the intensity or volume of the
signal at any given concentration ratio reflects the concentration of free p53
DNA binding domain in the solution. To normalize for differences in intensity or
volume between different cross peaks in the spectrum, the degree of attenuation
was evaluated as the concentration ratio at which the intensity or volume was at
50% of the initial value in the absence of added Hsp90.

Fluorescence SpectroscopyFluorescence spectra were recorded in a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer
(JOBIN YVON INC., NJ, USA), using the fluorescent probe
1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS). Fluorescence emission spectra
between 400 and 600 nm were obtained with a fixed excitation wavelength of 370
nm. The p53 DNA-binding domain and Hsp90 domains were prepared in the same
buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.1 or pH 6, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). For each
titration experiment, 5μM solution of p53 DNA-binding domain containing
11.3 μM ANS were prepared and a solution of one of the Hsp90 proteins
added. As a control experiment, a solution containing only 11.3 μM ANS
was titrated with each Hsp90 construct. The dilution effect upon adding the
Hsp90 constructs into the solution was negligible.

Fluorescence Spectroscopy

Fluorescence spectra were recorded in a Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer
(JOBIN YVON INC., NJ, USA), using the fluorescent probe
1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS). Fluorescence emission spectra
between 400 and 600 nm were obtained with a fixed excitation wavelength of 370
nm. The p53 DNA-binding domain and Hsp90 domains were prepared in the same
buffer (25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.1 or pH 6, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT). For each
titration experiment, 5μM solution of p53 DNA-binding domain containing
11.3 μM ANS were prepared and a solution of one of the Hsp90 proteins
added. As a control experiment, a solution containing only 11.3 μM ANS
was titrated with each Hsp90 construct. The dilution effect upon adding the
Hsp90 constructs into the solution was negligible.

H/D Exchange ExperimentsFour samples were prepared: p53 free in H2O, p53 free in
D2O, p53 in H2O in the presence of an amount of Hsp90
protein that would result in less than complete attenuation of cross peaks and
p53 in D2O in the presence of the same concentration of Hsp90
protein. The p53 concentrations were kept exactly the same in all four cases. A
stock solution of p53 in H2O buffer (353 μM p53 in 25 mM
Na2HPO4, pH 7.0. 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) was first
divided into four equal 0.5 ml volumes, two of which were added to 176.5
μl of buffer and the others to 176.5 μl of buffer containing 1
mM Hsp90 M. All samples were exchanged using NAP-5 columns, one free p53 and one
complex exchanged to H2O buffer and the other free p53 and complex
samples to D2O buffer. The pH of the D2O buffer was
adjusted to 6.6 to account for the deuterium isotope effect. After NAP-5
exchange, equal volumes of a D2O solution of 2H-DTT and
additional D2O (to provide a spectrometer lock in the H2O
samples) to a final concentration of 5% were added to all samples. The
final concentration of p53 in all samples was 123 μM. Samples were
equilibrated for exactly 20 minutes before being placed in the probe of the 800
MHz spectrometer, where they were equilibrate at 10°C for a further 15
minutes before acquisition of an HSQC spectrum for 47 minutes.

H/D Exchange Experiments

Four samples were prepared: p53 free in H2O, p53 free in
D2O, p53 in H2O in the presence of an amount of Hsp90
protein that would result in less than complete attenuation of cross peaks and
p53 in D2O in the presence of the same concentration of Hsp90
protein. The p53 concentrations were kept exactly the same in all four cases. A
stock solution of p53 in H2O buffer (353 μM p53 in 25 mM
Na2HPO4, pH 7.0. 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT) was first
divided into four equal 0.5 ml volumes, two of which were added to 176.5
μl of buffer and the others to 176.5 μl of buffer containing 1
mM Hsp90 M. All samples were exchanged using NAP-5 columns, one free p53 and one
complex exchanged to H2O buffer and the other free p53 and complex
samples to D2O buffer. The pH of the D2O buffer was
adjusted to 6.6 to account for the deuterium isotope effect. After NAP-5
exchange, equal volumes of a D2O solution of 2H-DTT and
additional D2O (to provide a spectrometer lock in the H2O
samples) to a final concentration of 5% were added to all samples. The
final concentration of p53 in all samples was 123 μM. Samples were
equilibrated for exactly 20 minutes before being placed in the probe of the 800
MHz spectrometer, where they were equilibrate at 10°C for a further 15
minutes before acquisition of an HSQC spectrum for 47 minutes.

Supplementary Material1

Supplementary Material
