---
pmid: '19766565'
title: Recombinational repair within heterochromatin requires ATP-dependent chromatin
  remodeling.
authors:
- Sinha M
- Watanabe S
- Johnson A
- Moazed D
- Peterson CL
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2791047
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.013
---

# Recombinational repair within heterochromatin requires ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling.
**Authors:** Sinha M, Watanabe S, Johnson A, Moazed D, Peterson CL
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.013)
**PMC:** [PMC2791047](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2791047/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 Sep 18;138(6):1109-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.013.

Recombinational repair within heterochromatin requires ATP-dependent chromatin 
remodeling.

Sinha M(1), Watanabe S, Johnson A, Moazed D, Peterson CL.

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Heterochromatin plays a key role in protection of chromosome integrity by 
suppressing homologous recombination. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Sir2p, Sir3p, 
and Sir4p are structural components of heterochromatin found at telomeres and 
the silent mating-type loci. Here we have investigated whether incorporation of 
Sir proteins into minichromosomes regulates early steps of recombinational 
repair in vitro. We find that addition of Sir3p to a nucleosomal substrate is 
sufficient to eliminate yRad51p-catalyzed formation of joints, and that this 
repression is enhanced by Sir2p/Sir4p. Importantly, Sir-mediated repression 
requires histone residues that are critical for silencing in vivo. Moreover, we 
demonstrate that the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling enzyme facilitates joint 
formation by evicting Sir3p, thereby promoting subsequent Rad54p-dependent 
formation of a strand invasion product. These results suggest that 
recombinational repair in the context of heterochromatin presents additional 
constraints that can be overcome by ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling enzymes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.013
PMCID: PMC2791047
PMID: 19766565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
