---
pmid: '23918928'
title: Furin is the primary in vivo convertase of angiopoietin-like 3 and endothelial
  lipase in hepatocytes.
authors:
- Essalmani R
- Susan-Resiga D
- Chamberland A
- Asselin MC
- Canuel M
- Constam D
- Creemers JW
- Day R
- Gauthier D
- Prat A
- Seidah NG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3772187
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501304
---

# Furin is the primary in vivo convertase of angiopoietin-like 3 and endothelial lipase in hepatocytes.
**Authors:** Essalmani R, Susan-Resiga D, Chamberland A, Asselin MC, Canuel M, Constam D, Creemers JW, Day R, Gauthier D, Prat A, Seidah NG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.501304](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.501304)
**PMC:** [PMC3772187](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3772187/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 13;288(37):26410-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501304. Epub 
2013 Aug 5.

Furin is the primary in vivo convertase of angiopoietin-like 3 and endothelial 
lipase in hepatocytes.

Essalmani R(1), Susan-Resiga D, Chamberland A, Asselin MC, Canuel M, Constam D, 
Creemers JW, Day R, Gauthier D, Prat A, Seidah NG.

Author information:
(1)From the Laboratories of Biochemical Neuroendocrinology and.

The proprotein convertases (PCs) furin, PC5/6, and PACE4 exhibit unique and/or 
complementary functions. Their knock-out (KO) in mice resulted in strong and 
specific phenotypes demonstrating that, in vivo, these PCs are unique and 
essential during development. However, they also exhibit redundant functions. 
Liver angiopoietin-like 3 (ANGPTL3) inhibits lipolysis by binding to lipoprotein 
lipases. It is found in the plasma as full length and truncated forms. The 
latter is more active and generated by cleavage at a furin-like site. 
Endothelial lipase (EL) binds heparin sulfate proteoglycans on cell surfaces and 
catalyzes the hydrolysis of HDL phospholipids. EL activity is regulated by two 
endogenous inhibitors, ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4, and by PCs that inactivate EL 
through cleavage releasing the N-terminal catalytic and C-terminal lipid-binding 
domains. Herein, because furin and PC5/6 complete KOs are lethal, we used mice 
lacking furin or PC5/6 specifically in hepatocytes (hKO) or mice completely 
lacking PACE4. In primary hepatocytes, ANGPTL3 was processed into a shorter form 
of ANGPTL3 intracellularly by furin only, and extracellularly mainly by PACE4. 
In vivo, the absence of furin in hepatocytes reduced by ∼50% the circulating 
levels of cleaved ANGPTL3, while the lack of PACE4 had only a minor effect. 
Analysis of the EL processing in primary hepatocytes and in vivo revealed that 
it is mostly cleaved by furin. However, the lack of furin or PC5/6 in 
hepatocytes and complete PACE4 KO did not appreciably modify plasma HDL levels 
or EL activity. Thus, inhibition of furin in liver would not be expected to 
modify the plasma lipid profiles.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501304
PMCID: PMC3772187
PMID: 23918928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
