---
pmid: '10634139'
title: Characterization of a novel variant (S145C/L311V) of 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol
  dehydrogenase in human liver.
authors:
- Kume T
- Iwasa H
- Shiraishi H
- Yokoi T
- Nagashima K
- Otsuka M
- Terada T
- Takagi T
- Hara A
- Kamataki T
journal: Pharmacogenetics
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of a novel variant (S145C/L311V) of 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase in human liver.
**Authors:** Kume T, Iwasa H, Shiraishi H, Yokoi T, Nagashima K, Otsuka M, Terada T, Takagi T, Hara A, Kamataki T
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics (1999)

## Abstract

1. Pharmacogenetics. 1999 Dec;9(6):763-71.

Characterization of a novel variant (S145C/L311V) of 
3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase in human liver.

Kume T(1), Iwasa H, Shiraishi H, Yokoi T, Nagashima K, Otsuka M, Terada T, 
Takagi T, Hara A, Kamataki T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. t-kume@tanabe.co.jp

Human liver 3alpha-hydroxysteroid/dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) is involved in 
the metabolism of steroid hormones and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and is 
also responsible for the reduction of ketone-containing drugs. To account for 
the interindividual difference in the activity, we isolated and characterized 
clones for the human liver enzymes. The sequence of the cDNA clone coding for 
the variant differed from that coding for the wild-type DD by two nucleotides 
(substitutions of C with G at positions 434 and 931) which caused two amino acid 
replacements, Ser145 to Cys (S145C) and Leu311 to Val (L311V). The heterologous 
expression of the variant mRNA was confirmed in four of 31 liver samples from 
Japanese by an allele-specific polymerase chain reaction. The effects of the 
mutations on the catalytic properties were examined with the recombinant enzymes 
expressed in Escherichia coli. The introduction of S145C/L311V double mutations 
resulted in three- to five-fold decreased activities for xenobiotic and 
steroidal substrates, whereas no significant change was observed by an 
introduction of the S145C mutation alone. The results substantiate the existence 
of polymorphic forms for human liver DD, and also suggest the importance of the 
residue at position 311 for substrate binding to the enzyme.

PMID: 10634139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
