---
pmid: '25942624'
title: A family of tetraspans organizes cargo for sorting into multivesicular bodies.
authors:
- MacDonald C
- Payne JA
- Aboian M
- Smith W
- Katzmann DJ
- Piper RC
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4421094
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.007
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A family of tetraspans organizes cargo for sorting into multivesicular bodies.
**Authors:** MacDonald C, Payne JA, Aboian M, Smith W, Katzmann DJ, Piper RC
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.007)
**PMC:** [PMC4421094](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4421094/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2015 May 4;33(3):328-42. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.007.

A family of tetraspans organizes cargo for sorting into multivesicular bodies.

MacDonald C(1), Payne JA(2), Aboian M(3), Smith W(1), Katzmann DJ(4), Piper 
RC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Radiology and Biomedical 
Imaging, University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address: katzmann.david@mayo.edu.
(5)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address: robert-piper@uiowa.edu.

The abundance of cell-surface membrane proteins is regulated by internalization 
and delivery into intralumenal vesicles (ILVs) of multivesicular bodies (MVBs). 
Many cargoes are ubiquitinated, allowing access to an ESCRT-dependent pathway 
into MVBs. Yet how nonubiquitinated proteins, such as 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins, enter MVBs is unclear, 
supporting the possibility of mechanistically distinct ILV biogenesis pathways. 
Here we show that a family of highly ubiquitinated tetraspan Cos proteins 
provides a Ub signal in trans, allowing sorting of nonubiquitinated MVB cargo 
into the canonical ESCRT- and Ub-dependent pathway. Cos proteins create discrete 
endosomal subdomains that concentrate Ub cargo prior to their envelopment into 
ILVs, and the activity of Cos proteins is required not only for efficient 
sorting of canonical Ub cargo but also for sorting nonubiquitinated cargo into 
MVBs. Expression of these proteins increases during nutrient stress through an 
NAD(+)/Sir2-dependent mechanism that in turn accelerates the downregulation of a 
broad range of cell-surface proteins.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.007
PMCID: PMC4421094
PMID: 25942624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTIONLysosomal degradation of membrane proteins is mediated by their incorporation into intralumenal vesicles (ILVs), which reside within late-endosomes/multivesicular bodies (MVBs)(Piper and Katzmann, 2007). MVB sorting is conducted by the ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport) machinery, through packaging of cargo into ILVs and scission of ILVs from the limiting endosomal membrane. The major sorting signal for this pathway is ubiquitin (Ub), which in yeast is typically ligated to MVB cargo by the HECT-type Ub-ligase Rsp5 that uses a host of adaptor proteins to associate with its substrates (Lin et al., 2008; Nikko and Pelham, 2009). A variety of ESCRTs (ESCRT-0, -I, -II) and ESCRT-associated factors such as Alix and Bro1, bind Ub to usher ubiquitinated membrane proteins into burgeoning ILVs (Piper et al., 2014). Before ILV formation is complete, most Ub is removed from cargo, catalyzed in yeast by the Doa4 deubiquitinating enzyme (Amerik et al., 2000). ESCRTs themselves are also largely removed from the nascent ILV.Current models for the sorting process predict that cargo needs to be highly organized and immobilized to allow for proper ESCRT assembly, cargo deubiquitination and eventual ESCRT release in preparation for incorporation into ILVs (Hurley and Hanson, 2010; Nickerson et al., 2007). Yet, key aspects of how MVB cargo is captured, concentrated and packaged into ILVs have yet to be clarified. In vitro systems that successfully reconstitute ESCRT assembly and ILV formation lack the ability to sort cargo (Carlson and Hurley, 2012; Wollert et al., 2009), suggesting that auxiliary factors work in conjunction with ESCRTs. Even some ESCRT components are not strictly required for MVB sorting, as loss of Mvb12, Vta1, or the Alix-related Bro1 protein does not block all cargo sorting into yeast ILVs. Sorting independent of ESCRTs is more profound in animal cells, Plasmodium, and Dictyostelium, which generate MVBs when they lack, or are severely depleted of, various archetypal ESCRTs, suggesting auxiliary factors or alternate pathways may play prominent roles in MVB sorting (Blanc et al., 2009; Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; Leung et al., 2008; Trajkovic et al., 2008).Lipid-based mechanisms, such the generation of ceramide by sphingomyelinase or the accumulation of bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate / lysobisphosphatidic acid (BMP/LBPA) may contribute to MVB formation (Falguieres et al., 2008; Matsuo et al., 2004; Trajkovic et al., 2008). Also, tetraspanins (Tspans), many of which are major constituents of ILVs (Pols and Klumperman, 2009; Wubbolts et al., 2003), have been implicated in MVB sorting. Tspans are palmitoylated 4 transmembrane-spanning domain (TMD)-containing proteins with a characteristic large extracellular disulfide-containing loop. They cluster in membrane microdomains and form complexes with a wide variety of membrane proteins (Hemler, 2005; Stipp et al., 2003). A functional role for Tspans in endosomes was established by studies of CD63, which compensates for the depletion of ESCRTs during ILV formation in general, and appears tasked with sorting specific cargo such as the luminal protein Pmel17 into ILVs of melanosomes (Berson et al., 2001; Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; Theos et al., 2006; van Niel et al., 2011). Yet, how Tspans integrate functionally with ESCRTs, and whether they and ESCRTs augment the same ILV formation pathway or control mechanistically distinct MVB biogenesis pathways, remains unclear.Here we document a family of yeast MVB sorting factors called Cos proteins that functionally resemble Tspans found in mammalian ILVs. We show that nutrient-limiting conditions, which elevate COS expression, increase flux through the MVB pathway thereby causing down-regulation of various cell surface proteins. The metabolic link is NAD+ levels, which are sensed by the NAD+-dependent deaceytlase Sir2. We find that Cos proteins cluster in endosomal subdomains, which they help create, and trap cargo there to promote incorporation into ILVs. Among these cargoes are Glycosylphosphatidylinisotol (GPI)-anchored proteins that sort into MVB ILVs along an ESCRT-dependent pathway, yet have no cytosolic domain to mediate interaction with the Ub-binding ESCRT apparatus.

INTRODUCTION

Lysosomal degradation of membrane proteins is mediated by their incorporation into intralumenal vesicles (ILVs), which reside within late-endosomes/multivesicular bodies (MVBs)(Piper and Katzmann, 2007). MVB sorting is conducted by the ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport) machinery, through packaging of cargo into ILVs and scission of ILVs from the limiting endosomal membrane. The major sorting signal for this pathway is ubiquitin (Ub), which in yeast is typically ligated to MVB cargo by the HECT-type Ub-ligase Rsp5 that uses a host of adaptor proteins to associate with its substrates (Lin et al., 2008; Nikko and Pelham, 2009). A variety of ESCRTs (ESCRT-0, -I, -II) and ESCRT-associated factors such as Alix and Bro1, bind Ub to usher ubiquitinated membrane proteins into burgeoning ILVs (Piper et al., 2014). Before ILV formation is complete, most Ub is removed from cargo, catalyzed in yeast by the Doa4 deubiquitinating enzyme (Amerik et al., 2000). ESCRTs themselves are also largely removed from the nascent ILV.

Current models for the sorting process predict that cargo needs to be highly organized and immobilized to allow for proper ESCRT assembly, cargo deubiquitination and eventual ESCRT release in preparation for incorporation into ILVs (Hurley and Hanson, 2010; Nickerson et al., 2007). Yet, key aspects of how MVB cargo is captured, concentrated and packaged into ILVs have yet to be clarified. In vitro systems that successfully reconstitute ESCRT assembly and ILV formation lack the ability to sort cargo (Carlson and Hurley, 2012; Wollert et al., 2009), suggesting that auxiliary factors work in conjunction with ESCRTs. Even some ESCRT components are not strictly required for MVB sorting, as loss of Mvb12, Vta1, or the Alix-related Bro1 protein does not block all cargo sorting into yeast ILVs. Sorting independent of ESCRTs is more profound in animal cells, Plasmodium, and Dictyostelium, which generate MVBs when they lack, or are severely depleted of, various archetypal ESCRTs, suggesting auxiliary factors or alternate pathways may play prominent roles in MVB sorting (Blanc et al., 2009; Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; Leung et al., 2008; Trajkovic et al., 2008).

Lipid-based mechanisms, such the generation of ceramide by sphingomyelinase or the accumulation of bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate / lysobisphosphatidic acid (BMP/LBPA) may contribute to MVB formation (Falguieres et al., 2008; Matsuo et al., 2004; Trajkovic et al., 2008). Also, tetraspanins (Tspans), many of which are major constituents of ILVs (Pols and Klumperman, 2009; Wubbolts et al., 2003), have been implicated in MVB sorting. Tspans are palmitoylated 4 transmembrane-spanning domain (TMD)-containing proteins with a characteristic large extracellular disulfide-containing loop. They cluster in membrane microdomains and form complexes with a wide variety of membrane proteins (Hemler, 2005; Stipp et al., 2003). A functional role for Tspans in endosomes was established by studies of CD63, which compensates for the depletion of ESCRTs during ILV formation in general, and appears tasked with sorting specific cargo such as the luminal protein Pmel17 into ILVs of melanosomes (Berson et al., 2001; Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; Theos et al., 2006; van Niel et al., 2011). Yet, how Tspans integrate functionally with ESCRTs, and whether they and ESCRTs augment the same ILV formation pathway or control mechanistically distinct MVB biogenesis pathways, remains unclear.

Here we document a family of yeast MVB sorting factors called Cos proteins that functionally resemble Tspans found in mammalian ILVs. We show that nutrient-limiting conditions, which elevate COS expression, increase flux through the MVB pathway thereby causing down-regulation of various cell surface proteins. The metabolic link is NAD+ levels, which are sensed by the NAD+-dependent deaceytlase Sir2. We find that Cos proteins cluster in endosomal subdomains, which they help create, and trap cargo there to promote incorporation into ILVs. Among these cargoes are Glycosylphosphatidylinisotol (GPI)-anchored proteins that sort into MVB ILVs along an ESCRT-dependent pathway, yet have no cytosolic domain to mediate interaction with the Ub-binding ESCRT apparatus.

RESULTSSorting through the MVB pathway is stimulated in response to NAD+ depletionNutrient-stress caused by growing cells past mid-log phase induces many plasma membrane proteins to sort into the vacuole (Babst and Odorizzi, 2013; Beck et al., 1999; MacDonald et al., 2012b). This phenomenon is exemplified by the redistribution to the vacuole of the cell surface proteins Mup1-GFP (methionine transporter), Can1 (arginine transporter), Fur4 (uracil transporter), Snc1 (recycling v-SNARE), Ste3 (a-factor GPCR), and Yor1 (ABC transporter) (Figure 1 and S1a). This downregulation was also independent of many of the known Rsp5 arrestin-related E3 ligase adaptors that connect Rsp5 to its substrates (Lin et al., 2008; Nikko and Pelham, 2009). To understand this metabolic control we identified the key components of SD media that were being consumed or altered (Figure S1b). Interestingly, increased Yeast Nitrogen base, comprised mostly of B-vitamins and trace metals (Figure S1c), suppressed Mup1 vacuolar sorting. We traced the active ingredient to Niacin/Vitamin B3, a precursor for NAD+ also known as Nicotinic Acid (NA). NA is present in standard SD media at ~3 μM, but supplementing SD media to 100 µM NA stabilized Mup1 almost entirely at the cell surface in cells grown to late log-phase (Figure 1C). By contrast, in SD media without NA, Mup1-GFP was found in the vacuole even in cells grown to mid-log phase, and was found exclusively in the vacuole at late-log phase.One prominent class of NAD+-sensors is the family of NAD+-dependent histone deacytelase enzymes (HDACs) knows as sirtuins (Hekimi and Guarente, 2003; Wood et al., 2004). The yeast sirtuin, Sir2, mediates gene silencing at the mating-type, ribosomal DNA and the telomeric loci, and is inhibited when NAD+ levels are low (Bryk et al., 1997; Gottschling et al., 1990; Landry et al., 2000; Loo et al., 1995). The effect of NA-depletion on MVB sorting of Mup1-GFP was mimicked by deleting SIR2, which caused cells at mid-log phase to accumulate Mup1 in the vacuole and caused exclusive localization of Mup1-GFP to the vacuole in cells grown to late-log phase (Figure 1D,E). Increasing NA levels to 100 µM did not suppress Mup1-GFP delivery to the vacuole in sir2Δ cells, suggesting the effects of high NA levels or NA-depletion are mediated through Sir2. Previous studies have shown that some of the effects of Sir2 on transcription are opposed by the activity of the Rdp3-Sin3 Class I HDAC complex (Bernstein et al., 2000; Rundlett et al., 1996). We found that Rpd3 had opposing effects on Mup1-GFP down-regulation in response to nutrient stress (Figure 1D,F and S1d) suggesting that the opposing effects of Rpd3 and Sir2 comprise reciprocal control over the transcription of factors that induce MVB sorting of a broad range of cell surface proteins.A novel family of yeast MVB sorting factorsTo find the genes responsible for nutrient-stress induced MVB sorting, we cross-referenced existing microarray data for those that were repressed in rpd3Δ mutants and induced when cells were grown toward stationary phase (Bernstein et al., 2000; Gasch et al., 2000). Of those 25, 15 also had substantially increased transcription in sir2Δ null mutants (Bedalov et al., 2001) (Figure 2A and S2a). Eleven belonged to the family of conserved sequence (COS) genes that are found in subtelomeric regions within 9 of the 16 yeast chromosomes (Figure S2b,e); regions known to be repressed by Sir2 and activated by Rdp3 (Bernstein et al., 2000). The 11 COS genes, COS1 – COS10 and COS12, are remarkably similar at both the protein and nucleotide level (Figure S2d) (Spode et al., 2002). Cos proteins are comprised of ~380 residues, predicted to form 4 membrane spanning segments that bridge 2 small extracellular loops and larger cytosolic N and C-terminal tails (Figure 2B). We found that GFP fusions of different Cos proteins sort to the vacuole lumen, consistent with previous high-throughput studies (Huh et al., 2003), and do so along an ESCRT-dependent route (Figure 2C and S4a,d).Overexpressing a representative of the Cos family, Cos5, in wild-type cells caused Mup1-GFP to be shunted from its exclusive localization at the cell surface to endosomes and the vacuole interior of cells grown to mid-log phase (Figure 2D,F). Similarly, Mup1-GFP retained at the cell surface of Cos-depleted rpd3Δ or sin3Δ cells grown past late-log phase can be directed to the vacuole by overexpressing Cos5-HA (Figure 2G). Overexpressing Cos5-HA also compromised the ability of Trp− auxotrophic cells to grow on low levels of tryptophan (Figure 2E), consistent with down-regulation of the tryptophan transporter Tat2 from the cell surface (Schmidt et al., 1994).The Cos proteins are required for efficiently sorting MVB cargoWe next generated a strain lacking all COS genes and COS pseudogenes (Figure S3c,d). Unlike wild-type cells, cosΔ cells no longer efficiently delivered Mup1-GFP to the vacuole at late-log phase; rather, Mup1-GFP was localized to the cell surface and intracellular endosomal puncta (Figure 3A). In wild-type cells, an inframe fusion of Ub to Mup1-GFP serves as a sufficient signal for MVB sorting in the absence of methionine (Figure S3a). However Mup1-GFP-Ub sorting was largely blocked in cosΔ cells lacking methionine but could be restored by addition of methionine or an additional Ub moiety to the fusion protein (di-Ub) (Figure 3B), implying that greater ubiquitination of cargo surmounts the cosΔ defect. Defects were also observed for Ste3-GFP that is constitutively ubiquitinated and sorted into the MVB pathway (Davis et al., 1993; Roth et al., 1998). In mid-log phase grown wild-type cells, Ste3-GFP was largely in the vacuole, however, in cosΔ cells, a significant proportion of Ste3-GFP was also observed within endosomes, accompanied by a sizeable loss of a vacuolar processed GFP detected by immunoblot (Figure S3b). This defect was also suppressed by an inframe fusion of Ub. We next monitored the cellular pool of Ub using GFP-Ub. Wild-type cells accumulate some GFP-Ub in the vacuole due to the MVB pathway (Ren et al., 2008), yet this was largely blocked in cosΔ cells (Figure 3C).We found the delivery of GFP-Snc1 to the vacuole, which is only observed at late-log phase, was dramatically reduced in cosΔ null mutants (Figure 3D). Instead, GFP-Snc1 accumulated in endosomal compartments suggesting that Cos proteins function at endosomes to convey proteins delivered there further into the MVB ILVs. Re-expressing Cos5-HA restored sorting of GFP-Snc1 into the vacuole of cosΔ null cells demonstrating that the defects observed were due to the specific loss of the COS genes.We next tested MVB sorting of a synthetic Ub-independent cargo, Sna3KR-GFP, a version of the small polytopic membrane Rsp5 adaptor protein Sna3 in which ubiquitinatable lysines are substituted with arginines (Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). In cosΔ cells, Sna3KR-GFP was found primarily in endosomes and blocked from entry into the vacuole, most strikingly when endogenous SNA3 was also deleted (Figure 3E). This was corrected by overexpressing Cos5-HA from a plasmid. These data suggest Cos proteins mediate efficient sorting of a wide number of MVB cargoes.The Cos proteins are ubiquitinated trafficking effectorsPrevious mass-spectrometry experiments indicated that the Cos proteins are ubiquitinated (Hitchcock et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2003; Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). We found that ubiquitination of Cos proteins is required for their MVB sorting (Figure 4A). A Cos5KR-GFP fusion protein, in which all 33 lysines of Cos5 were altered to arginine, was unable to sort into the vacuole of wild-type cells. Pulse/chase experiments (Figure 4B) showed that degradation of Cos5-GFP had a half-time of ~20 min and was dependent on vacuolar proteases. The Cos5KR-GFP mutant, by contrast, was very stable. Sorting into the vacuole was restored by reintroducing a single lysine at positions 2 or 7 within the N-terminus and was correlated with the overall level of Cos5 ubiquitination (Figure S4b,c). Sorting of Cos5 into the vacuole was also blocked in cells compromised for Rsp5 function (Figure 4A and S4e), and blocked by fusing Cos5 to the catalytic domain of the deubiquitinating enzyme UL36 (Figure 4A), a manipulation that removes Ub on the host protein (Stringer and Piper, 2011). Ubiquitination was also important for Cos5 to have an effect on the sorting of other cargoes. Overexpressing Cos5-HA in mid-log grown cells caused Mup1-GFP to accumulate in endosomes and the vacuole (Figure 4C). Yet, overexpressing Cos5KR-HA to similar levels had no effect on Mup1-GFP sorting. Importantly, the defective Cos5KR-HA could be converted to a functional protein by an inframe fusion of Ub, Cos5KR-HA-Ub, which drove sorting of Mup1-GFP into endosomes and the vacuole to an extent on par with the wild-type Cos5-HA (Figure 4C,D).We found that sorting of Cos5-GFP to the vacuole was slightly perturbed in cells lacking Sna3 or Bsd2, two polytopic membrane proteins that act as Rsp5 substrate adaptors (Hettema et al., 2004; MacDonald et al., 2012b) and was significantly compromised in a sna3Δ bsd2Δ double mutant (Figure 4E). We also found that loss of Sna3 or Bsd2 caused synthetic MVB sorting defects when combined with a single deletion of a COS gene (COS6 in Figure 4F and COS1, COS2, COS4, or COS5 in Figure S4g). Together these data indicate that Sna3 and Bsd2 collaborate with Cos proteins to facilitate MVB sorting, possibly by mediating ubiquitination of the Cos proteins themselves. To test this model, Cos5-GFP and Cos5KR-GFP were immunoprecipitated from cells co-expressing HA-Ub (Figure 4G). Cells also carried a pep12Δ mutation that stabilizes Ub-modified MVB cargo (Katzmann et al., 2001). Ubiquitination of Cos5-GFP was diminished by loss of Bsd2 and Sna3 and no ubiquitination could be found on Cos5KR-GFP. These data demonstrate that Sna3 and Bsd2 contribute to the ubiquitination of Cos proteins, however, residual ubiquitination of Cos proteins remained in bsd2Δ sna3Δ cells. We also found that Rsp5 could bind directly to Cos proteins (Figure 4H). GST fusions to the C-terminal domains (CTD) of Cos4, Cos5, and Cos6 bound a recombinant MBP-Rsp5 fusion protein at levels similar to those attained by a GST fusion protein containing the CTD of Sna3, which has a PPxY motif that binds strongly to Rsp5 (McNatt et al., 2007; Oestreich et al., 2007; Stawiecka-Mirota et al., 2007; Watson and Bonifacino, 2007). Together these results show that Cos proteins are major targets of Rsp5-dependent ubiquitination, that multiple mechanisms are used by Rsp5 to ubiquitinate Cos proteins, and that ubiquitination of Cos proteins in turn is critical for their ability to sort themselves and other proteins into the MVB pathway.Cos proteins form endosomal microdomains that concentrate ubiquitinated cargoImmunoblot analysis of Cos5-HA suggests Cos proteins can self associate, as indicated by dimeric and oligomeric species detectable at higher exposures (Figure 2D, 4D and S5a). To explore this in vivo we examined the localization of Cos proteins within endosomes with respect to other Ub-cargo. FRET (Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) microscopy showed that Cos proteins interact with each other in endosomal compartments (Figure 5A). A strong FRET signal between Cos5-GFP and Cos5-mCherry was only found at peri-vacuolar / late endosomal structures of wild-type cells or within class E endosomes of vps36Δ cells. We also found that Cos5 interacted with Ub-cargo by FRET using a fusion of Vph1-GFP to Ub (Figure 5A). Vph1 is a membrane protein subunit of the V-ATPase, which normally localizes to the limiting membrane of the vacuole but is redirected into the MVB pathway when translationally fused to Ub (Figure S5b) (Urbanowski and Piper, 2001). We also found that GFP-Ub, which accumulates on MVB cargo on endosomes of ESCRT null mutants (Macdonald et al., 2012a; Ren et al., 2008), co-localized with Cos proteins in endosomal structures of vps36Δ and vps4Δ cells (Figure S5c).In contrast to Ub-cargo, Vph1-GFP that also accumulates within class E endosomes of ESCRT mutants, did not co-localize with Cos proteins and instead occupied adjacent subdomains (Figure 5B & C). This separation of subdomains, one marked by Cos proteins and Ub-cargo and another marked by the non-MVB cargo Vph1-GFP, were found not only in vps36Δ cells, but also in vps23Δ, vps4Δ, and escrt-IIIΔ cells (Figure S5d). We found that the Cos/Ub-cargo domains could also be visualized with Mup1-RFP-Ub, which segregates with Vph1-GFP-Ub and not Vph1-GFP within class E compartment/endosomes. Using Mup1-RFP-Ub together with Vph1-GFP revealed that segregation of Ub-cargo within class E endosomal compartments required Cos proteins, as these markers were not segregated in endosomes of cosΔ vps4Δ cells (Figure 5C).The Cos protein network traps cargo at endosomesThe effects of Cos overexpression on GFP-Snc1 and Mup1-GFP localization suggested that Cos proteins immobilize cargo in endosomes prior to sorting into ILVs (Figure 2F, 3E and 4C). To test the idea that Cos proteins retain cargo on endosomes, we compared the distribution of Ste3-GFP in vps24Δ and snf7Δ with Cos5-HA overexpression (Figure 6A). In control cells Ste3-GFP was found within late-endosomal/class E compartments and also at the cell surface; overexpressing Cos5-HA shifted Ste3 more to endosomal compartments. Previous studies compared the steady-state distribution of Mup1-GFP on the plasma membrane with endosomes in various ESCRT null mutants as a measure for how well cargo is trapped on endosomes (Teis et al., 2008). Those studies found differences in the degree of Mup1 localization at the cell surface depending on which ESCRT subunit was deleted, implying that exaggerated ESCRT-III polymers might trap cargo on endosomes. We found that localization of Mup1-GFP to the cell surface in all ESCRT mutants was also modulated by how much extracellular methionine was present, likely reflecting how strongly Mup1 is ubiquitinated. Therefore, we assessed Mup1-GFP distribution at low [0.5 μg/ml] and modest [4.0 μg/ml] concentrations of methionine and quantified the distribution of Mup1-GFP between the cell surface and class E/endosomal compartments (Figure 6B). We found that in all ESCRT mutants tested, overexpression of Cos5-HA shifted the distribution of Mup1-GFP from the cell surface to class E/endosomal compartments. Notably, this was found in vps36Δ mutants, snf7Δ mutants, and escrt-IIIΔ mutants (lacking all ESCRT-III subunits) indicating that the ability of Cos proteins to trap cargo did not strictly require ESCRT-III polymers.We next developed a kinetic assay to follow recycling of Mup1-GFP back to the cell surface (Figure 6). We took advantage of the ability of Rapamycin to heterodimerize chimeric proteins containing FK506-binding protein (FKBP-12) and the FRB domain of mTOR (Belshaw et al., 1996; Liberles et al., 1997; Spencer et al., 1993). Here we fused Mup1-GFP to FKBP-12 and co-expressed it with FRB fused to the deubiquitinating enzyme M48 and tested feasibility with a set of control experiments (Figure S6). To assess endosomal trapping, Mup1-GFP-FKBP was expressed in vps36Δ cells grown for 16 hrs in SD media lacking methionine. High concentrations of methionine [40 μg/ml] were then added for 3 hrs to drive all of the Mup1-GFP-FKBP into endosomal/class E compartments (Figure 6D,E). These high levels of methionine also repress the MUP1 promoter ensuring that only a pre-existing population of Mup1-GFP-FKBP was followed (Menant et al., 2006). Rapamycin triggered a dramatic redistribution of Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface within 45 min (Figure 6D,E), while having no effect on a co-expressed Ste3-mCherry that remained localized to endosomal compartments. By contrast, overexpressing Cos5-HA caused Mup1-GFP-FKBP to remain in endosomal compartments (Figure 6C,D,E). Extending the treatment of Rapamycin to 4 hr did allow recycling of more Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface of Cos5-HA overexpressing cells underscoring the dramatic delay in the efflux of cargo from endosomes (Figure S6c).Cos proteins act as cargo adaptors for GPI-anchored proteinsWe hypothesized a model in which the functional role of Cos proteins is to create an endosomal environment, or subdomain (Figure 5), conducive to MVB sorting. This could explain how cargo that has no Ub signal of its own might still access the canonical ESCRT- and Ub-dependent MVB pathway for degradation. To explore this possibility we examined the MVB sorting of an unequivocal Ub-independent class of cargo: GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs), which do not have cytosolic domain on which to attach Ub or otherwise interact directly with ESCRT components (Mayor and Riezman, 2004) (Figure S7a). Previous experiments demonstrate that many Fluorescent Protein (FP)-tagged GPI-anchored proteins are sorted to the vacuole (Ast et al., 2013; Bagnat and Simons, 2002; Castillon et al., 2009; Cohen et al., 2013; Rodriguez-Pena et al., 2002). Analysis in pep4Δ cells that lack active vacuolar hydrolases to cleave YFP from lumenally exposed GPI-APs clearly showed that GPI-APs enter the vacuole via intralumenal vesicles (Figure S7a,b,c). We also found that MVB sorting of GPI-APs relied on proper Rsp5 and ESCRT function (Figure 7A,B). In addition, GPI-APs strongly co-localized with Cos proteins within endosomal class E compartments of vps4Δ pep4Δ cells demonstrating that like canonical Ub-cargo, they too can localize to discrete Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B).In cosΔ cells, MVB sorting of GPI-APs was completely blocked, yet was restored upon overexpressing Cos5-RFP from a plasmid (Figure 7E). This was consistent with the effect of deleting Cos proteins on the overall levels of two GPI-APs, Gas1 and Sed1 assessed by immunoblotting (Figure 7C). Loss of Cos or Pep4 function did not alter levels of the ER-localized myc-Rot1 GPI-AP (Takeuchi et al., 2006), confirming the specificity of Cos proteins with regard to vacuole-dependent degradation. Finally, we found that overexpressing Cos5-HA in otherwise wild-type cells resulted in more GPI-APs directed to the vacuole for degradation (Figure 7D). These results were corroborated in pep4Δ cells grown in media containing high levels of NA, which activates Sir2 to silence subtelomerically-localized COS genes (Figure S7d). Here, sorting of YFP-Ccw14, YFP-Tos6, and YFP-Cwp2 into the vacuole was modest but was strongly increased upon overexpression of Cos5-RFP from a plasmid.These data demonstrate that Cos proteins mediate entry of GPI-APs into the Ub-dependent and ESCRT-dependent MVB sorting pathway. The simplest explanation is that GPI-APs congregate with Cos proteins, which supply a Ub sorting signal in trans. It is unlikely that such a mechanism is mediated by direct interaction between GPI-APs and Cos proteins because GPI-APs are entirely luminal proteins with small lipid anchors and Cos proteins only have 4-6 predicted residues on their luminal side, providing no basis for direct interaction. Rather, Cos proteins might form a membrane subcompartment into which GPI-APs are segregated and held, a model consistent with the co-localization of GPI-APs within Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B). A prediction of this model is that residues within the membrane spanning domains are critical for the ability of Cos proteins to mediate MVB sorting of GPI-APs. Indeed, Cos proteins have many residues within their TMDs that are atypical for such hydrophobic stretches and these in turn might create a local environment that promotes trapping of cargoes before their incorporation into ILVs. To test this idea, we created a version of Cos5 with TMDs composed entirely of conventional hydrophobic residues (TMD*; Figure S7e). Despite these changes, Cos5TMD*-RFP still sorted into the vacuole lumen, however, its ability to confer sorting on GPI-APs was greatly reduced. This was reflected by the inability of overexpressed Cos5TMD*-RFP to decrease steady-state levels of HA-Gas1 (Figure 7F) or to completely shift YFP-Ccw14 from the cell surface into the vacuole lumen (Figure 7G).

Sorting through the MVB pathway is stimulated in response to NAD+ depletionNutrient-stress caused by growing cells past mid-log phase induces many plasma membrane proteins to sort into the vacuole (Babst and Odorizzi, 2013; Beck et al., 1999; MacDonald et al., 2012b). This phenomenon is exemplified by the redistribution to the vacuole of the cell surface proteins Mup1-GFP (methionine transporter), Can1 (arginine transporter), Fur4 (uracil transporter), Snc1 (recycling v-SNARE), Ste3 (a-factor GPCR), and Yor1 (ABC transporter) (Figure 1 and S1a). This downregulation was also independent of many of the known Rsp5 arrestin-related E3 ligase adaptors that connect Rsp5 to its substrates (Lin et al., 2008; Nikko and Pelham, 2009). To understand this metabolic control we identified the key components of SD media that were being consumed or altered (Figure S1b). Interestingly, increased Yeast Nitrogen base, comprised mostly of B-vitamins and trace metals (Figure S1c), suppressed Mup1 vacuolar sorting. We traced the active ingredient to Niacin/Vitamin B3, a precursor for NAD+ also known as Nicotinic Acid (NA). NA is present in standard SD media at ~3 μM, but supplementing SD media to 100 µM NA stabilized Mup1 almost entirely at the cell surface in cells grown to late log-phase (Figure 1C). By contrast, in SD media without NA, Mup1-GFP was found in the vacuole even in cells grown to mid-log phase, and was found exclusively in the vacuole at late-log phase.One prominent class of NAD+-sensors is the family of NAD+-dependent histone deacytelase enzymes (HDACs) knows as sirtuins (Hekimi and Guarente, 2003; Wood et al., 2004). The yeast sirtuin, Sir2, mediates gene silencing at the mating-type, ribosomal DNA and the telomeric loci, and is inhibited when NAD+ levels are low (Bryk et al., 1997; Gottschling et al., 1990; Landry et al., 2000; Loo et al., 1995). The effect of NA-depletion on MVB sorting of Mup1-GFP was mimicked by deleting SIR2, which caused cells at mid-log phase to accumulate Mup1 in the vacuole and caused exclusive localization of Mup1-GFP to the vacuole in cells grown to late-log phase (Figure 1D,E). Increasing NA levels to 100 µM did not suppress Mup1-GFP delivery to the vacuole in sir2Δ cells, suggesting the effects of high NA levels or NA-depletion are mediated through Sir2. Previous studies have shown that some of the effects of Sir2 on transcription are opposed by the activity of the Rdp3-Sin3 Class I HDAC complex (Bernstein et al., 2000; Rundlett et al., 1996). We found that Rpd3 had opposing effects on Mup1-GFP down-regulation in response to nutrient stress (Figure 1D,F and S1d) suggesting that the opposing effects of Rpd3 and Sir2 comprise reciprocal control over the transcription of factors that induce MVB sorting of a broad range of cell surface proteins.

Sorting through the MVB pathway is stimulated in response to NAD+ depletion

Nutrient-stress caused by growing cells past mid-log phase induces many plasma membrane proteins to sort into the vacuole (Babst and Odorizzi, 2013; Beck et al., 1999; MacDonald et al., 2012b). This phenomenon is exemplified by the redistribution to the vacuole of the cell surface proteins Mup1-GFP (methionine transporter), Can1 (arginine transporter), Fur4 (uracil transporter), Snc1 (recycling v-SNARE), Ste3 (a-factor GPCR), and Yor1 (ABC transporter) (Figure 1 and S1a). This downregulation was also independent of many of the known Rsp5 arrestin-related E3 ligase adaptors that connect Rsp5 to its substrates (Lin et al., 2008; Nikko and Pelham, 2009). To understand this metabolic control we identified the key components of SD media that were being consumed or altered (Figure S1b). Interestingly, increased Yeast Nitrogen base, comprised mostly of B-vitamins and trace metals (Figure S1c), suppressed Mup1 vacuolar sorting. We traced the active ingredient to Niacin/Vitamin B3, a precursor for NAD+ also known as Nicotinic Acid (NA). NA is present in standard SD media at ~3 μM, but supplementing SD media to 100 µM NA stabilized Mup1 almost entirely at the cell surface in cells grown to late log-phase (Figure 1C). By contrast, in SD media without NA, Mup1-GFP was found in the vacuole even in cells grown to mid-log phase, and was found exclusively in the vacuole at late-log phase.

One prominent class of NAD+-sensors is the family of NAD+-dependent histone deacytelase enzymes (HDACs) knows as sirtuins (Hekimi and Guarente, 2003; Wood et al., 2004). The yeast sirtuin, Sir2, mediates gene silencing at the mating-type, ribosomal DNA and the telomeric loci, and is inhibited when NAD+ levels are low (Bryk et al., 1997; Gottschling et al., 1990; Landry et al., 2000; Loo et al., 1995). The effect of NA-depletion on MVB sorting of Mup1-GFP was mimicked by deleting SIR2, which caused cells at mid-log phase to accumulate Mup1 in the vacuole and caused exclusive localization of Mup1-GFP to the vacuole in cells grown to late-log phase (Figure 1D,E). Increasing NA levels to 100 µM did not suppress Mup1-GFP delivery to the vacuole in sir2Δ cells, suggesting the effects of high NA levels or NA-depletion are mediated through Sir2. Previous studies have shown that some of the effects of Sir2 on transcription are opposed by the activity of the Rdp3-Sin3 Class I HDAC complex (Bernstein et al., 2000; Rundlett et al., 1996). We found that Rpd3 had opposing effects on Mup1-GFP down-regulation in response to nutrient stress (Figure 1D,F and S1d) suggesting that the opposing effects of Rpd3 and Sir2 comprise reciprocal control over the transcription of factors that induce MVB sorting of a broad range of cell surface proteins.

A novel family of yeast MVB sorting factorsTo find the genes responsible for nutrient-stress induced MVB sorting, we cross-referenced existing microarray data for those that were repressed in rpd3Δ mutants and induced when cells were grown toward stationary phase (Bernstein et al., 2000; Gasch et al., 2000). Of those 25, 15 also had substantially increased transcription in sir2Δ null mutants (Bedalov et al., 2001) (Figure 2A and S2a). Eleven belonged to the family of conserved sequence (COS) genes that are found in subtelomeric regions within 9 of the 16 yeast chromosomes (Figure S2b,e); regions known to be repressed by Sir2 and activated by Rdp3 (Bernstein et al., 2000). The 11 COS genes, COS1 – COS10 and COS12, are remarkably similar at both the protein and nucleotide level (Figure S2d) (Spode et al., 2002). Cos proteins are comprised of ~380 residues, predicted to form 4 membrane spanning segments that bridge 2 small extracellular loops and larger cytosolic N and C-terminal tails (Figure 2B). We found that GFP fusions of different Cos proteins sort to the vacuole lumen, consistent with previous high-throughput studies (Huh et al., 2003), and do so along an ESCRT-dependent route (Figure 2C and S4a,d).Overexpressing a representative of the Cos family, Cos5, in wild-type cells caused Mup1-GFP to be shunted from its exclusive localization at the cell surface to endosomes and the vacuole interior of cells grown to mid-log phase (Figure 2D,F). Similarly, Mup1-GFP retained at the cell surface of Cos-depleted rpd3Δ or sin3Δ cells grown past late-log phase can be directed to the vacuole by overexpressing Cos5-HA (Figure 2G). Overexpressing Cos5-HA also compromised the ability of Trp− auxotrophic cells to grow on low levels of tryptophan (Figure 2E), consistent with down-regulation of the tryptophan transporter Tat2 from the cell surface (Schmidt et al., 1994).

A novel family of yeast MVB sorting factors

To find the genes responsible for nutrient-stress induced MVB sorting, we cross-referenced existing microarray data for those that were repressed in rpd3Δ mutants and induced when cells were grown toward stationary phase (Bernstein et al., 2000; Gasch et al., 2000). Of those 25, 15 also had substantially increased transcription in sir2Δ null mutants (Bedalov et al., 2001) (Figure 2A and S2a). Eleven belonged to the family of conserved sequence (COS) genes that are found in subtelomeric regions within 9 of the 16 yeast chromosomes (Figure S2b,e); regions known to be repressed by Sir2 and activated by Rdp3 (Bernstein et al., 2000). The 11 COS genes, COS1 – COS10 and COS12, are remarkably similar at both the protein and nucleotide level (Figure S2d) (Spode et al., 2002). Cos proteins are comprised of ~380 residues, predicted to form 4 membrane spanning segments that bridge 2 small extracellular loops and larger cytosolic N and C-terminal tails (Figure 2B). We found that GFP fusions of different Cos proteins sort to the vacuole lumen, consistent with previous high-throughput studies (Huh et al., 2003), and do so along an ESCRT-dependent route (Figure 2C and S4a,d).

Overexpressing a representative of the Cos family, Cos5, in wild-type cells caused Mup1-GFP to be shunted from its exclusive localization at the cell surface to endosomes and the vacuole interior of cells grown to mid-log phase (Figure 2D,F). Similarly, Mup1-GFP retained at the cell surface of Cos-depleted rpd3Δ or sin3Δ cells grown past late-log phase can be directed to the vacuole by overexpressing Cos5-HA (Figure 2G). Overexpressing Cos5-HA also compromised the ability of Trp− auxotrophic cells to grow on low levels of tryptophan (Figure 2E), consistent with down-regulation of the tryptophan transporter Tat2 from the cell surface (Schmidt et al., 1994).

The Cos proteins are required for efficiently sorting MVB cargoWe next generated a strain lacking all COS genes and COS pseudogenes (Figure S3c,d). Unlike wild-type cells, cosΔ cells no longer efficiently delivered Mup1-GFP to the vacuole at late-log phase; rather, Mup1-GFP was localized to the cell surface and intracellular endosomal puncta (Figure 3A). In wild-type cells, an inframe fusion of Ub to Mup1-GFP serves as a sufficient signal for MVB sorting in the absence of methionine (Figure S3a). However Mup1-GFP-Ub sorting was largely blocked in cosΔ cells lacking methionine but could be restored by addition of methionine or an additional Ub moiety to the fusion protein (di-Ub) (Figure 3B), implying that greater ubiquitination of cargo surmounts the cosΔ defect. Defects were also observed for Ste3-GFP that is constitutively ubiquitinated and sorted into the MVB pathway (Davis et al., 1993; Roth et al., 1998). In mid-log phase grown wild-type cells, Ste3-GFP was largely in the vacuole, however, in cosΔ cells, a significant proportion of Ste3-GFP was also observed within endosomes, accompanied by a sizeable loss of a vacuolar processed GFP detected by immunoblot (Figure S3b). This defect was also suppressed by an inframe fusion of Ub. We next monitored the cellular pool of Ub using GFP-Ub. Wild-type cells accumulate some GFP-Ub in the vacuole due to the MVB pathway (Ren et al., 2008), yet this was largely blocked in cosΔ cells (Figure 3C).We found the delivery of GFP-Snc1 to the vacuole, which is only observed at late-log phase, was dramatically reduced in cosΔ null mutants (Figure 3D). Instead, GFP-Snc1 accumulated in endosomal compartments suggesting that Cos proteins function at endosomes to convey proteins delivered there further into the MVB ILVs. Re-expressing Cos5-HA restored sorting of GFP-Snc1 into the vacuole of cosΔ null cells demonstrating that the defects observed were due to the specific loss of the COS genes.We next tested MVB sorting of a synthetic Ub-independent cargo, Sna3KR-GFP, a version of the small polytopic membrane Rsp5 adaptor protein Sna3 in which ubiquitinatable lysines are substituted with arginines (Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). In cosΔ cells, Sna3KR-GFP was found primarily in endosomes and blocked from entry into the vacuole, most strikingly when endogenous SNA3 was also deleted (Figure 3E). This was corrected by overexpressing Cos5-HA from a plasmid. These data suggest Cos proteins mediate efficient sorting of a wide number of MVB cargoes.

The Cos proteins are required for efficiently sorting MVB cargo

We next generated a strain lacking all COS genes and COS pseudogenes (Figure S3c,d). Unlike wild-type cells, cosΔ cells no longer efficiently delivered Mup1-GFP to the vacuole at late-log phase; rather, Mup1-GFP was localized to the cell surface and intracellular endosomal puncta (Figure 3A). In wild-type cells, an inframe fusion of Ub to Mup1-GFP serves as a sufficient signal for MVB sorting in the absence of methionine (Figure S3a). However Mup1-GFP-Ub sorting was largely blocked in cosΔ cells lacking methionine but could be restored by addition of methionine or an additional Ub moiety to the fusion protein (di-Ub) (Figure 3B), implying that greater ubiquitination of cargo surmounts the cosΔ defect. Defects were also observed for Ste3-GFP that is constitutively ubiquitinated and sorted into the MVB pathway (Davis et al., 1993; Roth et al., 1998). In mid-log phase grown wild-type cells, Ste3-GFP was largely in the vacuole, however, in cosΔ cells, a significant proportion of Ste3-GFP was also observed within endosomes, accompanied by a sizeable loss of a vacuolar processed GFP detected by immunoblot (Figure S3b). This defect was also suppressed by an inframe fusion of Ub. We next monitored the cellular pool of Ub using GFP-Ub. Wild-type cells accumulate some GFP-Ub in the vacuole due to the MVB pathway (Ren et al., 2008), yet this was largely blocked in cosΔ cells (Figure 3C).

We found the delivery of GFP-Snc1 to the vacuole, which is only observed at late-log phase, was dramatically reduced in cosΔ null mutants (Figure 3D). Instead, GFP-Snc1 accumulated in endosomal compartments suggesting that Cos proteins function at endosomes to convey proteins delivered there further into the MVB ILVs. Re-expressing Cos5-HA restored sorting of GFP-Snc1 into the vacuole of cosΔ null cells demonstrating that the defects observed were due to the specific loss of the COS genes.

We next tested MVB sorting of a synthetic Ub-independent cargo, Sna3KR-GFP, a version of the small polytopic membrane Rsp5 adaptor protein Sna3 in which ubiquitinatable lysines are substituted with arginines (Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). In cosΔ cells, Sna3KR-GFP was found primarily in endosomes and blocked from entry into the vacuole, most strikingly when endogenous SNA3 was also deleted (Figure 3E). This was corrected by overexpressing Cos5-HA from a plasmid. These data suggest Cos proteins mediate efficient sorting of a wide number of MVB cargoes.

The Cos proteins are ubiquitinated trafficking effectorsPrevious mass-spectrometry experiments indicated that the Cos proteins are ubiquitinated (Hitchcock et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2003; Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). We found that ubiquitination of Cos proteins is required for their MVB sorting (Figure 4A). A Cos5KR-GFP fusion protein, in which all 33 lysines of Cos5 were altered to arginine, was unable to sort into the vacuole of wild-type cells. Pulse/chase experiments (Figure 4B) showed that degradation of Cos5-GFP had a half-time of ~20 min and was dependent on vacuolar proteases. The Cos5KR-GFP mutant, by contrast, was very stable. Sorting into the vacuole was restored by reintroducing a single lysine at positions 2 or 7 within the N-terminus and was correlated with the overall level of Cos5 ubiquitination (Figure S4b,c). Sorting of Cos5 into the vacuole was also blocked in cells compromised for Rsp5 function (Figure 4A and S4e), and blocked by fusing Cos5 to the catalytic domain of the deubiquitinating enzyme UL36 (Figure 4A), a manipulation that removes Ub on the host protein (Stringer and Piper, 2011). Ubiquitination was also important for Cos5 to have an effect on the sorting of other cargoes. Overexpressing Cos5-HA in mid-log grown cells caused Mup1-GFP to accumulate in endosomes and the vacuole (Figure 4C). Yet, overexpressing Cos5KR-HA to similar levels had no effect on Mup1-GFP sorting. Importantly, the defective Cos5KR-HA could be converted to a functional protein by an inframe fusion of Ub, Cos5KR-HA-Ub, which drove sorting of Mup1-GFP into endosomes and the vacuole to an extent on par with the wild-type Cos5-HA (Figure 4C,D).We found that sorting of Cos5-GFP to the vacuole was slightly perturbed in cells lacking Sna3 or Bsd2, two polytopic membrane proteins that act as Rsp5 substrate adaptors (Hettema et al., 2004; MacDonald et al., 2012b) and was significantly compromised in a sna3Δ bsd2Δ double mutant (Figure 4E). We also found that loss of Sna3 or Bsd2 caused synthetic MVB sorting defects when combined with a single deletion of a COS gene (COS6 in Figure 4F and COS1, COS2, COS4, or COS5 in Figure S4g). Together these data indicate that Sna3 and Bsd2 collaborate with Cos proteins to facilitate MVB sorting, possibly by mediating ubiquitination of the Cos proteins themselves. To test this model, Cos5-GFP and Cos5KR-GFP were immunoprecipitated from cells co-expressing HA-Ub (Figure 4G). Cells also carried a pep12Δ mutation that stabilizes Ub-modified MVB cargo (Katzmann et al., 2001). Ubiquitination of Cos5-GFP was diminished by loss of Bsd2 and Sna3 and no ubiquitination could be found on Cos5KR-GFP. These data demonstrate that Sna3 and Bsd2 contribute to the ubiquitination of Cos proteins, however, residual ubiquitination of Cos proteins remained in bsd2Δ sna3Δ cells. We also found that Rsp5 could bind directly to Cos proteins (Figure 4H). GST fusions to the C-terminal domains (CTD) of Cos4, Cos5, and Cos6 bound a recombinant MBP-Rsp5 fusion protein at levels similar to those attained by a GST fusion protein containing the CTD of Sna3, which has a PPxY motif that binds strongly to Rsp5 (McNatt et al., 2007; Oestreich et al., 2007; Stawiecka-Mirota et al., 2007; Watson and Bonifacino, 2007). Together these results show that Cos proteins are major targets of Rsp5-dependent ubiquitination, that multiple mechanisms are used by Rsp5 to ubiquitinate Cos proteins, and that ubiquitination of Cos proteins in turn is critical for their ability to sort themselves and other proteins into the MVB pathway.

The Cos proteins are ubiquitinated trafficking effectors

Previous mass-spectrometry experiments indicated that the Cos proteins are ubiquitinated (Hitchcock et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2003; Reggiori and Pelham, 2001). We found that ubiquitination of Cos proteins is required for their MVB sorting (Figure 4A). A Cos5KR-GFP fusion protein, in which all 33 lysines of Cos5 were altered to arginine, was unable to sort into the vacuole of wild-type cells. Pulse/chase experiments (Figure 4B) showed that degradation of Cos5-GFP had a half-time of ~20 min and was dependent on vacuolar proteases. The Cos5KR-GFP mutant, by contrast, was very stable. Sorting into the vacuole was restored by reintroducing a single lysine at positions 2 or 7 within the N-terminus and was correlated with the overall level of Cos5 ubiquitination (Figure S4b,c). Sorting of Cos5 into the vacuole was also blocked in cells compromised for Rsp5 function (Figure 4A and S4e), and blocked by fusing Cos5 to the catalytic domain of the deubiquitinating enzyme UL36 (Figure 4A), a manipulation that removes Ub on the host protein (Stringer and Piper, 2011). Ubiquitination was also important for Cos5 to have an effect on the sorting of other cargoes. Overexpressing Cos5-HA in mid-log grown cells caused Mup1-GFP to accumulate in endosomes and the vacuole (Figure 4C). Yet, overexpressing Cos5KR-HA to similar levels had no effect on Mup1-GFP sorting. Importantly, the defective Cos5KR-HA could be converted to a functional protein by an inframe fusion of Ub, Cos5KR-HA-Ub, which drove sorting of Mup1-GFP into endosomes and the vacuole to an extent on par with the wild-type Cos5-HA (Figure 4C,D).

We found that sorting of Cos5-GFP to the vacuole was slightly perturbed in cells lacking Sna3 or Bsd2, two polytopic membrane proteins that act as Rsp5 substrate adaptors (Hettema et al., 2004; MacDonald et al., 2012b) and was significantly compromised in a sna3Δ bsd2Δ double mutant (Figure 4E). We also found that loss of Sna3 or Bsd2 caused synthetic MVB sorting defects when combined with a single deletion of a COS gene (COS6 in Figure 4F and COS1, COS2, COS4, or COS5 in Figure S4g). Together these data indicate that Sna3 and Bsd2 collaborate with Cos proteins to facilitate MVB sorting, possibly by mediating ubiquitination of the Cos proteins themselves. To test this model, Cos5-GFP and Cos5KR-GFP were immunoprecipitated from cells co-expressing HA-Ub (Figure 4G). Cells also carried a pep12Δ mutation that stabilizes Ub-modified MVB cargo (Katzmann et al., 2001). Ubiquitination of Cos5-GFP was diminished by loss of Bsd2 and Sna3 and no ubiquitination could be found on Cos5KR-GFP. These data demonstrate that Sna3 and Bsd2 contribute to the ubiquitination of Cos proteins, however, residual ubiquitination of Cos proteins remained in bsd2Δ sna3Δ cells. We also found that Rsp5 could bind directly to Cos proteins (Figure 4H). GST fusions to the C-terminal domains (CTD) of Cos4, Cos5, and Cos6 bound a recombinant MBP-Rsp5 fusion protein at levels similar to those attained by a GST fusion protein containing the CTD of Sna3, which has a PPxY motif that binds strongly to Rsp5 (McNatt et al., 2007; Oestreich et al., 2007; Stawiecka-Mirota et al., 2007; Watson and Bonifacino, 2007). Together these results show that Cos proteins are major targets of Rsp5-dependent ubiquitination, that multiple mechanisms are used by Rsp5 to ubiquitinate Cos proteins, and that ubiquitination of Cos proteins in turn is critical for their ability to sort themselves and other proteins into the MVB pathway.

Cos proteins form endosomal microdomains that concentrate ubiquitinated cargoImmunoblot analysis of Cos5-HA suggests Cos proteins can self associate, as indicated by dimeric and oligomeric species detectable at higher exposures (Figure 2D, 4D and S5a). To explore this in vivo we examined the localization of Cos proteins within endosomes with respect to other Ub-cargo. FRET (Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) microscopy showed that Cos proteins interact with each other in endosomal compartments (Figure 5A). A strong FRET signal between Cos5-GFP and Cos5-mCherry was only found at peri-vacuolar / late endosomal structures of wild-type cells or within class E endosomes of vps36Δ cells. We also found that Cos5 interacted with Ub-cargo by FRET using a fusion of Vph1-GFP to Ub (Figure 5A). Vph1 is a membrane protein subunit of the V-ATPase, which normally localizes to the limiting membrane of the vacuole but is redirected into the MVB pathway when translationally fused to Ub (Figure S5b) (Urbanowski and Piper, 2001). We also found that GFP-Ub, which accumulates on MVB cargo on endosomes of ESCRT null mutants (Macdonald et al., 2012a; Ren et al., 2008), co-localized with Cos proteins in endosomal structures of vps36Δ and vps4Δ cells (Figure S5c).In contrast to Ub-cargo, Vph1-GFP that also accumulates within class E endosomes of ESCRT mutants, did not co-localize with Cos proteins and instead occupied adjacent subdomains (Figure 5B & C). This separation of subdomains, one marked by Cos proteins and Ub-cargo and another marked by the non-MVB cargo Vph1-GFP, were found not only in vps36Δ cells, but also in vps23Δ, vps4Δ, and escrt-IIIΔ cells (Figure S5d). We found that the Cos/Ub-cargo domains could also be visualized with Mup1-RFP-Ub, which segregates with Vph1-GFP-Ub and not Vph1-GFP within class E compartment/endosomes. Using Mup1-RFP-Ub together with Vph1-GFP revealed that segregation of Ub-cargo within class E endosomal compartments required Cos proteins, as these markers were not segregated in endosomes of cosΔ vps4Δ cells (Figure 5C).

Cos proteins form endosomal microdomains that concentrate ubiquitinated cargo

Immunoblot analysis of Cos5-HA suggests Cos proteins can self associate, as indicated by dimeric and oligomeric species detectable at higher exposures (Figure 2D, 4D and S5a). To explore this in vivo we examined the localization of Cos proteins within endosomes with respect to other Ub-cargo. FRET (Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer) microscopy showed that Cos proteins interact with each other in endosomal compartments (Figure 5A). A strong FRET signal between Cos5-GFP and Cos5-mCherry was only found at peri-vacuolar / late endosomal structures of wild-type cells or within class E endosomes of vps36Δ cells. We also found that Cos5 interacted with Ub-cargo by FRET using a fusion of Vph1-GFP to Ub (Figure 5A). Vph1 is a membrane protein subunit of the V-ATPase, which normally localizes to the limiting membrane of the vacuole but is redirected into the MVB pathway when translationally fused to Ub (Figure S5b) (Urbanowski and Piper, 2001). We also found that GFP-Ub, which accumulates on MVB cargo on endosomes of ESCRT null mutants (Macdonald et al., 2012a; Ren et al., 2008), co-localized with Cos proteins in endosomal structures of vps36Δ and vps4Δ cells (Figure S5c).

In contrast to Ub-cargo, Vph1-GFP that also accumulates within class E endosomes of ESCRT mutants, did not co-localize with Cos proteins and instead occupied adjacent subdomains (Figure 5B & C). This separation of subdomains, one marked by Cos proteins and Ub-cargo and another marked by the non-MVB cargo Vph1-GFP, were found not only in vps36Δ cells, but also in vps23Δ, vps4Δ, and escrt-IIIΔ cells (Figure S5d). We found that the Cos/Ub-cargo domains could also be visualized with Mup1-RFP-Ub, which segregates with Vph1-GFP-Ub and not Vph1-GFP within class E compartment/endosomes. Using Mup1-RFP-Ub together with Vph1-GFP revealed that segregation of Ub-cargo within class E endosomal compartments required Cos proteins, as these markers were not segregated in endosomes of cosΔ vps4Δ cells (Figure 5C).

The Cos protein network traps cargo at endosomesThe effects of Cos overexpression on GFP-Snc1 and Mup1-GFP localization suggested that Cos proteins immobilize cargo in endosomes prior to sorting into ILVs (Figure 2F, 3E and 4C). To test the idea that Cos proteins retain cargo on endosomes, we compared the distribution of Ste3-GFP in vps24Δ and snf7Δ with Cos5-HA overexpression (Figure 6A). In control cells Ste3-GFP was found within late-endosomal/class E compartments and also at the cell surface; overexpressing Cos5-HA shifted Ste3 more to endosomal compartments. Previous studies compared the steady-state distribution of Mup1-GFP on the plasma membrane with endosomes in various ESCRT null mutants as a measure for how well cargo is trapped on endosomes (Teis et al., 2008). Those studies found differences in the degree of Mup1 localization at the cell surface depending on which ESCRT subunit was deleted, implying that exaggerated ESCRT-III polymers might trap cargo on endosomes. We found that localization of Mup1-GFP to the cell surface in all ESCRT mutants was also modulated by how much extracellular methionine was present, likely reflecting how strongly Mup1 is ubiquitinated. Therefore, we assessed Mup1-GFP distribution at low [0.5 μg/ml] and modest [4.0 μg/ml] concentrations of methionine and quantified the distribution of Mup1-GFP between the cell surface and class E/endosomal compartments (Figure 6B). We found that in all ESCRT mutants tested, overexpression of Cos5-HA shifted the distribution of Mup1-GFP from the cell surface to class E/endosomal compartments. Notably, this was found in vps36Δ mutants, snf7Δ mutants, and escrt-IIIΔ mutants (lacking all ESCRT-III subunits) indicating that the ability of Cos proteins to trap cargo did not strictly require ESCRT-III polymers.We next developed a kinetic assay to follow recycling of Mup1-GFP back to the cell surface (Figure 6). We took advantage of the ability of Rapamycin to heterodimerize chimeric proteins containing FK506-binding protein (FKBP-12) and the FRB domain of mTOR (Belshaw et al., 1996; Liberles et al., 1997; Spencer et al., 1993). Here we fused Mup1-GFP to FKBP-12 and co-expressed it with FRB fused to the deubiquitinating enzyme M48 and tested feasibility with a set of control experiments (Figure S6). To assess endosomal trapping, Mup1-GFP-FKBP was expressed in vps36Δ cells grown for 16 hrs in SD media lacking methionine. High concentrations of methionine [40 μg/ml] were then added for 3 hrs to drive all of the Mup1-GFP-FKBP into endosomal/class E compartments (Figure 6D,E). These high levels of methionine also repress the MUP1 promoter ensuring that only a pre-existing population of Mup1-GFP-FKBP was followed (Menant et al., 2006). Rapamycin triggered a dramatic redistribution of Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface within 45 min (Figure 6D,E), while having no effect on a co-expressed Ste3-mCherry that remained localized to endosomal compartments. By contrast, overexpressing Cos5-HA caused Mup1-GFP-FKBP to remain in endosomal compartments (Figure 6C,D,E). Extending the treatment of Rapamycin to 4 hr did allow recycling of more Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface of Cos5-HA overexpressing cells underscoring the dramatic delay in the efflux of cargo from endosomes (Figure S6c).

The Cos protein network traps cargo at endosomes

The effects of Cos overexpression on GFP-Snc1 and Mup1-GFP localization suggested that Cos proteins immobilize cargo in endosomes prior to sorting into ILVs (Figure 2F, 3E and 4C). To test the idea that Cos proteins retain cargo on endosomes, we compared the distribution of Ste3-GFP in vps24Δ and snf7Δ with Cos5-HA overexpression (Figure 6A). In control cells Ste3-GFP was found within late-endosomal/class E compartments and also at the cell surface; overexpressing Cos5-HA shifted Ste3 more to endosomal compartments. Previous studies compared the steady-state distribution of Mup1-GFP on the plasma membrane with endosomes in various ESCRT null mutants as a measure for how well cargo is trapped on endosomes (Teis et al., 2008). Those studies found differences in the degree of Mup1 localization at the cell surface depending on which ESCRT subunit was deleted, implying that exaggerated ESCRT-III polymers might trap cargo on endosomes. We found that localization of Mup1-GFP to the cell surface in all ESCRT mutants was also modulated by how much extracellular methionine was present, likely reflecting how strongly Mup1 is ubiquitinated. Therefore, we assessed Mup1-GFP distribution at low [0.5 μg/ml] and modest [4.0 μg/ml] concentrations of methionine and quantified the distribution of Mup1-GFP between the cell surface and class E/endosomal compartments (Figure 6B). We found that in all ESCRT mutants tested, overexpression of Cos5-HA shifted the distribution of Mup1-GFP from the cell surface to class E/endosomal compartments. Notably, this was found in vps36Δ mutants, snf7Δ mutants, and escrt-IIIΔ mutants (lacking all ESCRT-III subunits) indicating that the ability of Cos proteins to trap cargo did not strictly require ESCRT-III polymers.

We next developed a kinetic assay to follow recycling of Mup1-GFP back to the cell surface (Figure 6). We took advantage of the ability of Rapamycin to heterodimerize chimeric proteins containing FK506-binding protein (FKBP-12) and the FRB domain of mTOR (Belshaw et al., 1996; Liberles et al., 1997; Spencer et al., 1993). Here we fused Mup1-GFP to FKBP-12 and co-expressed it with FRB fused to the deubiquitinating enzyme M48 and tested feasibility with a set of control experiments (Figure S6). To assess endosomal trapping, Mup1-GFP-FKBP was expressed in vps36Δ cells grown for 16 hrs in SD media lacking methionine. High concentrations of methionine [40 μg/ml] were then added for 3 hrs to drive all of the Mup1-GFP-FKBP into endosomal/class E compartments (Figure 6D,E). These high levels of methionine also repress the MUP1 promoter ensuring that only a pre-existing population of Mup1-GFP-FKBP was followed (Menant et al., 2006). Rapamycin triggered a dramatic redistribution of Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface within 45 min (Figure 6D,E), while having no effect on a co-expressed Ste3-mCherry that remained localized to endosomal compartments. By contrast, overexpressing Cos5-HA caused Mup1-GFP-FKBP to remain in endosomal compartments (Figure 6C,D,E). Extending the treatment of Rapamycin to 4 hr did allow recycling of more Mup1-GFP-FKBP to the cell surface of Cos5-HA overexpressing cells underscoring the dramatic delay in the efflux of cargo from endosomes (Figure S6c).

Cos proteins act as cargo adaptors for GPI-anchored proteinsWe hypothesized a model in which the functional role of Cos proteins is to create an endosomal environment, or subdomain (Figure 5), conducive to MVB sorting. This could explain how cargo that has no Ub signal of its own might still access the canonical ESCRT- and Ub-dependent MVB pathway for degradation. To explore this possibility we examined the MVB sorting of an unequivocal Ub-independent class of cargo: GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs), which do not have cytosolic domain on which to attach Ub or otherwise interact directly with ESCRT components (Mayor and Riezman, 2004) (Figure S7a). Previous experiments demonstrate that many Fluorescent Protein (FP)-tagged GPI-anchored proteins are sorted to the vacuole (Ast et al., 2013; Bagnat and Simons, 2002; Castillon et al., 2009; Cohen et al., 2013; Rodriguez-Pena et al., 2002). Analysis in pep4Δ cells that lack active vacuolar hydrolases to cleave YFP from lumenally exposed GPI-APs clearly showed that GPI-APs enter the vacuole via intralumenal vesicles (Figure S7a,b,c). We also found that MVB sorting of GPI-APs relied on proper Rsp5 and ESCRT function (Figure 7A,B). In addition, GPI-APs strongly co-localized with Cos proteins within endosomal class E compartments of vps4Δ pep4Δ cells demonstrating that like canonical Ub-cargo, they too can localize to discrete Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B).In cosΔ cells, MVB sorting of GPI-APs was completely blocked, yet was restored upon overexpressing Cos5-RFP from a plasmid (Figure 7E). This was consistent with the effect of deleting Cos proteins on the overall levels of two GPI-APs, Gas1 and Sed1 assessed by immunoblotting (Figure 7C). Loss of Cos or Pep4 function did not alter levels of the ER-localized myc-Rot1 GPI-AP (Takeuchi et al., 2006), confirming the specificity of Cos proteins with regard to vacuole-dependent degradation. Finally, we found that overexpressing Cos5-HA in otherwise wild-type cells resulted in more GPI-APs directed to the vacuole for degradation (Figure 7D). These results were corroborated in pep4Δ cells grown in media containing high levels of NA, which activates Sir2 to silence subtelomerically-localized COS genes (Figure S7d). Here, sorting of YFP-Ccw14, YFP-Tos6, and YFP-Cwp2 into the vacuole was modest but was strongly increased upon overexpression of Cos5-RFP from a plasmid.These data demonstrate that Cos proteins mediate entry of GPI-APs into the Ub-dependent and ESCRT-dependent MVB sorting pathway. The simplest explanation is that GPI-APs congregate with Cos proteins, which supply a Ub sorting signal in trans. It is unlikely that such a mechanism is mediated by direct interaction between GPI-APs and Cos proteins because GPI-APs are entirely luminal proteins with small lipid anchors and Cos proteins only have 4-6 predicted residues on their luminal side, providing no basis for direct interaction. Rather, Cos proteins might form a membrane subcompartment into which GPI-APs are segregated and held, a model consistent with the co-localization of GPI-APs within Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B). A prediction of this model is that residues within the membrane spanning domains are critical for the ability of Cos proteins to mediate MVB sorting of GPI-APs. Indeed, Cos proteins have many residues within their TMDs that are atypical for such hydrophobic stretches and these in turn might create a local environment that promotes trapping of cargoes before their incorporation into ILVs. To test this idea, we created a version of Cos5 with TMDs composed entirely of conventional hydrophobic residues (TMD*; Figure S7e). Despite these changes, Cos5TMD*-RFP still sorted into the vacuole lumen, however, its ability to confer sorting on GPI-APs was greatly reduced. This was reflected by the inability of overexpressed Cos5TMD*-RFP to decrease steady-state levels of HA-Gas1 (Figure 7F) or to completely shift YFP-Ccw14 from the cell surface into the vacuole lumen (Figure 7G).

Cos proteins act as cargo adaptors for GPI-anchored proteins

We hypothesized a model in which the functional role of Cos proteins is to create an endosomal environment, or subdomain (Figure 5), conducive to MVB sorting. This could explain how cargo that has no Ub signal of its own might still access the canonical ESCRT- and Ub-dependent MVB pathway for degradation. To explore this possibility we examined the MVB sorting of an unequivocal Ub-independent class of cargo: GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs), which do not have cytosolic domain on which to attach Ub or otherwise interact directly with ESCRT components (Mayor and Riezman, 2004) (Figure S7a). Previous experiments demonstrate that many Fluorescent Protein (FP)-tagged GPI-anchored proteins are sorted to the vacuole (Ast et al., 2013; Bagnat and Simons, 2002; Castillon et al., 2009; Cohen et al., 2013; Rodriguez-Pena et al., 2002). Analysis in pep4Δ cells that lack active vacuolar hydrolases to cleave YFP from lumenally exposed GPI-APs clearly showed that GPI-APs enter the vacuole via intralumenal vesicles (Figure S7a,b,c). We also found that MVB sorting of GPI-APs relied on proper Rsp5 and ESCRT function (Figure 7A,B). In addition, GPI-APs strongly co-localized with Cos proteins within endosomal class E compartments of vps4Δ pep4Δ cells demonstrating that like canonical Ub-cargo, they too can localize to discrete Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B).

In cosΔ cells, MVB sorting of GPI-APs was completely blocked, yet was restored upon overexpressing Cos5-RFP from a plasmid (Figure 7E). This was consistent with the effect of deleting Cos proteins on the overall levels of two GPI-APs, Gas1 and Sed1 assessed by immunoblotting (Figure 7C). Loss of Cos or Pep4 function did not alter levels of the ER-localized myc-Rot1 GPI-AP (Takeuchi et al., 2006), confirming the specificity of Cos proteins with regard to vacuole-dependent degradation. Finally, we found that overexpressing Cos5-HA in otherwise wild-type cells resulted in more GPI-APs directed to the vacuole for degradation (Figure 7D). These results were corroborated in pep4Δ cells grown in media containing high levels of NA, which activates Sir2 to silence subtelomerically-localized COS genes (Figure S7d). Here, sorting of YFP-Ccw14, YFP-Tos6, and YFP-Cwp2 into the vacuole was modest but was strongly increased upon overexpression of Cos5-RFP from a plasmid.

These data demonstrate that Cos proteins mediate entry of GPI-APs into the Ub-dependent and ESCRT-dependent MVB sorting pathway. The simplest explanation is that GPI-APs congregate with Cos proteins, which supply a Ub sorting signal in trans. It is unlikely that such a mechanism is mediated by direct interaction between GPI-APs and Cos proteins because GPI-APs are entirely luminal proteins with small lipid anchors and Cos proteins only have 4-6 predicted residues on their luminal side, providing no basis for direct interaction. Rather, Cos proteins might form a membrane subcompartment into which GPI-APs are segregated and held, a model consistent with the co-localization of GPI-APs within Cos-containing endosomal subdomains (Figure 7B). A prediction of this model is that residues within the membrane spanning domains are critical for the ability of Cos proteins to mediate MVB sorting of GPI-APs. Indeed, Cos proteins have many residues within their TMDs that are atypical for such hydrophobic stretches and these in turn might create a local environment that promotes trapping of cargoes before their incorporation into ILVs. To test this idea, we created a version of Cos5 with TMDs composed entirely of conventional hydrophobic residues (TMD*; Figure S7e). Despite these changes, Cos5TMD*-RFP still sorted into the vacuole lumen, however, its ability to confer sorting on GPI-APs was greatly reduced. This was reflected by the inability of overexpressed Cos5TMD*-RFP to decrease steady-state levels of HA-Gas1 (Figure 7F) or to completely shift YFP-Ccw14 from the cell surface into the vacuole lumen (Figure 7G).

DISCUSSIONCos proteins contribute to the MVB sorting of a variety of cargo and are used as a broad mechanism to drive down-regulation of cell surface proteins when nutrients, in particular Niacin, are depleted. This mechanism allows cells to integrate protein turnover with the overall metabolic activity and requirements of the cell whilst reducing the abundance of transporters, receptors, and other proteins at the cell surface. Such a response may also provide an additional mechanism to generate amino acids during mild nutrient stress as a complementary form of autophagy (Babst and Odorizzi, 2013).While the efficiency of MVB sorting was compromised for many Ub-cargoes in the absence of Cos proteins, sorting defects were most severe for cargoes that contain no Ub signal (e.g. Sna3KR and GPI-APs). Our data indicate that Cos proteins form oligomers that establish specialized regions of endosomes that trap Ub-cargo as well as GPI-APs, supporting a “cargo corral” model whereby immobilization leads to more efficient incorporation into forming ILVs. The Cos proteins within this “corral” are highly ubiquitinated, allowing them to provide Ub sorting signals in trans to cargo proteins with which they associate. This ubiquitinated conglomerate would provide assistance to a wide variety of conventional membrane proteins that might otherwise escape incorporation into ILVs as they transit through endosomes. In the case of GPI-APs, the Cos corral provides a way to cluster GPI-anchored proteins and other non-ubiquitinated proteins and surround them with multiple Ub sorting signals allowing their entry into ILVs along an ESCRT-dependent route. Formation of a “Cos corral” would also organize canonical Ub-cargo in a manner that allows for its deubiquitination prior to ILV incorporation while preventing such deubiquitinated cargoes from escaping their MVB fate.This model explains how luminal sided GPI-APs rely on the E3 ligase Rsp5, ESCRTs and Cos proteins to enter the MVB pathway. Yet, exactly how Cos proteins segregate cargo remains to be determined. Part of the answer may lie in the unusual composition of the TMDs of the Cos proteins that is required for Cos protein function and that might establish a particular lipid architecture that favors coalescence of membrane proteins (Epand and Epand, 2011). In particular, the presence of arginines within the TMDs may induce thinning or other changes in the membrane bilayer (Krepkiy et al., 2009) that could affect diffusion of proximal cargo proteins. This model can explain how luminal sided GPI-APs rely on the E3 ligase Rsp5, ESCRTs and Cos proteins to enter the MVB pathway (Figure 7). In support of this model, mutations within the TMD of Cos5 greatly reduce its ability to sort GPI-APs. Future structure/function studies will determine the biophysical characteristics of Cos proteins that allow them to operate.Ubiquitination of Cos proteins is a critical requirement for their function, and multiple mechanisms appear to contribute to their ubiquitination. Cos proteins may associate with Rsp5 indirectly via the Rsp5-binding membrane proteins Sna3 and Bsd2 as well as bind directly through their C-terminal domains (Figure 4). Cos proteins also have a very high proportion of lysines (9% of all residues), and preliminary mass-spectrometry analysis from our lab (data not shown) and others (Hitchcock et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2003) indicates that 10 or more ubiquitination sites are distributed throughout the cytosolic regions. These qualities would ensure that Cos proteins are replete with the Ub-sorting signals they provide to their associated cohort of cargo. In addition, they might allow Cos proteins to retain at least some Ub following cargo deubiquitination by Doa4, thus providing a means to keep its associated cargo engaged with the ESCRT apparatus. Indeed, the delivery of the intravacuolar pool of Ub along the MVB pathway requires the Cos proteins, implying that they may themselves be the major carriers of vacuolar localized Ub (Figure 3).This study raises the question as to what the functional analogs of Cos proteins are in animal cells, where Ub-independent sorting and sorting of GPI-APs has been clearly documented (Dores et al., 2012; Satpute-Krishnan et al., 2014). Our model suggests that the role of Cos proteins in the MVB sorting process may be at least partly analogous to those of the Tspans in mammals. Tspans are enriched in membrane subdomains that can capture or contain a variety of other polytopic membrane proteins (Hemler, 2003). Some Tspans, such as CD63/LAMP3, are major components of the ILVs of mammalian MVBs (Pols and Klumperman, 2009) and contribute to the formation of MVBs and the sorting of particular cargo (Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; van Niel et al., 2011). Whether Tspan-dependent MVB cargo is ushered into an ILV pathway that is distinct from that for Ub-dependent cargo has yet to be fully resolved. Ubiquitination of some Tspans has been described, and the MARCH Ub ligases have been proposed to regulate Tspan turnover (Bartee et al., 2010; Lineberry et al., 2008). Also, Tspans have been implicated in the MVB sorting of the EGF receptor, a prototypical Ub-dependent MVB cargo (Danglot et al., 2010; Odintsova et al., 2000; Odintsova et al., 2013). Cos proteins bear some resemblance to Tspans with respect to their molecular structures, localization, and proposed function. Cos proteins have polar residues within their 4 TMDs, associate with one another, and congregate in membrane subdomains. In addition, Cos proteins and a subset of Tspans are efficiently sorted into MVB ILVs. Tspans are widely expressed throughout Eukaryota yet are conspicuously absent from yeast (Garcia-España et al., 2008). Some of the defining sequence motifs of Tspans that distinguish them from other 4-TMD-contianing proteins are absent in Cos proteins. These include a large cysteine-rich extracellular domain between TMDs 3 and 4, and juxtamembrane domain-localized cysteine residues that serve as sites for palmitoylation. These features may simply be incompatible for function within the yeast secretory pathway, obliging their loss from a common ancestor. Alternatively, Cos proteins and Tspans may have evolved convergently to meet a related functional need in the MVB sorting process. One of the central observations here is that Cos proteins were required for sorting GPI-APs into ILVs, and this process in animal cells has been hypothesized to be mediated by Tspans (Sobo et al., 2007; van Niel et al., 2006). This extends the possibility that yeast Cos proteins are the functional analogs of Tspans or that other cell types possess a different analog that serves this central purpose.

Cos proteins contribute to the MVB sorting of a variety of cargo and are used as a broad mechanism to drive down-regulation of cell surface proteins when nutrients, in particular Niacin, are depleted. This mechanism allows cells to integrate protein turnover with the overall metabolic activity and requirements of the cell whilst reducing the abundance of transporters, receptors, and other proteins at the cell surface. Such a response may also provide an additional mechanism to generate amino acids during mild nutrient stress as a complementary form of autophagy (Babst and Odorizzi, 2013).

While the efficiency of MVB sorting was compromised for many Ub-cargoes in the absence of Cos proteins, sorting defects were most severe for cargoes that contain no Ub signal (e.g. Sna3KR and GPI-APs). Our data indicate that Cos proteins form oligomers that establish specialized regions of endosomes that trap Ub-cargo as well as GPI-APs, supporting a “cargo corral” model whereby immobilization leads to more efficient incorporation into forming ILVs. The Cos proteins within this “corral” are highly ubiquitinated, allowing them to provide Ub sorting signals in trans to cargo proteins with which they associate. This ubiquitinated conglomerate would provide assistance to a wide variety of conventional membrane proteins that might otherwise escape incorporation into ILVs as they transit through endosomes. In the case of GPI-APs, the Cos corral provides a way to cluster GPI-anchored proteins and other non-ubiquitinated proteins and surround them with multiple Ub sorting signals allowing their entry into ILVs along an ESCRT-dependent route. Formation of a “Cos corral” would also organize canonical Ub-cargo in a manner that allows for its deubiquitination prior to ILV incorporation while preventing such deubiquitinated cargoes from escaping their MVB fate.

This model explains how luminal sided GPI-APs rely on the E3 ligase Rsp5, ESCRTs and Cos proteins to enter the MVB pathway. Yet, exactly how Cos proteins segregate cargo remains to be determined. Part of the answer may lie in the unusual composition of the TMDs of the Cos proteins that is required for Cos protein function and that might establish a particular lipid architecture that favors coalescence of membrane proteins (Epand and Epand, 2011). In particular, the presence of arginines within the TMDs may induce thinning or other changes in the membrane bilayer (Krepkiy et al., 2009) that could affect diffusion of proximal cargo proteins. This model can explain how luminal sided GPI-APs rely on the E3 ligase Rsp5, ESCRTs and Cos proteins to enter the MVB pathway (Figure 7). In support of this model, mutations within the TMD of Cos5 greatly reduce its ability to sort GPI-APs. Future structure/function studies will determine the biophysical characteristics of Cos proteins that allow them to operate.

Ubiquitination of Cos proteins is a critical requirement for their function, and multiple mechanisms appear to contribute to their ubiquitination. Cos proteins may associate with Rsp5 indirectly via the Rsp5-binding membrane proteins Sna3 and Bsd2 as well as bind directly through their C-terminal domains (Figure 4). Cos proteins also have a very high proportion of lysines (9% of all residues), and preliminary mass-spectrometry analysis from our lab (data not shown) and others (Hitchcock et al., 2003; Peng et al., 2003) indicates that 10 or more ubiquitination sites are distributed throughout the cytosolic regions. These qualities would ensure that Cos proteins are replete with the Ub-sorting signals they provide to their associated cohort of cargo. In addition, they might allow Cos proteins to retain at least some Ub following cargo deubiquitination by Doa4, thus providing a means to keep its associated cargo engaged with the ESCRT apparatus. Indeed, the delivery of the intravacuolar pool of Ub along the MVB pathway requires the Cos proteins, implying that they may themselves be the major carriers of vacuolar localized Ub (Figure 3).

This study raises the question as to what the functional analogs of Cos proteins are in animal cells, where Ub-independent sorting and sorting of GPI-APs has been clearly documented (Dores et al., 2012; Satpute-Krishnan et al., 2014). Our model suggests that the role of Cos proteins in the MVB sorting process may be at least partly analogous to those of the Tspans in mammals. Tspans are enriched in membrane subdomains that can capture or contain a variety of other polytopic membrane proteins (Hemler, 2003). Some Tspans, such as CD63/LAMP3, are major components of the ILVs of mammalian MVBs (Pols and Klumperman, 2009) and contribute to the formation of MVBs and the sorting of particular cargo (Colombo et al., 2013; Edgar et al., 2014; van Niel et al., 2011). Whether Tspan-dependent MVB cargo is ushered into an ILV pathway that is distinct from that for Ub-dependent cargo has yet to be fully resolved. Ubiquitination of some Tspans has been described, and the MARCH Ub ligases have been proposed to regulate Tspan turnover (Bartee et al., 2010; Lineberry et al., 2008). Also, Tspans have been implicated in the MVB sorting of the EGF receptor, a prototypical Ub-dependent MVB cargo (Danglot et al., 2010; Odintsova et al., 2000; Odintsova et al., 2013). Cos proteins bear some resemblance to Tspans with respect to their molecular structures, localization, and proposed function. Cos proteins have polar residues within their 4 TMDs, associate with one another, and congregate in membrane subdomains. In addition, Cos proteins and a subset of Tspans are efficiently sorted into MVB ILVs. Tspans are widely expressed throughout Eukaryota yet are conspicuously absent from yeast (Garcia-España et al., 2008). Some of the defining sequence motifs of Tspans that distinguish them from other 4-TMD-contianing proteins are absent in Cos proteins. These include a large cysteine-rich extracellular domain between TMDs 3 and 4, and juxtamembrane domain-localized cysteine residues that serve as sites for palmitoylation. These features may simply be incompatible for function within the yeast secretory pathway, obliging their loss from a common ancestor. Alternatively, Cos proteins and Tspans may have evolved convergently to meet a related functional need in the MVB sorting process. One of the central observations here is that Cos proteins were required for sorting GPI-APs into ILVs, and this process in animal cells has been hypothesized to be mediated by Tspans (Sobo et al., 2007; van Niel et al., 2006). This extends the possibility that yeast Cos proteins are the functional analogs of Tspans or that other cell types possess a different analog that serves this central purpose.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESGeneralYeast strains, plasmids, and where they were used in this study are described in Tables S1 and S2. Details on deleting all COS genes are provided in supplemental data as are procedures for pulse chase analysis, production of recombinant proteins and in vitro binding studies.Cell CultureStandard yeast minimal and rich media were used as previously described (MacDonald et al., 2012b; Norgan et al., 2013). Synthetic defined (SD) 1x media containing 2% glucose, 1x yeast nitrogen base (Research Products International, Mount Prospect, IL) or 1x yeast nitrogen base lacking NA (Formedium, Norfolk, UK) was supplemented with amino acid mixtures that allow appropriate selection (Formedium, Norfolk, UK). Expression from the CUP1 promoter was induced with 50 μM CuCl2 or repressed with batho-cuproine disulphonate. Optical density at 600 nm was used to measure yeast growth: Mid-log was OD600 = 0.5 - 1.0; late-log phase was OD600 = 1.5 - 2.0, and late-log+ was 2-6 hrs after cells had reached OD600 = 2.0.MicroscopyConventional fluorescence microscopy of cells resuspended in 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, 0.2% (w/v) NaN3 and NaF3 was performed as previously described (Macdonald et al., 2012a). For deconvolved fluorescence images, micrographs of cells imaged with an Olympus IX70 and Coolsnap HQ camera (Photometrics, Tuscon, AZ) were processed using Delta Vision software (Applied Precision Issaquah, WA). Confocal images and FRET data were collected on live cells using a Zeiss 710 laser confocal microscope. Data were processed using Fiji software and change in GFP fluorescence upon bleaching was converted to a color-coded heat map calibrated across all measurements and images.Immunoblot analysisSources of antibodies included: Monoclonal α-HA (Covance research products Inc. Berkely, CA); Polyclonal α-PGK1 (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR); Polyclonal α-GFP (Urbanowski and Piper, 1999). Polyclonal α-Rsp5 (Stamenova et al., 2004); α-MBP (Lee et al., 2009); and Polyclonal anti-CPY (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR). For immunoblot analysis, cells were grown to mid-log phase, resuspended in 0.2 M NaOH for 2 min, lysed at 25°C in 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 6.8, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol and 8 M urea and immediately subjected to SDS-PAGE.ImmunoprecipitationsImmunoprecipitations were described in (Katzmann et al., 2001). Yeast expressing the Cos5 constructs (10 OD) and (HA)-ubiquitin were TCA precipitated processed and lysed with glass beads. Immunoprecipitations were performed using GFP Rabbit Serum Polyclonal Antibody (Life Technologies). Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Cos5 was detected with monoclonal anti-GFP AV-JL8 (Clontech) and the Ubiquitination status was determined with monoclonal anti-HA.11 (Covance) to recognize HA-ubiquitin.Steady state recycling assayFor Ste3-GFP, cells were grown to mid-log phase in SD media and the number of cells exhibiting any cell surface Ste3-GFP were compared to the number of cells with only intracellular Ste3-GFP. For Mup1-GFP, cells were grown to early-log phase in minimal media lacking methionine before methionine (0.5 μg/ml or 4 μg/ml) was added for 1 hr.Triggered Recycling AssayThe CUP1-HA-FRB-M48 gene was integrated into cells carrying the tor1-1 and fpr1Δ mutations (Haruki et al., 2008). The chromosomal copy of MUP1 was modified to express Mup1-GFP-FKBP as the sole copy of Mup1 under its endogenous promoter; and VPS4 was deleted. Cells grown to mid-log phase were treated with 40 μg/ml methionine for 3 hrs, washed 3x and resuspended in fresh methionine-containing media with 50 μM CuCl2 for 15 min before a 45 min or 4 hr treatment with 10 µM Rapamycin.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

GeneralYeast strains, plasmids, and where they were used in this study are described in Tables S1 and S2. Details on deleting all COS genes are provided in supplemental data as are procedures for pulse chase analysis, production of recombinant proteins and in vitro binding studies.

Yeast strains, plasmids, and where they were used in this study are described in Tables S1 and S2. Details on deleting all COS genes are provided in supplemental data as are procedures for pulse chase analysis, production of recombinant proteins and in vitro binding studies.

Cell CultureStandard yeast minimal and rich media were used as previously described (MacDonald et al., 2012b; Norgan et al., 2013). Synthetic defined (SD) 1x media containing 2% glucose, 1x yeast nitrogen base (Research Products International, Mount Prospect, IL) or 1x yeast nitrogen base lacking NA (Formedium, Norfolk, UK) was supplemented with amino acid mixtures that allow appropriate selection (Formedium, Norfolk, UK). Expression from the CUP1 promoter was induced with 50 μM CuCl2 or repressed with batho-cuproine disulphonate. Optical density at 600 nm was used to measure yeast growth: Mid-log was OD600 = 0.5 - 1.0; late-log phase was OD600 = 1.5 - 2.0, and late-log+ was 2-6 hrs after cells had reached OD600 = 2.0.

Cell Culture

Standard yeast minimal and rich media were used as previously described (MacDonald et al., 2012b; Norgan et al., 2013). Synthetic defined (SD) 1x media containing 2% glucose, 1x yeast nitrogen base (Research Products International, Mount Prospect, IL) or 1x yeast nitrogen base lacking NA (Formedium, Norfolk, UK) was supplemented with amino acid mixtures that allow appropriate selection (Formedium, Norfolk, UK). Expression from the CUP1 promoter was induced with 50 μM CuCl2 or repressed with batho-cuproine disulphonate. Optical density at 600 nm was used to measure yeast growth: Mid-log was OD600 = 0.5 - 1.0; late-log phase was OD600 = 1.5 - 2.0, and late-log+ was 2-6 hrs after cells had reached OD600 = 2.0.

MicroscopyConventional fluorescence microscopy of cells resuspended in 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, 0.2% (w/v) NaN3 and NaF3 was performed as previously described (Macdonald et al., 2012a). For deconvolved fluorescence images, micrographs of cells imaged with an Olympus IX70 and Coolsnap HQ camera (Photometrics, Tuscon, AZ) were processed using Delta Vision software (Applied Precision Issaquah, WA). Confocal images and FRET data were collected on live cells using a Zeiss 710 laser confocal microscope. Data were processed using Fiji software and change in GFP fluorescence upon bleaching was converted to a color-coded heat map calibrated across all measurements and images.

Conventional fluorescence microscopy of cells resuspended in 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, 0.2% (w/v) NaN3 and NaF3 was performed as previously described (Macdonald et al., 2012a). For deconvolved fluorescence images, micrographs of cells imaged with an Olympus IX70 and Coolsnap HQ camera (Photometrics, Tuscon, AZ) were processed using Delta Vision software (Applied Precision Issaquah, WA). Confocal images and FRET data were collected on live cells using a Zeiss 710 laser confocal microscope. Data were processed using Fiji software and change in GFP fluorescence upon bleaching was converted to a color-coded heat map calibrated across all measurements and images.

Immunoblot analysisSources of antibodies included: Monoclonal α-HA (Covance research products Inc. Berkely, CA); Polyclonal α-PGK1 (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR); Polyclonal α-GFP (Urbanowski and Piper, 1999). Polyclonal α-Rsp5 (Stamenova et al., 2004); α-MBP (Lee et al., 2009); and Polyclonal anti-CPY (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR). For immunoblot analysis, cells were grown to mid-log phase, resuspended in 0.2 M NaOH for 2 min, lysed at 25°C in 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 6.8, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol and 8 M urea and immediately subjected to SDS-PAGE.

Immunoblot analysis

Sources of antibodies included: Monoclonal α-HA (Covance research products Inc. Berkely, CA); Polyclonal α-PGK1 (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR); Polyclonal α-GFP (Urbanowski and Piper, 1999). Polyclonal α-Rsp5 (Stamenova et al., 2004); α-MBP (Lee et al., 2009); and Polyclonal anti-CPY (Tom Stevens, University of Oregon, OR). For immunoblot analysis, cells were grown to mid-log phase, resuspended in 0.2 M NaOH for 2 min, lysed at 25°C in 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 6.8, 5% SDS, 10% glycerol and 8 M urea and immediately subjected to SDS-PAGE.

ImmunoprecipitationsImmunoprecipitations were described in (Katzmann et al., 2001). Yeast expressing the Cos5 constructs (10 OD) and (HA)-ubiquitin were TCA precipitated processed and lysed with glass beads. Immunoprecipitations were performed using GFP Rabbit Serum Polyclonal Antibody (Life Technologies). Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Cos5 was detected with monoclonal anti-GFP AV-JL8 (Clontech) and the Ubiquitination status was determined with monoclonal anti-HA.11 (Covance) to recognize HA-ubiquitin.

Immunoprecipitations

Immunoprecipitations were described in (Katzmann et al., 2001). Yeast expressing the Cos5 constructs (10 OD) and (HA)-ubiquitin were TCA precipitated processed and lysed with glass beads. Immunoprecipitations were performed using GFP Rabbit Serum Polyclonal Antibody (Life Technologies). Samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Cos5 was detected with monoclonal anti-GFP AV-JL8 (Clontech) and the Ubiquitination status was determined with monoclonal anti-HA.11 (Covance) to recognize HA-ubiquitin.

Steady state recycling assayFor Ste3-GFP, cells were grown to mid-log phase in SD media and the number of cells exhibiting any cell surface Ste3-GFP were compared to the number of cells with only intracellular Ste3-GFP. For Mup1-GFP, cells were grown to early-log phase in minimal media lacking methionine before methionine (0.5 μg/ml or 4 μg/ml) was added for 1 hr.

Steady state recycling assay

For Ste3-GFP, cells were grown to mid-log phase in SD media and the number of cells exhibiting any cell surface Ste3-GFP were compared to the number of cells with only intracellular Ste3-GFP. For Mup1-GFP, cells were grown to early-log phase in minimal media lacking methionine before methionine (0.5 μg/ml or 4 μg/ml) was added for 1 hr.

Triggered Recycling AssayThe CUP1-HA-FRB-M48 gene was integrated into cells carrying the tor1-1 and fpr1Δ mutations (Haruki et al., 2008). The chromosomal copy of MUP1 was modified to express Mup1-GFP-FKBP as the sole copy of Mup1 under its endogenous promoter; and VPS4 was deleted. Cells grown to mid-log phase were treated with 40 μg/ml methionine for 3 hrs, washed 3x and resuspended in fresh methionine-containing media with 50 μM CuCl2 for 15 min before a 45 min or 4 hr treatment with 10 µM Rapamycin.

Triggered Recycling Assay

The CUP1-HA-FRB-M48 gene was integrated into cells carrying the tor1-1 and fpr1Δ mutations (Haruki et al., 2008). The chromosomal copy of MUP1 was modified to express Mup1-GFP-FKBP as the sole copy of Mup1 under its endogenous promoter; and VPS4 was deleted. Cells grown to mid-log phase were treated with 40 μg/ml methionine for 3 hrs, washed 3x and resuspended in fresh methionine-containing media with 50 μM CuCl2 for 15 min before a 45 min or 4 hr treatment with 10 µM Rapamycin.

Supplementary Material12

Supplementary Material
