---
pmid: '11746698'
title: Intrinsic structural disorder and sequence features of the cell cycle inhibitor
  p57Kip2.
authors:
- Adkins JN
- Lumb KJ
journal: Proteins
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.10018
---

# Intrinsic structural disorder and sequence features of the cell cycle inhibitor p57Kip2.
**Authors:** Adkins JN, Lumb KJ
**Journal:** Proteins (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.10018](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.10018)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2002 Jan 1;46(1):1-7. doi: 10.1002/prot.10018.

Intrinsic structural disorder and sequence features of the cell cycle inhibitor 
p57Kip2.

Adkins JN(1), Lumb KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, USA.

The cell cycle inhibitor p57Kip2 induces cell cycle arrest by inhibiting the 
activity of cyclin-dependent kinases. p57, although active as a cyclin A-CDK2 
inhibitor, is largely unfolded or intrinsically disordered as shown by circular 
dichroism and fluorescence spectra characteristic of an unfolded protein and a 
hydrodynamic radius consistent with an unfolded structure. In addition, the 
N-terminal domain of p57 is both functionally independent as a cyclin A-CDK2 
inhibitor and unstructured, as demonstrated by circular dichroism and 
fluorescence spectra indicative of unfolded proteins, a lack of 1H chemical 
shift dispersion and a hydrodynamic radius consistent with a highly unfolded 
structure. The amino acid compositions of full-length p57 and the excised QT 
domain of p57 exhibit significant deviations from the average composition of 
globular proteins that are consistent with the observed intrinsic disorder. 
However, the amino acid composition of the CDK inhibition domain of p57 does not 
exhibit such a striking deviation from the average values observed for proteins, 
implying that a general low level of hydrophobicity, rather than depletion or 
enrichment in specific amino acids, contributes to the intrinsic disorder of the 
excised p57 CDK inhibition domain.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.10018
PMID: 11746698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
