---
pmid: '15475954'
title: RITS acts in cis to promote RNA interference-mediated transcriptional and post-transcriptional
  silencing.
authors:
- Noma K
- Sugiyama T
- Cam H
- Verdel A
- Zofall M
- Jia S
- Moazed D
- Grewal SI
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1452
---

# RITS acts in cis to promote RNA interference-mediated transcriptional and post-transcriptional silencing.
**Authors:** Noma K, Sugiyama T, Cam H, Verdel A, Zofall M, Jia S, Moazed D, Grewal SI
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1452](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1452)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1174-80. doi: 10.1038/ng1452. Epub 2004 Oct 10.

RITS acts in cis to promote RNA interference-mediated transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional silencing.

Noma K(1), Sugiyama T, Cam H, Verdel A, Zofall M, Jia S, Moazed D, Grewal SI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1141-2. doi: 10.1038/ng1104-1141.

RNA interference is a conserved mechanism by which double-stranded RNA is 
processed into short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that can trigger both 
post-transcriptional and transcriptional gene silencing. In fission yeast, the 
RNA-induced initiation of transcriptional gene silencing (RITS) complex contains 
Dicer-generated siRNAs and is required for heterochromatic silencing. Here we 
show that RITS components, including Argonaute protein, bind to all known 
heterochromatic loci. At the mating-type region, RITS is recruited to the 
centromere-homologous repeat cenH in a Dicer-dependent manner, whereas the 
spreading of RITS across the entire 20-kb silenced domain, as well as its 
subsequent maintenance, requires heterochromatin machinery including Swi6 and 
occurs even in the absence of Dicer. Furthermore, our analyses suggest that RNA 
interference machinery operates in cis as a stable component of heterochromatic 
domains with RITS tethered to silenced loci by methylation of histone H3 at 
Lys9. This tethering promotes the processing of transcripts and generation of 
additional siRNAs for heterochromatin maintenance.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1452
PMID: 15475954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
