---
pmid: '18437684'
title: Involvement of FGF and BMP family proteins and VEGF in early human kidney development.
authors:
- Carev D
- Saraga M
- Saraga-Babic M
journal: Histol Histopathol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.14670/HH-23.853
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Involvement of FGF and BMP family proteins and VEGF in early human kidney development.
**Authors:** Carev D, Saraga M, Saraga-Babic M
**Journal:** Histol Histopathol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.14670/HH-23.853](https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-23.853)

## Abstract

1. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Jul;23(7):853-62. doi: 10.14670/HH-23.853.

Involvement of FGF and BMP family proteins and VEGF in early human kidney 
development.

Carev D(1), Saraga M, Saraga-Babic M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine, 
University of Split, Split, Croatia. dominkocarev@yahoo.com

The spatial and temporal pattern of the appearance of the fibroblast growth 
factor proteins (FGF-8 and FGF-10), the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2/4 
subfamily and BMP-7) and the vascular endothelial growth factor protein (VEGF) 
was investigated in the human mesonephros and metanephros of the 5-9 week-old 
conceptuses. In the mesonephros, both FGF's and BMP's were found in all 
structures and their expression slightly decreased in the early fetal period. 
VEGF positivity appeared in all mesonephric structures, and increased in the 
fetal period coincidently with formation of the mesonephric blood vessel 
network. In the metanephros, FGF-8 first appeared only in the metanephric 
mesenchyme, but from the 7th week on, its reactivity increased and spread to 
other metanephric structures. FGF-10 positive cells appeared in all metanephric 
structures already in the 5th week, and slightly intensified with progression of 
development. Cell survival and nephrogenesis in the permanent kidney might be 
associated with the appearance of both growth factors. Both BMP-2/4 and BMP-7 
displayed a similar pattern of reactivity in all metanephric structures, and 
their reactivity intensified with advancing development. Alterations in their 
pattern of appearance might lead to the formation of small and dysplastic 
kidneys. Already in the earliest developmental stages, VEGF protein appeared in 
all metanephric structures. At later stages, VEGF showed more intense reaction 
in the collecting system than in the differentiating nephrons and interstitium. 
Due to VEGF involvement in vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, abnormal VEGF 
appearance might lead to impaired formation of the blood vessel network in the 
human permanent kidney.

DOI: 10.14670/HH-23.853
PMID: 18437684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
