---
pmid: '34782749'
title: Regulators of tubulin polyglutamylation control nuclear shape and cilium disassembly
  by balancing microtubule and actin assembly.
authors:
- Wang L
- Paudyal SC
- Kang Y
- Owa M
- Liang FX
- Spektor A
- Knaut H
- Sánchez I
- Dynlacht BD
journal: Cell Res
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8807603
doi: 10.1038/s41422-021-00584-9
---

# Regulators of tubulin polyglutamylation control nuclear shape and cilium disassembly by balancing microtubule and actin assembly.
**Authors:** Wang L, Paudyal SC, Kang Y, Owa M, Liang FX, Spektor A, Knaut H, Sánchez I, Dynlacht BD
**Journal:** Cell Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41422-021-00584-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-021-00584-9)
**PMC:** [PMC8807603](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8807603/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2022 Feb;32(2):190-209. doi: 10.1038/s41422-021-00584-9. Epub 2021
Nov  15.

Regulators of tubulin polyglutamylation control nuclear shape and cilium 
disassembly by balancing microtubule and actin assembly.

Wang L(1), Paudyal SC(2), Kang Y(3), Owa M(3), Liang FX(4), Spektor A(2), Knaut 
H(5), Sánchez I(3), Dynlacht BD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Lei.Wang@nyulangone.org.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Microscopy Laboratory, Division of Advanced Research Technologies, NYU 
Langone Health, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York 
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Brian.Dynlacht@nyulangone.org.

Cytoskeletal networks play an important role in regulating nuclear morphology 
and ciliogenesis. However, the role of microtubule (MT) post-translational 
modifications in nuclear shape regulation and cilium disassembly has not been 
explored. Here we identified a novel regulator of the tubulin polyglutamylase 
complex (TPGC), C11ORF49/CSTPP1, that regulates cytoskeletal organization, 
nuclear shape, and cilium disassembly. Mechanistically, loss of C11ORF49/CSTPP1 
impacts the assembly and stability of the TPGC, which modulates long-chain 
polyglutamylation levels on microtubules (MTs) and thereby balances the binding 
of MT-associated proteins and actin nucleators. As a result, loss of TPGC leads 
to aberrant, enhanced assembly of MTs that penetrate the nucleus, which in turn 
leads to defects in nuclear shape, and disorganization of cytoplasmic actin that 
disrupts the YAP/TAZ pathway and cilium disassembly. Further, we showed that 
C11ORF49/CSTPP1-TPGC plays mechanistically distinct roles in the regulation of 
nuclear shape and cilium disassembly. Remarkably, disruption of 
C11ORF49/CSTPP1-TPGC also leads to developmental defects in vivo. Our findings 
point to an unanticipated nexus that links tubulin polyglutamylation with 
nuclear shape and ciliogenesis.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, CAS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-021-00584-9
PMCID: PMC8807603
PMID: 34782749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
