---
pmid: '12778054'
title: Ubp3 requires a cofactor, Bre5, to specifically de-ubiquitinate the COPII protein,
  Sec23.
authors:
- Cohen M
- Stutz F
- Belgareh N
- Haguenauer-Tsapis R
- Dargemont C
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1003
---

# Ubp3 requires a cofactor, Bre5, to specifically de-ubiquitinate the COPII protein, Sec23.
**Authors:** Cohen M, Stutz F, Belgareh N, Haguenauer-Tsapis R, Dargemont C
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1003](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1003)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;5(7):661-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb1003.

Ubp3 requires a cofactor, Bre5, to specifically de-ubiquitinate the COPII 
protein, Sec23.

Cohen M(1), Stutz F, Belgareh N, Haguenauer-Tsapis R, Dargemont C.

Author information:
(1)Nucleocytoplasmic transport group, Institut Jacques Monod., Unité Mixte de 
Recherche 7592, CNRS, Universités Paris VI and VII, 2 Place Jussieu. Tour 43. 
75251, Paris, Cedex 05, France.

Ubiquitination is important for a broad array of cellular functions. Although 
reversal of this process, de-ubiquitination, most probably represents an 
important regulatory step contributing to cellular homeostasis, the specificity 
and properties of de-ubiquitination enzymes remain poorly understood. Here, we 
show that the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ubiquitin protease Ubp3 requires an 
additional protein, Bre5, to form an active de-ubiquitination complex that 
cleaves ubiquitin from specific substrates. In particular, this complex rescues 
Sec23p, a COPII subunit essential for the transport between the endoplasmic 
reticulum and the Golgi apparatus, from degradation by the proteasome. This 
probably contributes to maintaining and adapting a Sec23 expression level that 
is compatible with an efficient secretion pathway, and consequently with cell 
growth and viability.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1003
PMID: 12778054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
