---
pmid: '22411829'
title: M phase phosphorylation of the epigenetic regulator UHRF1 regulates its physical
  association with the deubiquitylase USP7 and stability.
authors:
- Ma H
- Chen H
- Guo X
- Wang Z
- Sowa ME
- Zheng L
- Hu S
- Zeng P
- Guo R
- Diao J
- Lan F
- Harper JW
- Shi YG
- Xu Y
- Shi Y
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3323953
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1116349109
---

# M phase phosphorylation of the epigenetic regulator UHRF1 regulates its physical association with the deubiquitylase USP7 and stability.
**Authors:** Ma H, Chen H, Guo X, Wang Z, Sowa ME, Zheng L, Hu S, Zeng P, Guo R, Diao J, Lan F, Harper JW, Shi YG, Xu Y, Shi Y
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1116349109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1116349109)
**PMC:** [PMC3323953](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3323953/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 27;109(13):4828-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1116349109. Epub 2012 Mar 12.

M phase phosphorylation of the epigenetic regulator UHRF1 regulates its physical 
association with the deubiquitylase USP7 and stability.

Ma H(1), Chen H, Guo X, Wang Z, Sowa ME, Zheng L, Hu S, Zeng P, Guo R, Diao J, 
Lan F, Harper JW, Shi YG, Xu Y, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, and Department 
of Biochemistry, Fudan University Medical School, 138 Yixue Yuan Road, Shanghai 
200032, China.

UHRF1 (Ubiquitin-like, with PHD and RING finger domains 1) plays an important 
role in DNA CpG methylation, heterochromatin function and gene expression. 
Overexpression of UHRF1 has been suggested to contribute to tumorigenesis. 
However, regulation of UHRF1 is largely unknown. Here we show that the 
deubiquitylase USP7 interacts with UHRF1. Using interaction-defective and 
catalytic mutants of USP7 for complementation experiments, we demonstrate that 
both physical interaction and catalytic activity of USP7 are necessary for UHRF1 
ubiquitylation and stability regulation. Mass spectrometry analysis identified 
phosphorylation of serine (S) 652 within the USP7-interacting domain of UHRF1, 
which was further confirmed by a UHRF1 S652 phosphor (S652ph)-specific antibody. 
Importantly, the S652ph antibody identifies phosphorylated UHRF1 in mitotic 
cells and consistently S652 can be phosphorylated by the M phase-specific kinase 
CDK1-cyclin B in vitro. UHRF1 S652 phosphorylation significantly reduces UHRF1 
interaction with USP7 in vitro and in vivo, which is correlated with a decreased 
UHRF1 stability in the M phase of the cell cycle. In contrast, UHRF1 carrying 
the S652A mutation, which renders UHRF1 resistant to phosphorylation at S652, is 
more stable. Importantly, cells carrying the S652A mutant grow more slowly 
suggesting that maintaining an appropriate level of UHRF1 is important for cell 
proliferation regulation. Taken together, our findings uncovered a cell 
cycle-specific signaling event that relieves UHRF1 from its interaction with 
USP7, thus exposing UHRF1 to proteasome-mediated degradation. These findings 
identify a molecular mechanism by which cellular UHRF1 level is regulated, which 
may impact cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1116349109
PMCID: PMC3323953
PMID: 22411829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: Fei Lan is an 
employee of Constellation Pharmaceuticals Inc., and Yang Shi is a cofounder of 
Constellation Pharmaceuticals Inc. and a member of its scientific advisory 
board. The remaining authors have declared no conflict of interest.
