---
pmid: '24599843'
title: Elucidating common structural features of human pathogenic variations using
  large-scale atomic-resolution protein networks.
authors:
- Das J
- Lee HR
- Sagar A
- Fragoza R
- Liang J
- Wei X
- Wang X
- Mort M
- Stenson PD
- Cooper DN
- Yu H
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4876038
doi: 10.1002/humu.22534
---

# Elucidating common structural features of human pathogenic variations using large-scale atomic-resolution protein networks.
**Authors:** Das J, Lee HR, Sagar A, Fragoza R, Liang J, Wei X, Wang X, Mort M, Stenson PD, Cooper DN, Yu H
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22534](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22534)
**PMC:** [PMC4876038](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4876038/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2014 May;35(5):585-93. doi: 10.1002/humu.22534. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Elucidating common structural features of human pathogenic variations using 
large-scale atomic-resolution protein networks.

Das J(1), Lee HR, Sagar A, Fragoza R, Liang J, Wei X, Wang X, Mort M, Stenson 
PD, Cooper DN, Yu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York, 14853; Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular 
Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, 14853.

With the rapid growth of structural genomics, numerous protein crystal 
structures have become available. However, the parallel increase in knowledge of 
the functional principles underlying biological processes, and more specifically 
the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease, has been less dramatic. This 
notwithstanding, the study of complex cellular networks has made possible the 
inference of protein functions on a large scale. Here, we combine the scale of 
network systems biology with the resolution of traditional structural biology to 
generate a large-scale atomic-resolution interactome-network comprising 3,398 
interactions between 2,890 proteins with a well-defined interaction interface 
and interface residues for each interaction. Within the framework of this 
atomic-resolution network, we have explored the structural principles underlying 
variations causing human-inherited disease. We find that in-frame pathogenic 
variations are enriched at both the interface and in the interacting domain, 
suggesting that variations not only at interface "hot-spots," but in the entire 
interacting domain can result in alterations of interactions. Further, the sites 
of pathogenic variations are closely related to the biophysical strength of the 
interactions they perturb. Finally, we show that biochemical alterations 
consequent to these variations are considerably more disruptive than 
evolutionary changes, with the most significant alterations at the protein 
interaction interface.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22534
PMCID: PMC4876038
PMID: 24599843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.
