---
pmid: '19196974'
title: The G protein-coupled receptor FSHR-1 is required for the Caenorhabditis elegans
  innate immune response.
authors:
- Powell JR
- Kim DH
- Ausubel FM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2650343
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0813048106
---

# The G protein-coupled receptor FSHR-1 is required for the Caenorhabditis elegans innate immune response.
**Authors:** Powell JR, Kim DH, Ausubel FM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0813048106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0813048106)
**PMC:** [PMC2650343](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2650343/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 24;106(8):2782-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0813048106. Epub 2009 Feb 5.

The G protein-coupled receptor FSHR-1 is required for the Caenorhabditis elegans 
innate immune response.

Powell JR(1), Kim DH, Ausubel FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Innate immunity is an ancient defense system used by both vertebrates and 
invertebrates. Previously characterized innate immune responses in plants and 
animals are triggered by detection of pathogens using specific receptors, which 
typically use a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain to bind molecular patterns 
associated with infection. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans uses defense 
pathways conserved with vertebrates; however, the mechanism by which C. elegans 
detects pathogens is unknown. We screened all LRR-containing transmembrane 
receptors in C. elegans and identified the G protein-coupled receptor FSHR-1 as 
an important component of the C. elegans immune response to Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive bacterial pathogens. FSHR-1 acts in the C. elegans intestine, the 
primary site of exposure to ingested pathogens. FSHR-1 signals in parallel to 
the known p38 MAPK pathway but converges to regulate the transcriptional 
induction of an overlapping but nonidentical set of antimicrobial effectors. 
FSHR-1 may act generally to boost the nematode immune response, or it may 
function as a pathogen receptor.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0813048106
PMCID: PMC2650343
PMID: 19196974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
