---
pmid: '1856204'
title: Structure of the gene encoding human casein kinase II subunit beta.
authors:
- Voss H
- Wirkner U
- Jakobi R
- Hewitt NA
- Schwager C
- Zimmermann J
- Ansorge W
- Pyerin W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
---

# Structure of the gene encoding human casein kinase II subunit beta.
**Authors:** Voss H, Wirkner U, Jakobi R, Hewitt NA, Schwager C, Zimmermann J, Ansorge W, Pyerin W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jul 25;266(21):13706-11.

Structure of the gene encoding human casein kinase II subunit beta.

Voss H(1), Wirkner U, Jakobi R, Hewitt NA, Schwager C, Zimmermann J, Ansorge W, 
Pyerin W.

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Cell Physiology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg.

Casein kinase II (CKII) is a ubiquitous serine/threonine protein kinase with 
numerous key functions in cell metabolism and growth. The human CKII has a 
tetrameric structure; two catalytic subunits (alpha and alpha') form the 
holoenzyme together with two presumably regulatory subunits (beta). The gene 
encoding CKII subunit beta was isolated from human genomic DNA and analyzed for 
its primary structure using exclusively nonradioactive procedures. The gene was 
found to span 4.2 kilobase pairs and to be composed of seven exons. Exon sizes 
range from 76 (exon 5) to 329 base pairs (bp) (exon 1), intron sizes from 145 
(intron V) to 965 bp (intron II). All exon-intron junctional sequences conform 
to the canonical GT-AG rule. Primer extension analysis determined three 
transcription initiation sites, at 951, 919, and (minor) 840 bp upstream of the 
translation start site. The translation start is located early in the second 
exon; exon 1 is untranslated. The 3'-cleavage/polyadenylation signal sequence 
(AA-TAAA) is in the last exon at position 4173 bp relative to the first 
transcription initiation site. The coding sequence for CKII beta comprises 648 
nucleotides identical to the published CKII beta-cDNA sequence (Jakobi, R., 
Voss, H., and Pyerin, W. (1989) Eur. J. Biochem. 183, 227-233). The upstream 
promoter region of the CKII beta gene contains multiple potential gene 
regulatory sequence elements, noticeable DNA structures, and the characteristics 
of a housekeeping gene (more than one transcription initiation site, lack of a 
TATA-box, presence of a CpG island, occurrence of multiple GC boxes and of 
nonstandard positioned CCAAT boxes). The CKII beta gene promoter shares common 
features with that of mammalian protein kinases and is closely related to the 
regulatory subunit gene promoter of cAMP-dependent protein kinase.

PMID: 1856204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
