---
pmid: '16732283'
title: Lysine activation and functional analysis of E2-mediated conjugation in the
  SUMO pathway.
authors:
- Yunus AA
- Lima CD
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1104
---

# Lysine activation and functional analysis of E2-mediated conjugation in the SUMO pathway.
**Authors:** Yunus AA, Lima CD
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1104](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1104)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Jun;13(6):491-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1104. Epub 2006
May  28.

Lysine activation and functional analysis of E2-mediated conjugation in the SUMO 
pathway.

Yunus AA(1), Lima CD.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 
10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Jun;13(6):474-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0606-474.

E2 conjugating proteins that transfer ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like modifiers to 
substrate lysine residues must first activate the lysine nucleophile for 
conjugation. Genetic complementation revealed three side chains of the E2 Ubc9 
that were crucial for normal growth. Kinetic analysis revealed modest binding 
defects but substantially lowered catalytic rates for these mutant alleles with 
respect to wild-type Ubc9. X-ray structures for wild-type and mutant human 
Ubc9-RanGAP1 complexes showed partial loss of contacts to the substrate lysine 
in mutant complexes. Computational analysis predicted pK perturbations for the 
substrate lysine, and Ubc9 mutations weakened pK suppression through improper 
side chain coordination. Biochemical studies with p53, RanGAP1 and the 
Nup358/RanBP2 E3 were used to determine rate constants and pK values, confirming 
both structural and computational predictions. It seems that Ubc9 uses an 
indirect mechanism to activate lysine for conjugation that may be conserved 
among E2 family members.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1104
PMID: 16732283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
