---
pmid: '3426593'
title: Amino acid sequence of the phosphopyridoxyl peptide from P-protein of the chicken
  liver glycine cleavage system.
authors:
- Fujiwara K
- Okamura-Ikeda K
- Motokawa Y
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(87)90413-x
---

# Amino acid sequence of the phosphopyridoxyl peptide from P-protein of the chicken liver glycine cleavage system.
**Authors:** Fujiwara K, Okamura-Ikeda K, Motokawa Y
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(87)90413-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(87)90413-x)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 Dec 16;149(2):621-7. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(87)90413-x.

Amino acid sequence of the phosphopyridoxyl peptide from P-protein of the 
chicken liver glycine cleavage system.

Fujiwara K(1), Okamura-Ikeda K, Motokawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Enzyme Research, University of Tokushima, Japan.

A pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-containing peptide which contained 54 amino acid 
residues was isolated from chicken liver P-protein of the glycine cleavage 
system following reduction with NaB3H4, carboxymethylation, and proteolysis with 
lysylendopeptidase. Two peptides which comprise the two halves of the 
phosphopyridoxyl peptide were isolated from apo-P-protein. Sequence analysis of 
these three peptides provided the primary structure of the phosphopyridoxyl 
peptide and revealed that the cofactor is linked to Lys-35. The pyridoxal 
5'-phosphate-binding site has the His-Lys(PLP)-X structure characteristic of 
known pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-dependent amino acid decarboxylases, tryptophan 
synthase, and serine hydroxymethyltransferase.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(87)90413-x
PMID: 3426593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
