---
pmid: '25599644'
title: Crystal structure of the human 20S proteasome in complex with carfilzomib.
authors:
- Harshbarger W
- Miller C
- Diedrich C
- Sacchettini J
journal: Structure
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.017
---

# Crystal structure of the human 20S proteasome in complex with carfilzomib.
**Authors:** Harshbarger W, Miller C, Diedrich C, Sacchettini J
**Journal:** Structure (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2014.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2014.11.017)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2015 Feb 3;23(2):418-24. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.017. Epub 2015 
Jan 15.

Crystal structure of the human 20S proteasome in complex with carfilzomib.

Harshbarger W(1), Miller C(2), Diedrich C(2), Sacchettini J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 
77842-3012, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, TX 77842-3012, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 
77842-3012, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, TX 77842-3012, USA. Electronic address: 
sacchett@tamu.edu.

Proteasome inhibition is highly effective as a treatment for multiple myeloma, 
and recently carfilzomib was granted US FDA approval for the treatment of 
relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma. Here, we report the X-ray crystal 
structure of the human constitutive 20S proteasome with and without carfilzomib 
bound at 2.9 and 2.6 Å, respectively. Our data indicate that the S3 and S4 
binding pockets play a pivotal role in carfilzomib's selectivity for 
chymotrypsin-like sites. Structural comparison with the mouse immunoproteasome 
crystal structure reveals amino acid substitutions that explain carfilzomib's 
slight preference for chymotrypsin-like subunits of constitutive proteasomes. In 
addition, comparison of the human proteasome:carfilzomib complex with the mouse 
proteasome:PR-957 complex reveals new details that explain why PR-957 is 
selective for immunoproteasomes. Together, the data presented here support the 
design of inhibitors for either constitutive or immunoproteasomes, with 
implications for the treatment of cancers as well as autoimmune and 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2014.11.017
PMID: 25599644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
