---
pmid: '18500650'
title: Large-scale analysis of the GRAS gene family in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Lee MH
- Kim B
- Song SK
- Heo JO
- Yu NI
- Lee SA
- Kim M
- Kim DG
- Sohn SO
- Lim CE
- Chang KS
- Lee MM
- Lim J
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9345-1
---

# Large-scale analysis of the GRAS gene family in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Lee MH, Kim B, Song SK, Heo JO, Yu NI, Lee SA, Kim M, Kim DG, Sohn SO, Lim CE, Chang KS, Lee MM, Lim J
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11103-008-9345-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11103-008-9345-1)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 2008 Aug;67(6):659-70. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9345-1. Epub
2008  May 26.

Large-scale analysis of the GRAS gene family in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Lee MH(1), Kim B, Song SK, Heo JO, Yu NI, Lee SA, Kim M, Kim DG, Sohn SO, Lim 
CE, Chang KS, Lee MM, Lim J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, 1 
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul, 143-701, Korea.

GRAS proteins belong to a plant-specific transcription factor family. Currently, 
33 GRAS members including a putative expressed pseudogene have been identified 
in the Arabidopsis genome. With a reverse genetic approach, we have constructed 
a "phenome-ready unimutant collection" of the GRAS genes in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Of this collection, we focused on loss-of-function mutations in 23 
novel GRAS members. Under standard conditions, homozygous mutants have no 
obvious morphological phenotypes compared with those of wild-type plants. 
Expression analysis of GRAS genes using quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), 
microarray data mining, and promoter::GUS reporter fusions revealed their 
tissue-specific expression patterns. Our analysis of protein-protein interaction 
and subcellular localization of individual GRAS members indicated their roles as 
transcription regulators. In our yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) assay, we confirmed the 
protein-protein interaction between SHORT-ROOT (SHR) and SCARECROW (SCR). 
Furthermore, we identified a new SHR-interacting protein, SCARECROW-LIKE23 
(SCL23), which is the most closely related to SCR. Our large-scale analysis 
provides a comprehensive evaluation on the Arabidopsis GRAS members, and also 
our phenome-ready unimutant collection will be a useful resource to better 
understand individual GRAS proteins that play diverse roles in plant growth and 
development.

DOI: 10.1007/s11103-008-9345-1
PMID: 18500650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
