---
pmid: '37260402'
title: Structure, Assembly, and Function of Flagella Responsible for Bacterial Locomotion.
authors:
- Minamino T
- Kinoshita M
journal: EcoSal Plus
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC10729930
doi: 10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0011-2023
---

# Structure, Assembly, and Function of Flagella Responsible for Bacterial Locomotion.
**Authors:** Minamino T, Kinoshita M
**Journal:** EcoSal Plus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0011-2023](https://doi.org/10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0011-2023)
**PMC:** [PMC10729930](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10729930/)

## Abstract

1. EcoSal Plus. 2023 Dec 12;11(1):eesp00112023. doi: 
10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0011-2023. Epub 2023 Jun 1.

Structure, Assembly, and Function of Flagella Responsible for Bacterial 
Locomotion.

Minamino T(1), Kinoshita M(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, 
Japan.

Many motile bacteria use flagella for locomotion under a variety of 
environmental conditions. Because bacterial flagella are under the control of 
sensory signal transduction pathways, each cell is able to autonomously control 
its flagellum-driven locomotion and move to an environment favorable for 
survival. The flagellum of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is a 
supramolecular assembly consisting of at least three distinct functional parts: 
a basal body that acts as a bidirectional rotary motor together with multiple 
force generators, each of which serves as a transmembrane proton channel to 
couple the proton flow through the channel with torque generation; a filament 
that functions as a helical propeller that produces propulsion; and a hook that 
works as a universal joint that transmits the torque produced by the rotary 
motor to the helical propeller. At the base of the flagellum is a type III 
secretion system that transports flagellar structural subunits from the 
cytoplasm to the distal end of the growing flagellar structure, where assembly 
takes place. In recent years, high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) 
image analysis has revealed the overall structure of the flagellum, and this 
structural information has made it possible to discuss flagellar assembly and 
function at the atomic level. In this article, we describe what is known about 
the structure, assembly, and function of Salmonella flagella.

DOI: 10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0011-2023
PMCID: PMC10729930
PMID: 37260402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
