---
reference_id: PMID:38134053
title: P4HA1 expression and function in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Gou W
- Song B
- Yang Y
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036800
content_type: abstract_only
---

# P4HA1 expression and function in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Gou W, Song B, Yang Y
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000036800](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000036800)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Dec 22;102(51):e36800. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000036800.

P4HA1 expression and function in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Gou W(1), Song B(2), Yang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, People's Hospital of Wanning, Wanning, Hainan
Province, China.
(2)Department of Endoscopy, People's Hospital of Wanning, Wanning, Hainan
Province, China.

This study aimed to explore the effect of P4HA1 (prolyl 4-hydroxylase subunit
α1) and its ratio on the prognosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. The
expression data of P4HA1 in esophageal cancer in The Cancer Genome Atlas and
Genotype-Tissue Expression were collected using the public database gene
expression profiling interactive analysis. The expression levels of P4HA1 were
examined by immunohistochemistry. The relationship between P4HA1 expression and
clinicopathological parameters was analyzed the χ2 test. Survival analysis was
performed to investigate the effect of P4HA1 and its ratio on prognosis.
Compared with normal esophageal mucosal epithelium, there was higher P4HA1 gene
mRNA in esophageal cancer tissue. Regarding the expression level, no significant
difference was observed in patients with stage I-IV esophageal cancer.
Immunohistochemistry showed that P4HA1 was highly expressed in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (68.7%), while it was negatively expressed in
paracancerous tissues. There was a significant difference in expression between
cancer and adjacent tissues. The expression of P4HA1 associated with the degree
of tumor differentiation, site, lymph node metastasis, and tumor node metastasis
stage. The prognostic factors that affected the OS (overall survival) of
esophageal cancer patients were the degree of differentiation, lymph node
metastasis, and P4HA1 expression. Multivariate analysis of the OS results of
patients showed that lymph node metastases and P4HA1 expression were independent
prognostic factors that affected the OS of esophageal cancer patients. The
prognostic factors affecting the PFS (progression-free survival) of esophageal
cancer patients in the univariate survival analysis were as follows: degree of
differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and P4HA1 expression. In addition,
multivariate analysis of the PFS results of patients showed that lymph node
metastasis and P4HA1 expression were independent prognostic factors that
affected the PFS of esophageal cancer patients. P4HA1 may be a novel potential
biomarker for the early diagnosis, prognosis, and targeted therapy of esophageal
cancer.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036800
PMCID: PMC10735103
PMID: 38134053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.