---
pmid: '18359851'
title: Hedgehog signaling overrides p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2.
authors:
- Abe Y
- Oda-Sato E
- Tobiume K
- Kawauchi K
- Taya Y
- Okamoto K
- Oren M
- Tanaka N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2290789
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0712216105
---

# Hedgehog signaling overrides p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2.
**Authors:** Abe Y, Oda-Sato E, Tobiume K, Kawauchi K, Taya Y, Okamoto K, Oren M, Tanaka N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0712216105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0712216105)
**PMC:** [PMC2290789](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2290789/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 25;105(12):4838-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0712216105. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Hedgehog signaling overrides p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2.

Abe Y(1), Oda-Sato E, Tobiume K, Kawauchi K, Taya Y, Okamoto K, Oren M, Tanaka 
N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon Medical 
School, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 211-8533, Japan.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the development of many organs in 
mammals, and activation of this pathway is widely observed in human cancers. 
Although it is known that Hh signaling activates the expression of genes 
involved in cell growth, the precise role of the Hh pathway in cancer 
development is still unclear. Here, we show that constitutively activated 
mutants of Smoothened (Smo), a transducer of the Hh signaling pathway, inhibit 
the accumulation of the tumor suppressor protein p53. This inhibition was also 
observed in the presence of Hh ligand or with the overexpression of the 
transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2, downstream effectors of Smo, indicating 
that this inhibition is specific for the Hh pathway. We also report that Smo 
mutants augment p53 binding to the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase Mdm2 and promote 
p53 ubiquitination. Furthermore, Hh signaling induced the phosphorylation of 
human Mdm2 protein on serines 166 and 186, which are activating phosphorylation 
sites of Mdm2. Smo mutants enhanced the proliferation of mouse embryonic 
fibroblasts (MEFs) while inducing a DNA-damage response. Moreover, Smo partially 
inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis and cell growth inhibition in 
oncogene-expressing MEFs. We also found that accumulation of p53 is inhibited by 
Hh signaling in several human cancer cell lines. Therefore, the Hh pathway may 
be a powerful accelerator of oncogenesis by activating cell proliferation and 
inhibiting the p53-mediated anti-cancer barrier induced by oncogenic stress.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0712216105
PMCID: PMC2290789
PMID: 18359851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway regulates the development of many organs in mammals, and activation of this pathway is widely observed in human cancers. Although it is known that Hh signaling activates the expression of genes involved in cell growth, the precise role of the Hh pathway in cancer development is still unclear. Here, we show that constitutively activated mutants of Smoothened (Smo), a transducer of the Hh signaling pathway, inhibit the accumulation of the tumor suppressor protein p53. This inhibition was also observed in the presence of Hh ligand or with the overexpression of the transcription factors Gli1 and Gli2, downstream effectors of Smo, indicating that this inhibition is specific for the Hh pathway. We also report that Smo mutants augment p53 binding to the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase Mdm2 and promote p53 ubiquitination. Furthermore, Hh signaling induced the phosphorylation of human Mdm2 protein on serines 166 and 186, which are activating phosphorylation sites of Mdm2. Smo mutants enhanced the proliferation of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) while inducing a DNA-damage response. Moreover, Smo partially inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis and cell growth inhibition in oncogene-expressing MEFs. We also found that accumulation of p53 is inhibited by Hh signaling in several human cancer cell lines. Therefore, the Hh pathway may be a powerful accelerator of oncogenesis by activating cell proliferation and inhibiting the p53-mediated anti-cancer barrier induced by oncogenic stress.

Discussion

In this study, we found that Hh signaling inhibits p53-mediated tumor suppression by activating Mdm2. p53 functions as a critical tumor suppressor by activating the expression of genes that induce cell growth inhibition, apoptosis, and DNA repair ( 17 , 31 , 32 ). Recent studies have clearly shown that oncogene activation evokes a DNA-damage response, which results in p53 activation ( 12 , 13 ). Moreover, many studies have shown that p53 induces apoptosis or replicative senescence in oncogene-expressing cells ( 17 , 18 , 31 ), suggesting that the elimination of such cells is important for tumor suppression. Therefore, it is possible that escape from such a p53-mediated tumor surveillance system is important during the early stages of oncogenesis. In this context, Hh signaling is an interesting example with which to consider oncogenesis. Hh signaling induces cell growth by activating the expression of cyclins D1 and E ( Fig. 4 e and f ). At the same time, Hh signaling evokes a DNA-damage-induced signal ( Fig. 4 g ). This DNA-damage-induced signal may be caused by oncogenic stress ( 12 , 13 , 31 , 32 ); however, at the same time, Hh signaling down-regulates p53 by activating Mdm2 ( Figs. 1 – 3 ). As a result, an important function of p53 in tumor suppression, the induction of apoptosis or senescence in oncogene-expressing cells, is partially inhibited ( Fig. 4 c and d ). These results suggest that Hh signaling functions as an accelerator of oncogenesis, activating cell proliferation and, at the same time, inhibiting the p53-mediated anti-cancer barrier induced by oncogenic stress.

In this study, we showed that Hh signaling activates phosphorylation of Mdm2 at serines 166 and 186, which were identified as sites of activating phosphorylation by Akt ( Fig. 3 a and refs. 22 and 23 ). It was recently reported that Hh signaling activates PI3K and Akt ( 24 ). Indeed, phosphorylation of these sites, induced by Hh signaling, is reduced by the PI3K inhibitor ( Fig. 3 b ). These results indicate that induction of the PI3K/Akt pathway by Hh signaling is involved in the activation of Mdm2. However, we also found that the forced expression of Gli1 or Gli2 reduced the amount of p53 in cells ( Fig. 3 c and d ). This result was also supported by the findings that the forced expression of SuFu, a negative regulator of Gli activation in the Hh pathway, restored the Smo mutant-meditated reduction in the amount of p53 in cells ( Fig. 3 f ), and that the phosphorylation of Mdm2 at serines 166 and 186 was inhibited by cycloheximide ( Fig. 3 g ), suggesting that de novo protein synthesis is important for these phosphorylation events. These results strongly suggest that a Gli-induced factor(s) underlies this phenomenon. At present, the kinase(s) directly induced or indirectly activated by Hh signaling remain to be identified. However, when considering oncogenesis, it is interesting that the oncogenic transcription factor Gli also decreased the amount of p53 in cells. Hdm2 and Gli1 genes are relatively close to each other on the same human chromosome, and they are sometimes coamplified in cancers ( 33 ), suggesting that a combination of excess Gli1 together with excess Mdm2 is sufficient to efficiently inactivate p53.

Hh signaling has been implicated in tissue repair and the maintenance of stem or progenitor cells in adult tissues, including skin, blood, gut, prostate, muscle, and the nervous system ( 1 – 3 ). It is also well known that chronic tissue injury caused by inflammation is associated with tumorigenesis ( 1 ). Moreover, recently, it was also shown that Hh signaling maintains a tumor stem cell compartment ( 34 ). Therefore, it is possible that, in the early stage of tumorigenesis, Hh signaling promotes cell growth and partially inhibits p53 function, thereby enabling these cells to survive and grow. This model is also supported by a recent study that demonstrated cooperation of Hedgehog and Ras signaling during the earliest stages of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma formation in an animal model ( 35 ). By contrast, the effect of Hh signaling in the inhibition of p53 is not complete, but partial (see Fig. 1 d and e and Fig. 4 a and b ). This partial effect is seen in the result showing that Smo mutants enhanced activated Ras-induced transformation in p53 heterozygote ( p53 +/− ) MEFs, but not in WT MEFs ( Fig. 4 h ), suggesting that activation of Hh signaling only is not sufficient for the inhibition of p53-mediated tumor suppression. This issue is also supported because mutations in both Ptch (or Smo ) and p53 are often observed together in BCC tumors ( 36 , 37 ). We also showed that, in human breast cancer cell lines, the levels of p53 are decreased by activated Hh signaling and that inhibition of Hh signaling by KAAD cyclopamine results in accumulation of p53 ( Fig. 5 b ). Therefore, at least in some types of cancer, activation of the Hh signaling pathway partially abrogates the tumor suppressive effects of p53. Altogether, our observations imply that constitutive Hh pathway activation functions as an accelerator of oncogenesis and simultaneously induces cell proliferation by overriding p53-mediated tumor suppression.
