---
pmid: '9569023'
title: Disabled-2 (Dab2) is an SH3 domain-binding partner of Grb2.
authors:
- Xu XX
- Yi T
- Tang B
- Lambeth JD
journal: Oncogene
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201678
---

# Disabled-2 (Dab2) is an SH3 domain-binding partner of Grb2.
**Authors:** Xu XX, Yi T, Tang B, Lambeth JD
**Journal:** Oncogene (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1201678](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1201678)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1998 Mar 26;16(12):1561-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201678.

Disabled-2 (Dab2) is an SH3 domain-binding partner of Grb2.

Xu XX(1), Yi T, Tang B, Lambeth JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, and Winship Cancer Center, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Disabled-2 (Dab2), a mammalian structural homolog of Drosophila Disabled (Dab), 
is a mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein. It has been speculated to be a negative 
regulator of growth since its expression is lost in ovarian carcinomas. Dab2 
contains a C-terminal proline-rich domain with sequences similar to those found 
in Sos, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ras. The proline-rich sequences 
of Sos mediate the interaction of Sos with Grb2, an adaptor protein which 
coupled tyrosine kinase receptors to Sos. Herein, we have investigated the 
possibility that Dab2 interacts with Grb2. In experiments of 
co-immunoprecipitation from BAC1.2F5 macrophage cell lysates, significant 
quantities of Grb2 were associated with both Sos and Dab2, although Dab2 and Sos 
were not present in the same complex. Transfection of Dab2 into a Dab2-negative 
cell line (293 cells) decreased the amount of Grb2 associated with Sos, 
suggesting that Dab2 competes with Sos for binding to Grb2. Proline-rich 
peptides corresponding to Dab2 (#661-669) and to Sos (#1146-1161) inhibited the 
binding of Dab2 to Grb2, but were less effective in disrupting the Grb2-Sos 
complex. The expressed proline-rich domain of Dab2 (#600-730) bound Grb2, but 
other regions of Dab2 failed to bind Grb2. Both of the individual SH3 domains of 
Grb2 bound to Sos (N-terminal SH3 domain >> C-terminal SH3 domain), but binding 
to Dab2 required the intact Grb2, suggesting cooperative binding using both SH3 
domains of Grb2. These data indicate that Dab2 binds to the SH3 domains of Grb2 
via its C-terminal proline-rich sequences. Dab2 may modulate growth factor/Ras 
pathways by competing with Sos for binding to Grb2.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1201678
PMID: 9569023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
