---
pmid: '12225811'
title: Matrix-matrix interaction of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and fibronectin.
authors:
- Di Cesare PE
- Chen FS
- Moergelin M
- Carlson CS
- Leslie MP
- Perris R
- Fang C
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0945-053x(02)00015-x
---

# Matrix-matrix interaction of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and fibronectin.
**Authors:** Di Cesare PE, Chen FS, Moergelin M, Carlson CS, Leslie MP, Perris R, Fang C
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0945-053x(02)00015-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0945-053x(02)00015-x)

## Abstract

1. Matrix Biol. 2002 Aug;21(5):461-70. doi: 10.1016/s0945-053x(02)00015-x.

Matrix-matrix interaction of cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and 
fibronectin.

Di Cesare PE(1), Chen FS, Moergelin M, Carlson CS, Leslie MP, Perris R, Fang C.

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Center, NYU-Hospital for Joint Diseases Department 
of Orthopedic Surgery, 301 East 17th Street, New York, NY 10030, USA. 
pedicesare@aol.com

Recent work indicates that cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) plays an 
important role in extracellular matrix assembly and matrix-matrix protein 
interactions. In order to identify the proteins in extracellular matrix that 
interact with COMP, we used an ELISA-based solid-phase binding assay, which 
revealed a specific, high-affinity interaction between COMP and fibronectin. 
This interaction is concentration-dependent and saturable, and appears to occur 
under physiologically relevant conditions. Electron microscopy after negative 
staining and fragment binding analysis using the solid-phase assay revealed a 
predominant binding site for the COMP C-terminal globular domain to a molecular 
domain approximately 14 nm from the N-terminal domain of fibronectin, which can 
be inhibited by the presence of a polyclonal antibody specific for the 
C-terminal heptadecapeptide of COMP. This interaction is further demonstrated in 
vivo by colocalization of both COMP and fibronectin in the chondrocyte 
pericellular matrix by laser confocal microscopy of chondrocytes grown in 
agarose culture, and by appositional and colocalization of these proteins in the 
growth plate of primates by immunohistochemistry.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V./International Society of Matrix Biology

DOI: 10.1016/s0945-053x(02)00015-x
PMID: 12225811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
