---
pmid: '7588596'
title: WT1 suppresses synthesis of the epidermal growth factor receptor and induces
  apoptosis.
authors:
- Englert C
- Hou X
- Maheswaran S
- Bennett P
- Ngwu C
- Re GG
- Garvin AJ
- Rosner MR
- Haber DA
journal: EMBO J
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC394563
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00148.x
---

# WT1 suppresses synthesis of the epidermal growth factor receptor and induces apoptosis.
**Authors:** Englert C, Hou X, Maheswaran S, Bennett P, Ngwu C, Re GG, Garvin AJ, Rosner MR, Haber DA
**Journal:** EMBO J (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00148.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00148.x)
**PMC:** [PMC394563](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC394563/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1995 Oct 2;14(19):4662-75. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00148.x.

WT1 suppresses synthesis of the epidermal growth factor receptor and induces 
apoptosis.

Englert C(1), Hou X, Maheswaran S, Bennett P, Ngwu C, Re GG, Garvin AJ, Rosner 
MR, Haber DA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer 
Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The Wilms tumor suppressor gene WT1 encodes a developmentally regulated 
transcription factor that is mutated in a subset of embryonal tumors. To test 
its functional properties, we developed osteosarcoma cell lines expressing WT1 
under an inducible tetracycline-regulated promoter. Induction of WT1 resulted in 
programmed cell death. This effect, which was differentially mediated by the 
alternative splicing variants of WT1, was independent of p53. WT1-mediated 
apoptosis was associated with reduced synthesis of the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR), but not of other postulated WT1-target genes, and it was 
abrogated by constitutive expression of EGFR. WT1 repressed transcription from 
the EGFR promoter, binding to two TC-rich repeat sequences. In the developing 
kidney, EGFR expression in renal precursor cells declined with the onset of WT1 
expression. Repression of EGFR and induction of apoptosis by mechanism that may 
contribute to its critical role in normal kidney development and to the 
immortalization of tumor cells with inactivated WT1 alleles.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1995.tb00148.x
PMCID: PMC394563
PMID: 7588596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The Wilms tumor suppressor gene WT1 encodes a developmentally regulated transcription factor that is mutated in a subset of embryonal tumors. To test its functional properties, we developed osteosarcoma cell lines expressing WT1 under an inducible tetracycline-regulated promoter. Induction of WT1 resulted in programmed cell death. This effect, which was differentially mediated by the alternative splicing variants of WT1, was independent of p53. WT1-mediated apoptosis was associated with reduced synthesis of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), but not of other postulated WT1-target genes, and it was abrogated by constitutive expression of EGFR. WT1 repressed transcription from the EGFR promoter, binding to two TC-rich repeat sequences. In the developing kidney, EGFR expression in renal precursor cells declined with the onset of WT1 expression. Repression of EGFR and induction of apoptosis by mechanism that may contribute to its critical role in normal kidney development and to the immortalization of tumor cells with inactivated WT1 alleles.
