---
pmid: '19339278'
title: LULL1 retargets TorsinA to the nuclear envelope revealing an activity that
  is impaired by the DYT1 dystonia mutation.
authors:
- Vander Heyden AB
- Naismith TV
- Snapp EL
- Hodzic D
- Hanson PI
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2688546
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e09-01-0094
---

# LULL1 retargets TorsinA to the nuclear envelope revealing an activity that is impaired by the DYT1 dystonia mutation.
**Authors:** Vander Heyden AB, Naismith TV, Snapp EL, Hodzic D, Hanson PI
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e09-01-0094](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e09-01-0094)
**PMC:** [PMC2688546](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2688546/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jun;20(11):2661-72. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e09-01-0094. Epub
2009  Apr 1.

LULL1 retargets TorsinA to the nuclear envelope revealing an activity that is 
impaired by the DYT1 dystonia mutation.

Vander Heyden AB(1), Naismith TV, Snapp EL, Hodzic D, Hanson PI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

TorsinA (TorA) is an AAA+ ATPase in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen that is 
mutated in early onset DYT1 dystonia. TorA is an essential protein in mice and 
is thought to function in the nuclear envelope (NE) despite localizing 
throughout the ER. Here, we report that transient interaction of TorA with the 
ER membrane protein LULL1 targets TorA to the NE. FRAP and Blue Native PAGE 
indicate that TorA is a stable, slowly diffusing oligomer in either the absence 
or presence of LULL1. Increasing LULL1 expression redistributes both wild-type 
and disease-mutant TorA to the NE, while decreasing LULL1 with shRNAs eliminates 
intrinsic enrichment of disease-mutant TorA in the NE. When concentrated in the 
NE, TorA displaces the nuclear membrane proteins Sun2, nesprin-2G, and nesprin-3 
while leaving nuclear pores and Sun1 unchanged. Wild-type TorA also induces 
changes in NE membrane structure. Because SUN proteins interact with nesprins to 
connect nucleus and cytoskeleton, these effects suggest a new role for TorA in 
modulating complexes that traverse the NE. Importantly, once concentrated in the 
NE, disease-mutant TorA displaces Sun2 with reduced efficiency and does not 
change NE membrane structure. Together, our data suggest that LULL1 regulates 
the distribution and activity of TorA within the ER and NE lumen and reveal 
functional defects in the mutant protein responsible for DYT1 dystonia.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e09-01-0094
PMCID: PMC2688546
PMID: 19339278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
