---
pmid: '22872483'
title: The oocyte-to-embryo transition.
authors:
- Robertson S
- Lin R
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4015-4_12
---

# The oocyte-to-embryo transition.
**Authors:** Robertson S, Lin R
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4614-4015-4_12](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-4015-4_12)

## Abstract

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;757:351-72. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4015-4_12.

The oocyte-to-embryo transition.

Robertson S(1), Lin R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. scott.robertson@utsouthwestern.edu

The oocyte-to-embryo transition refers to the process whereby a fully grown, 
relatively quiescent oocyte undergoes maturation, fertilization, and is 
converted into a developmentally active, mitotically dividing embryo, arguably 
one of the most dramatic transitions in biology. This transition occurs very 
rapidly in Caenorhabditis elegans, with fertilization of a new oocyte occurring 
every 23 min and the first mitotic division occurring 45 min later. Molecular 
events regulating this transition must be very precisely timed. This chapter 
reviews our current understanding of the coordinated temporal regulation of 
different events during this transition. We divide the oocyte-to-embryo 
transition into a number of component processes, which are coordinated primarily 
through the MBK-2 kinase, whose activation is intimately tied to completion of 
meiosis, and the OMA-1/OMA-2 proteins, whose expression and functions span 
multiple processes during this transition. The oocyte-to-embryo transition 
occurs in the absence of de novo transcription, and all the factors required for 
the process, whether mRNA or protein, are already present within the oocyte. 
Therefore, all regulation of this transition is posttranscriptional. The 
combination of asymmetric partitioning of maternal factors, protein 
modification-mediated functional switching, protein degradation, and highly 
regulated translational repression ensure a smooth oocyte-to-embryo transition. 
We will highlight protein degradation and translational repression, two 
posttranscriptional processes which play particularly critical roles in this 
transition.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4015-4_12
PMID: 22872483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
