---
pmid: '29038162'
title: Systematic Analysis of Human Cells Lacking ATG8 Proteins Uncovers Roles for
  GABARAPs and the CCZ1/MON1 Regulator C18orf8/RMC1 in Macroautophagic and Selective
  Autophagic Flux.
authors:
- Vaites LP
- Paulo JA
- Huttlin EL
- Harper JW
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5730722
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00392-17
---

# Systematic Analysis of Human Cells Lacking ATG8 Proteins Uncovers Roles for GABARAPs and the CCZ1/MON1 Regulator C18orf8/RMC1 in Macroautophagic and Selective Autophagic Flux.
**Authors:** Vaites LP, Paulo JA, Huttlin EL, Harper JW
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00392-17](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00392-17)
**PMC:** [PMC5730722](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5730722/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2017 Dec 13;38(1):e00392-17. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00392-17. Print 
2018 Jan 1.

Systematic Analysis of Human Cells Lacking ATG8 Proteins Uncovers Roles for 
GABARAPs and the CCZ1/MON1 Regulator C18orf8/RMC1 in Macroautophagic and 
Selective Autophagic Flux.

Vaites LP(1), Paulo JA(1), Huttlin EL(1), Harper JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA wade_harper@hms.harvard.edu.

Selective autophagy and macroautophagy sequester specific organelles/substrates 
or bulk cytoplasm, respectively, inside autophagosomes as cargo for delivery to 
lysosomes. The mammalian ATG8 orthologues (MAP1LC3A/B/C and GABARAP/L1/L2) are 
ubiquitin (UB)-like proteins conjugated to the autophagosome membrane and are 
thought to facilitate cargo receptor recruitment, vesicle maturation, and 
lysosomal fusion. To elucidate the molecular functions of the ATG8 proteins, we 
engineered cells lacking genes for each subfamily as well as all six mammalian 
ATG8s. Loss of GABARAPs alone attenuates autophagic flux basally and in response 
to macroautophagic or selective autophagic stimuli, including parkin-dependent 
mitophagy, and cells lacking all ATG8 proteins accumulate cytoplasmic UB 
aggregates, which are resolved following ectopic expression of individual 
GABARAPs. Autophagosomes from cells lacking GABARAPs had reduced lysosomal 
content by quantitative proteomics, consistent with fusion defects, but 
accumulated regulators of late endosome (LE)/autophagosome maturation. Through 
interaction proteomics of proteins accumulating in GABARAP/L1/L2-deficient 
cells, we identified C18orf8/RMC1 as a new subunit of the CCZ1-MON1 RAB7 guanine 
exchange factor (GEF) that positively regulates RAB7 recruitment to 
LE/autophagosomes. This work defines unique roles for GABARAP and LC3 
subfamilies in macroautophagy and selective autophagy and demonstrates how 
analysis of autophagic machinery in the absence of flux can identify new 
regulatory circuits.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00392-17
PMCID: PMC5730722
PMID: 29038162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
