---
pmid: '8898232'
title: De novo DNA cytosine methyltransferase activities in mouse embryonic stem cells.
authors:
- Lei H
- Oh SP
- Okano M
- Jüttermann R
- Goss KA
- Jaenisch R
- Li E
journal: Development
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.122.10.3195
---

# De novo DNA cytosine methyltransferase activities in mouse embryonic stem cells.
**Authors:** Lei H, Oh SP, Okano M, Jüttermann R, Goss KA, Jaenisch R, Li E
**Journal:** Development (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.122.10.3195](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.122.10.3195)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1996 Oct;122(10):3195-205. doi: 10.1242/dev.122.10.3195.

De novo DNA cytosine methyltransferase activities in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Lei H(1), Oh SP, Okano M, Jüttermann R, Goss KA, Jaenisch R, Li E.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital-East, 
Charlestown 02129, USA.

It has been a controversial issue as to how many DNA cytosine methyltransferase 
mammalian cells have and whether de novo methylation and maintenance methylation 
activities are encoded by a single gene or two different genes. To address these 
questions, we have generated a null mutation of the only known mammalian DNA 
methyltransferase gene through homologous recombination in mouse embryonic stem 
cells and found that the development of the homozygous embryos is arrested prior 
to the 8-somite stage. Surprisingly, the null mutant embryonic stem cells are 
viable and contain low but stable levels of methyl cytosine and 
methyltransferase activity, suggesting the existence of a second DNA 
methyltransferase in mammalian cells. Further studies indicate that de novo 
methylation activity is not impaired by the mutation as integrated provirus DNA 
in MoMuLV-infected homozygous embryonic stem cells become methylated at a 
similar rate as in wild-type cells. Differentiation of mutant cells results in 
further reduction of methyl cytosine levels, consistent with the de novo 
methylation activity being down regulated in differentiated cells. These results 
provide the first evidence that an independently encoded DNA methyltransferase 
is present in mammalian cells which is capable of de novo methylating cellular 
and viral DNA in vivo.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.122.10.3195
PMID: 8898232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
