---
pmid: '15166316'
title: Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis
  mechanisms.
authors:
- Skop AR
- Liu H
- Yates J 3rd
- Meyer BJ
- Heald R
journal: Science
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3679889
doi: 10.1126/science.1097931
---

# Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis mechanisms.
**Authors:** Skop AR, Liu H, Yates J 3rd, Meyer BJ, Heald R
**Journal:** Science (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1097931](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1097931)
**PMC:** [PMC3679889](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3679889/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2004 Jul 2;305(5680):61-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1097931. Epub 2004
May  27.

Dissection of the mammalian midbody proteome reveals conserved cytokinesis 
mechanisms.

Skop AR(1), Liu H, Yates J 3rd, Meyer BJ, Heald R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. skop@wisc.edu

Cytokinesis is the essential process that partitions cellular contents into 
daughter cells. To identify and characterize cytokinesis proteins rapidly, we 
used a functional proteomic and comparative genomic strategy. Midbodies were 
isolated from mammalian cells, proteins were identified by multidimensional 
protein identification technology (MudPIT), and protein function was assessed in 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Of 172 homologs disrupted by RNA interference, 58% 
displayed defects in cleavage furrow formation or completion, or germline 
cytokinesis. Functional dissection of the midbody demonstrated the importance of 
lipid rafts and vesicle trafficking pathways in cytokinesis, and the utilization 
of common membrane cytoskeletal components in diverse morphogenetic events in 
the cleavage furrow, the germline, and neurons.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1097931
PMCID: PMC3679889
PMID: 15166316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
