---
pmid: '16544096'
title: Activation of p53 signaling initiates apoptotic death in a cellular model of
  Parkinson's disease.
authors:
- Nair VD
journal: Apoptosis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s10495-006-6316-3
---

# Activation of p53 signaling initiates apoptotic death in a cellular model of Parkinson's disease.
**Authors:** Nair VD
**Journal:** Apoptosis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10495-006-6316-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10495-006-6316-3)

## Abstract

1. Apoptosis. 2006 Jun;11(6):955-66. doi: 10.1007/s10495-006-6316-3.

Activation of p53 signaling initiates apoptotic death in a cellular model of 
Parkinson's disease.

Nair VD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. Venugopalan.Nair@mssm.edu

Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by oxidative stress and genetic defects have 
been implicated in the loss of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease. 
However, the key molecular events that provoke neurodegeneration still remain 
poorly understood. We recently showed that shortly after exposure to oxidative 
stress, only those cells showing phosphorylation of p53 at Ser-15 subsequently 
undergo active cell death. To investigate the role of this early p53 signaling 
response in cell death, 6-hydroxydopamine was used to induce oxidative stress in 
dopaminergic neurons generated from embryonic stem cells and PC12-D(2)R cells. 
Exposure to toxic concentrations of 6-hydroxydopamine induced phosphorylation of 
p53 at Ser-15 even before cells show mitochondrial permeabilization and 
apoptosis. We found that 6-hydroxydopamine induced phosphorylation of ataxia 
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase an event integral to p53 activation and 
caffeine (ATM kinase inhibitor) inhibited Ser-15 phosphorylation. 
Phosphorylation of Ser-15 was correlated with enhanced induction and functional 
activation of p53 manifest as transcription of the pro-apoptotic p53 target 
Puma. Moreover, inhibition of the p53 abrogated the induction of Puma and 
promotion of apoptosis due to 6-hydroxydopamine treatments. Thus, these data 
suggest that activation of p53 signaling immediately after neurotoxin exposure 
acts as an initiating factor to mediate apoptosis in dopaminergic cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s10495-006-6316-3
PMID: 16544096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
