---
pmid: '12649290'
title: The a-subunit of the V-type H+-ATPase interacts with phosphofructokinase-1
  in humans.
authors:
- Su Y
- Zhou A
- Al-Lamki RS
- Karet FE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M210077200
---

# The a-subunit of the V-type H+-ATPase interacts with phosphofructokinase-1 in humans.
**Authors:** Su Y, Zhou A, Al-Lamki RS, Karet FE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M210077200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M210077200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):20013-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M210077200. Epub
2003  Mar 20.

The a-subunit of the V-type H+-ATPase interacts with phosphofructokinase-1 in 
humans.

Su Y(1), Zhou A, Al-Lamki RS, Karet FE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge University, United Kingdom.

V-type or H+-ATPases are a family of ATP-dependent proton pumps that move 
protons across the plasma membrane at specialized sites such as kidney 
epithelial cells and osteoclasts as well as acidifying intracellular 
compartments. The 100-kDa polytopic a-subunit of this group of ATPases is 
suggested to play an important role in coupling the two functions of the pump, 
ATP hydrolysis and proton transport. In man, different a-subunit isoforms are 
encoded by four genes. ATP6V0A4 encodes a4, which is expressed apically in 
alpha-intercalated cells in both human and mouse kidney. We sought binding 
partners for the C terminus of a4 in order to address its potential role in the 
H+-ATPase complex. Random peptide phage display analysis revealed a consensus 
motif (WLELRP) with almost complete homology to part of the enzyme 
phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK-1). Activity of this enzyme is the rate-limiting step 
in glycolysis. Specificity of a4 binding to this peptide was confirmed by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Protein-protein interaction was further 
demonstrated by co-immunoprecipitation of a4 with PFK-1 from solubilized human 
kidney membrane proteins. An in vitro bead-bound PFK-1 pull-down assay showed 
that this interaction was also true for the ubiquitously expressed a1 subunit. 
Finally, PFK-1 co-immunolocalized with a4 in alpha-intercalated cells in the 
collecting ducts of human kidney. These findings indicate a direct link between 
V-type H+-ATPases and glycolysis via the C-terminal region of the a-subunit of 
the pump and suggest a novel regulatory mechanism between H+-ATPase function and 
energy supply. This interaction between the a-subunit and PFK-1 also provides 
new evidence that the C terminus of this subunit lies cytoplasmically in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M210077200
PMID: 12649290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
