---
pmid: '20876564'
title: Antagonistic roles of PP2A-Pab1 and Etd1 in the control of cytokinesis in fission
  yeast.
authors:
- Lahoz A
- Alcaide-Gavilán M
- Daga RR
- Jimenez J
journal: Genetics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2998309
doi: 10.1534/genetics.110.121368
---

# Antagonistic roles of PP2A-Pab1 and Etd1 in the control of cytokinesis in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Lahoz A, Alcaide-Gavilán M, Daga RR, Jimenez J
**Journal:** Genetics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.110.121368](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.110.121368)
**PMC:** [PMC2998309](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2998309/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2010 Dec;186(4):1261-70. doi: 10.1534/genetics.110.121368. Epub 2010
 Sep 27.

Antagonistic roles of PP2A-Pab1 and Etd1 in the control of cytokinesis in 
fission yeast.

Lahoz A(1), Alcaide-Gavilán M, Daga RR, Jimenez J.

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.

In Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Etd1 is a positive regulator of the septation 
initiation network (SIN), a conserved GTPase-regulated kinase cascade that 
triggers cytokinesis. Here we show that a mutation in the pab1 gene, which 
encodes the B-regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), 
suppresses mutations in the etd1 gene. Etd1 is required for the function of the 
GTPase Spg1, a key regulator of SIN signaling. Interestingly, the loss of Pab1 
function restored the activity of Spg1 in Etd1-deficient cells. This result 
suggests that PP2A-Pab1-mediated dephosphorylation inhibits Spg1, thus 
antagonizing Etd1 function. The loss of pab1 function also rescues the lethality 
of mutants of other genes in the SIN cascade such as mob1, sid1, and cdc11. 
Two-hybrid assays indicate that Pab1 physically interacts with Mob1, Sid1, Sid2, 
and Cdc11, suggesting that the phosphatase 2A B-subunit is a component of the 
SIN complex. Together, our results indicate that PP2A-Pab1 plays a novel role in 
cytokinesis, regulating SIN activity at different levels. Pab1 is also required 
to activate polarized cell growth. Thus, PP2A-Pab1 may be involved in 
coordinating polar growth and cytokinesis.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.110.121368
PMCID: PMC2998309
PMID: 20876564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Schizosaccharomyces pombe , Etd1 is a positive regulator of the septation initiation network (SIN), a conserved GTPase-regulated kinase cascade that triggers cytokinesis. Here we show that a mutation in the pab1 gene, which encodes the B-regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), suppresses mutations in the etd1 gene. Etd1 is required for the function of the GTPase Spg1, a key regulator of SIN signaling. Interestingly, the loss of Pab1 function restored the activity of Spg1 in Etd1-deficient cells. This result suggests that PP2A-Pab1–mediated dephosphorylation inhibits Spg1, thus antagonizing Etd1 function. The loss of pab1 function also rescues the lethality of mutants of other genes in the SIN cascade such as mob1 , sid1 , and cdc11 . Two-hybrid assays indicate that Pab1 physically interacts with Mob1, Sid1, Sid2, and Cdc11, suggesting that the phosphatase 2A B-subunit is a component of the SIN complex. Together, our results indicate that PP2A-Pab1 plays a novel role in cytokinesis, regulating SIN activity at different levels. Pab1 is also required to activate polarized cell growth. Thus, PP2A-Pab1 may be involved in coordinating polar growth and cytokinesis.

Media and general methods:

Growth conditions and strain manipulations were described previously ( M oreno et al. 1991 ). Experiments in liquid culture were carried out in minimal medium (EMM), supplemented as required, with a starting cell density of 2–4 × 10 6 cells/ml, corresponding to the mid-exponential growth phase. For regulated nmt expression, described methods were used ( M aundrell 1993 ). Conditional deficiency for etd1 was assessed by using the etd1-1 allele (37° or 6% v/v ethanol are permissive conditions), the null etd1 Δ allele (37°, permissive temperature), or the etd1 Δ nmt81x-etd1 strain at any growth temperature, where etd1 expression is regulated by thiamine under the weak repressible nmt81x promoter ( D aga et al. 2005 ). This later strain was used to produce etd1 Δ mutants with the desired genetic background, removing the nmt81x-etd1 marker by tetrad dissection.

Genetic and cytological techniques were performed according to M oreno et al . (1991) . Double mutants were constructed by tetrad dissection. Transformation was achieved by using the lithium acetate transformation protocol ( N orbury and M oreno 1997 ).
