---
pmid: '27677288'
title: Overexpression of CASS4 promotes invasion in non-small cell lung cancer by
  activating the AKT signaling pathway and inhibiting E-cadherin expression.
authors:
- Li A
- Zhang W
- Xia H
- Miao Y
- Zhou H
- Zhang X
- Dong Q
- Li Q
- Qiu X
- Wang E
journal: Tumour Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s13277-016-5411-5
---

# Overexpression of CASS4 promotes invasion in non-small cell lung cancer by activating the AKT signaling pathway and inhibiting E-cadherin expression.
**Authors:** Li A, Zhang W, Xia H, Miao Y, Zhou H, Zhang X, Dong Q, Li Q, Qiu X, Wang E
**Journal:** Tumour Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13277-016-5411-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13277-016-5411-5)

## Abstract

1. Tumour Biol. 2016 Nov;37(11):15157-15164. doi: 10.1007/s13277-016-5411-5. Epub
 2016 Sep 27.

Overexpression of CASS4 promotes invasion in non-small cell lung cancer by 
activating the AKT signaling pathway and inhibiting E-cadherin expression.

Li A(1), Zhang W(1), Xia H(1), Miao Y(2), Zhou H(3), Zhang X(3), Dong Q(3), Li 
Q(3), Qiu X(3), Wang E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic 
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang, China. 
cmumiaoyuan@163.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital and College of Basic 
Medical Sciences of China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

The role of Crk-associated substrate (CAS) family members in regulating invasion 
and metastasis has been described in several cancers. As the fourth member of 
the CAS family, CASS4 is also related with positive lymph node metastasis and 
poor prognosis in lung cancer. However, the underlying mechanisms and downstream 
effectors of CASS4 in the development and progression of non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) remain unclear. In this study, CASS4 overexpression inhibited 
E-cadherin expression and enhanced invasion in NSCLC cell line transfected with 
CASS4 plasmid, while CASS4 depletion upregulated E-cadherin expression and 
inhibited invasion in NSCLC cell line transfected with CASS4 siRNA. The effect 
of CASS4 overexpression in facilitating invasion of NSCLC cells was reversed by 
restoring E-cadherin expression, which indicates that CASS4 may promote invasion 
by inhibiting E-cadherin expression. Subsequent immunohistochemistry results 
confirmed that CASS4 overexpression correlated with loss of E-cadherin 
expression. We next investigated the phosphorylation levels of focal adhesion 
kinase (FAK), p38, extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK), and AKT after 
CASS4 plasmid or CASS4 siRNA transfection. CASS4 facilitated AKT (Ser473) 
phosphorylation. Treatment with an AKT phosphorylation inhibitor reversed the 
increased invasive capacity and downregulation of E-cadherin protein induced by 
CASS4 overexpression. Taken together, the present results indicate that CASS4 
may promote NSCLC invasion by activating the AKT signaling pathway, thereby 
inhibiting E-cadherin expression.

DOI: 10.1007/s13277-016-5411-5
PMID: 27677288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
