---
pmid: '36748257'
title: Signaling by the EPFL-ERECTA family coordinates female germline specification
  through the BZR1 family in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Cai H
- Huang Y
- Liu L
- Zhang M
- Chai M
- Xi X
- Aslam M
- Wang L
- Ma S
- Su H
- Liu K
- Tian Y
- Zhu W
- Qi J
- Dresselhaus T
- Qin Y
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC10118260
doi: 10.1093/plcell/koad032
---

# Signaling by the EPFL-ERECTA family coordinates female germline specification through the BZR1 family in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Cai H, Huang Y, Liu L, Zhang M, Chai M, Xi X, Aslam M, Wang L, Ma S, Su H, Liu K, Tian Y, Zhu W, Qi J, Dresselhaus T, Qin Y
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/plcell/koad032](https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koad032)
**PMC:** [PMC10118260](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10118260/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2023 Apr 20;35(5):1455-1473. doi: 10.1093/plcell/koad032.

Signaling by the EPFL-ERECTA family coordinates female germline specification 
through the BZR1 family in Arabidopsis.

Cai H(1), Huang Y(1), Liu L(2), Zhang M(1)(3), Chai M(1), Xi X(1), Aslam M(1), 
Wang L(4), Ma S(1), Su H(1), Liu K(1), Tian Y(1), Zhu W(1), Qi J(1), Dresselhaus 
T(2), Qin Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Haixia Applied 
Plant Systems Biology, State Key Laboratory of Ecological Pest Control for 
Fujian and Taiwan Crops, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 
350002, China.
(2)Cell Biology and Plant Biochemistry, University of Regensburg, 93053 
Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Tea Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences & 
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tea Plant Resources Innovation and 
Utilization, Dafeng Road 6, Tianhe District, Guangzhou 510640, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi Key Lab of Sugarcane Biology, College of Agriculture, 
Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China.

In most flowering plants, the female germline is initiated in the subepidermal 
L2 layer of ovule primordia forming a single megaspore mother cell (MMC). How 
signaling from the L1 (epidermal) layer could contribute to the gene regulatory 
network (GRN) restricting MMC formation to a single cell is unclear. We show 
that EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR-like (EPFL) peptide ligands are expressed in 
the L1 layer, together with their ERECTA family (ERf) receptor kinases, to 
control female germline specification in Arabidopsis thaliana. EPFL-ERf 
dependent signaling restricts multiple subepidermal cells from acquiring 
MMC-like cell identity by activating the expression of the major brassinosteroid 
(BR) receptor kinase BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 and the BR-responsive 
transcription factor BRASSINOZOLE RESISTANT 1 (BZR1). Additionally, BZR1 
coordinates female germline specification by directly activating the expression 
of a nucleolar GTP-binding protein, NUCLEOSTEMIN-LIKE 1 (NSN1), which is 
expressed in early-stage ovules excluding the MMC. Mutants defective in this GRN 
form multiple MMCs resulting in a strong reduction of seed set. In conclusion, 
we uncovered a ligand/receptor-like kinase-mediated signaling pathway acting 
upstream and coordinating BR signaling via NSN1 to restrict MMC differentiation 
to a single subepidermal cell.

© American Society of Plant Biologists 2023. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plcell/koad032
PMCID: PMC10118260
PMID: 36748257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

In most flowering plants, the female germline is initiated in the subepidermal L2 layer of ovule primordia forming a single megaspore mother cell (MMC). How signaling from the L1 (epidermal) layer could contribute to the gene regulatory network (GRN) restricting MMC formation to a single cell is unclear. We show that EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR-like (EPFL) peptide ligands are expressed in the L1 layer, together with their ERECTA family (ERf) receptor kinases, to control female germline specification in Arabidopsis thaliana . EPFL-ERf dependent signaling restricts multiple subepidermal cells from acquiring MMC-like cell identity by activating the expression of the major brassinosteroid (BR) receptor kinase BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 and the BR-responsive transcription factor BRASSINOZOLE RESISTANT 1 (BZR1). Additionally, BZR1 coordinates female germline specification by directly activating the expression of a nucleolar GTP-binding protein, NUCLEOSTEMIN-LIKE 1 (NSN1), which is expressed in early-stage ovules excluding the MMC. Mutants defective in this GRN form multiple MMCs resulting in a strong reduction of seed set. In conclusion, we uncovered a ligand/receptor-like kinase-mediated signaling pathway acting upstream and coordinating BR signaling via NSN1 to restrict MMC differentiation to a single subepidermal cell.

Introduction

Germline specification occurs during early embryo development in sexually reproducing animals. In contrast, germline cells are established from somatic cells in floral reproductive organs of adult seed plants ( Hater et al. 2020 ). Because only one cell differentiates to become a female germline cell in most ovules, differentiation of this megaspore mother cell (MMC) is critical for plant sexual reproduction. MMC specification has been shown to be regulated at different levels involving signaling by hormones, small RNA pathways, cell cycle regulation, and other factors ( Olmedo-Monfil et al. 2010 ; Schmidt et al. 2011 ; Tucker et al. 2012 ; She et al. 2013 ; Hernandez-Lagana et al. 2016 ; Cai et al. 2017 ; Li et al. 2017 ; Ferreira et al. 2018 ; Zhao et al. 2018 ).

In Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ), several epigenetic regulators involved in MMC differentiation have been revealed. The RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway component ARGONAUTE9 (AGO9) controls MMC specification through a noncell-autonomous small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing mechanism ( Olmedo-Monfil et al. 2010 ). Loss-of-function mutants of RdDM components, including AGO4 and AGO6, produce excess MMC-like cells. Additionally, some can bypass meiosis and develop into unreduced functional megaspores and embryo sacs ( Hernandez-Lagana et al. 2016 ).

The SPOROCYTELESS/NOZZLE (SPL/NZZ) transcription factor, which is inhibited by RdDM, is necessary to promote MMC formation and limits female germline cell fate to a single cell ( Mendes et al. 2020 ). Besides, the THO/TREX (transcription/export) complex inhibits MMC differentiation by affecting the biogenesis of a trans-acting siRNAs targeting AUXIN-RESPONSIVE FACTORs (tasiR-ARFs) ( Cai et al. 2017 ). tasiR-ARFs are generated in the distal nucellar epidermis and move into the subepidermal cells to repress AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR3 and thus suppress ectopic MMC fate in these cells ( Su et al. 2020 ). Another epigenetics factor, SWITCH 2/SUCROSE NONFERMENTABLE 2-Related 1, which mediates the incorporation of histone H2A.Z at the WRKY28 locus, limits multiple MMC formation by promoting the expression of nucellar-specific WRKY28 leading to suppression of MMC cell fate ( Zhao et al. 2018 ).

The INHIBITOR OF CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE/KIP-RELATED PROTEIN (KRP) genes KRP4 , KRP6 , and KRP7 play a redundant role in restricting meiotic competence in a single cell through inhibiting A-type cyclin-dependent kinase (CDKA; 1)-dependent inactivation of RETINOBLASTOMA-RELATED 1 ( RBR1 ). RBR1 represses cell proliferation of MMCs by regulating the degradation of KRPs and directly inhibiting activity of the stem cell factor WUSCHEL (WUS), thus repressing the entry of multiple cells into meiosis ( Zhao et al. 2017 ). WUS also acts downstream of SPL in MMC development. Overexpression of SPL with the promoter of SEEDSTICK , which is specifically expressed in sporophyte ovule tissue, results in multiple MMCs during early ovule development ( Mendes et al. 2020 ).

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are important hormones that regulate several processes during plant growth, development, and stress adaptation ( Mitchell et al. 1970 ; Kutschera and Wang 2012 ; Nolan et al. 2017 ), and were recently shown to regulate MMC formation ( Cai et al. 2022 ). BRs are sensed by cell surface receptor kinase complexes, including BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 1 (BRI1) and its co-receptor BRI1-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR KINASE 1 (BAK1) ( Li and Chory 1997 ; Li et al. 2002 ; Nam and Li 2002 ). Once BRI1 and BAK1 are activated ( Hothorn et al. 2011 ; He et al. 2013 ), an intracellular signaling cascade is initiated ( Kim et al. 2009 ), leading to the release of the negative regulator BRI1 KINASE INHIBITOR 1 (BKI1) from the plasma membrane localized BRI1–BAK1 complex ( Wang and Chory 2006 ) to inactivating the second negative regulator BRASSINOSTEROID INSENSITIVE 2 (BIN2) by a phosphatase, BRI1 SUPPRESSOR 1 ( Li et al. 2001 ; Yan et al. 2009 ). Inactivation of BIN2 can significantly induce the accumulation of nonphosphorylated forms of the two transcription factors BRI1 EMS SUPPRESSOR 1 (BES1) and BRASSINAZOLE RESISTANT 1 (BZR1) in the nucleus ( Wang et al. 2002 ; Yin et al. 2002 ). Activated BES1 and BZR1 thereafter mediate expression of numerous downstream responsive genes by directly binding to the promoter of target genes or by interacting with other types of transcription factors ( Sun et al. 2010 ).

In a recent study, we showed that a BR gradient is established in the distal nucellus of ovule primordia with a maximum in epidermal L1 layer cells. This BR-generated microenvironment is required to restrict female germline cell fate to a single L2 layer nucellus cell by activating the BRI1–BZR1–WRKY23 pathway ( Cai et al. 2022 ). Whether BZR1 family members could be activated by BR-independent signaling and could trigger other downstream components in MMC specification is not known.

The ERECTA family (ERf) signaling pathway was initially linked to the growth and development of plant organs via cell proliferation ( Shpak et al. 2004 ). In Arabidopsis, ERf consists of three genes: ERECTA ( ER ), ERECTA-LIKE1 ( ERL1 ), and ERL2 . ERf plays a redundant role in shoot apical meristem regulation, stomatal patterning, inflorescence architecture, and ovule development ( Shpak et al. 2004 ). Ligands for ERf receptors belong to the evolutionarily conserved EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR (EPF)/EPF-like (EPFL)-family of cysteine-rich secreted peptides with 11 members in Arabidopsis. Some EPF/EPFL peptides act antagonistically in stomata development by competing for interaction with receptor complexes and consequently trigger different signaling readouts in the stomata cell lineage ( Torii 2012 ). Moreover, while EPFL1, EPFL2, EPFL4, and EPFL6 function redundantly in the shoot apical meristem ( Kosentka et al. 2019 ), EPFL4 and EPFL6 stimulate aboveground organ elongation ( Uchida et al. 2012 ; Kosentka et al. 2019 ). Our recent study revealed that Arabidopsis ERf is enriched in epidermal nucellus cells of ovule primordia and loss-of-function of ERf induced supernumerary MMC-like cell formation ( Hou et al. 2021 ). This observation suggested the involvement of ERf in MMC differentiation. However, ligands for ERf receptors during ovule development have not yet been identified and it was unclear how activated ERf complexes trigger downstream gene expression to restrict MMC formation.

We reported previously that quintuple mutants of the BZR1 transcription factor family (named qui-1 ) produced multiple MMCs in about 70% of ovules. This number exceeded by far the 20% multiple MMCs in BR receptor mutant ovules and indicated that other ligand–receptor complexes function upstream of the BZR1 family. Here, we reveal that EPFL-ERf ligand–receptor pairs act upstream of the BZR1 family and coordinate regulation of female germline specification by activating a nucleolar GTP-binding protein, NUCLEOSTEMIN-LIKE 1 (NSN1). In summary, this study elucidated a gene regulatory network that provides new insights for understanding how two different signaling pathways are interconnected to control female germline specification in concert.

Discussion

The differentiation of a single L2-layer nucellus cells at the distal part of ovule primordia leading to the formation of the MMC as the initial cell of the female germline appears to be highly complex and tightly regulated by multiple interacting pathways. Usually, the centermost cell among the group of subepidermal nucellus cells will acquire MMC identity ( Bower and Schnittger 2021 ; Hernandez-Lagana et al. 2021 ). The key events in MMC formation include female germline precursor cell selection, germline precursor cell expansion, germline commitment, and germline transition ( Pinto et al. 2019 ). This is regulated by hormone-signaling pathways (especially by auxin and BR), the epigenetic RdDM pathway, cell cycle factors, and others ( Bower and Schnittger 2021 ).

The ERf-signaling pathway first appeared in early terrestrial plants that evolved many innovations required to survive, e.g. at dryer environments ( Shpak 2013 ). Each plant species usually contains only two or three ERf receptors, while its postulated EPF/EPFL peptide ligand family is relatively large, with 10 or more genes ( Shpak 2013 ). Individual EPF/EPFLs are expressed in a unique spatio-temporal pattern and usually control a specific developmental process. EPF1, e.g. regulates stomata development in rice ( Oryza sativa ) ( Bessho-Uehara et al. 2016 ). There are 11 EPF/EPFLs in Arabidopsis ( Shimada et al. 2011 ). Mutant analyses showed that four genes, EPFL1 , EPFL2 , EPFL4 , and EPFL6 , are essential for the establishment of the shoot apical meristem ( Kosentka et al. 2019 ). Here, we reported that the epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 quadruple mutant also exhibits a multiple-MMC phenotype suggesting that these genes function redundantly in MMC specification. EPFL1 and EPFL2 as well as EPFL4 and EPFL6 belong to two closely related clades. EPFL4 and EPFL6 are verified ERf ligands as they bind directly to ERfs. EPFL2 has been shown to bind to ERfs to regulate leaf margin morphogenesis ( Takata et al. 2013 ).

Because all four EPFL genes have the potential to suppress stomata development when expressed in the epidermal tissue layer, they are considered as agonists of ERf receptors ( Abrash et al. 2011 ). It has been reported that in the absence of ER and ERL1, ERL2 is haplo-insufficient for female fertility, whereas ERL1 is haplo-sufficient in the absence of ER and ERL2 ( Pillitteri et al. 2007 ). This appears to occur also in MMC development and specification. In this study, double mutants of ER family members and er erl1+ erl2 showed only one MMC, while about 22% er erl1 erl2+ ovules and about 40% er erl1 erl2 ovules displayed supernumerary enlarged MMC-like cells. Taken together, our data suggest that the expression of EPFLs and ERfs overlap in sporophytic cells in ovule primordia and they act in concert to control MMC differentiation.

Moreover, about 87% of epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 ovules generate enlarged MMC-like cells, while only about 40% of er erl1 erl2 ovules contained enlarged MMC-like cells, suggesting that other receptors that work together with ERfs in higher order complexes in MMC specialization. A previous study indicated that the ERf and BRI1-signaling pathways coordinately regulate inflorescence architecture ( Cai et al. 2021a ). In this study, we found that bri1-119 and er-105 single mutant ovules differentiated only a single MMC; however, the er-105 bri-119 double mutant exhibited multiple MMCs, suggesting that ERf and BRI1 signaling also act together during MMC differentiation. Since the differentiated MMC is the first female germline cell in plants, plants evolved multiple ways to jointly ensure the accuracy of MMC specialization and thus reproductive success. It will now be important to elucidate higher-order receptor complexes or other factors involving in MMC specification. In addition to regulating MMC development, EPFL1/2/4/6 and ERf may also function in other stages of female gametophyte development, as the epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 and er erl1 erl2 mutants are completely sterile. In line with this finding, it was recently reported that EPFL1/2/4/6 and ERf play critical roles in regulating integument development in Arabidopsis ( Li et al. 2022 ). The complete sterility in epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 and er erl1 erl2 mutants may be caused by defective megasporogenesis and megagametogenesis.

In another study, we demonstrated that BZR1 family transcription factors play redundant and critical roles in MMC differentiation ( Cai et al. 2022 ). The BZR1 family quintuple mutant ( qui-1 ) showed the same multiple MMC phenotypes similar to the epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 quadruple and er erl1 erl2 triple mutants, which implies that EPFL-ER and BZR1 family transcription factors may belong to the same gene regulatory network (GRN). This hypothesis was confirmed as bes1-D or bzr1-1D gain-of-function mutants could partially restore multiple MMC-like cells defects in epfl1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , in er erl1 erl2 and in er-105 bri1-119 . These findings together suggest that BZR1 family transcription factors function as downstream components of the EPFL-ER signaling complex. A recent study further indicated that BES1 family members serve also as downstream components of other non-BR-dependent pathways. It was shown that they act in the TAPETUM DETERMINANT 1 (TPD1)–EXTRA MICROSPOROCYTES1 (EMS1)–SOMATIC EMBRYOGENESIS RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASES 1 and 2 (SERK1/2) signaling pathway to regulate tapetum development ( Chen et al. 2019 ). Additional signaling pathways may also use BZR1 family transcription factors as their downstream signaling components. Our study supports the observation that BZR1 family transcription factors can be shared by at least two distinctive signaling pathways in the regulation of MMC specification ( Fig. 7 ).

BZR1 family transcription factors can thus be considered as important hubs for crosstalk between BR and other signaling pathways. Many genes have been identified as downstream genes of BZR1 family transcription factors, such as DYSFUNCTIONAL TAPETUM1 in pollen development ( Chen et al. 2019 ), PREs and DWF4 in whole plant growth ( Zhang et al. 2009 ; Chen et al. 2019 ), and WRKY23 in MMC specification ( Cai et al. 2022 ). Here, we added with NSN1 another direct downstream gene. The orthologue of NSN1 was previously reported to be expressed in pineapple ( Ananas comosus ) ovules at the MMC stage ( Zhao et al. 2021 ). NSN1 encodes a GTP-binding protein, which contains multiple functional domains. These include nuclear localization signals, a GTP-binding domain and an RNA-binding domain. The nsn1 mutant was previously reported to display disrupted leaf polarity and meristem-like outgrowths in the adaxial leaf epidermis, which were accompanied by altered expression patterns of the stem cell marker gene CLAVATA3 ( Wang et al. 2012a , b ). NSN1 was further shown to genetically interact with the homeotic genes AGAMOUS and APETALA2 to regulate floral identity and maintenance of inflorescence meristem ( Wang et al. 2012a , b ). Here, we showed that NSN1 also genetically interacts with other transcription factors like WRKY23 for MMC differentiation. It will now be important to elucidate how it coordinates with WRKY23 to suppress MMC formation in ovule primordia.

Although this study significantly advanced our knowledge about the GRN controlling and restricting the initiation of female germline development to a single subepidermal nucellus cell, it is still unclear how expression of components of BR and EPFL-ERf receptor complexes and their shared downstream transcriptional regulators are suppressed once MMC differentiation is initiated. To complete the GRN, it will be important to analyze how auxin regulated pathways, RdDM, and other pathways affect and integrate into the GRN reported here.
