---
pmid: '16097049'
title: Screening and identification of proteins interacting with nucleostemin.
authors:
- Yang HX
- Jin GL
- Meng L
- Zhang JZ
- Liu WB
- Shou CC
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4398727
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v11.i31.4812
---

# Screening and identification of proteins interacting with nucleostemin.
**Authors:** Yang HX, Jin GL, Meng L, Zhang JZ, Liu WB, Shou CC
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v11.i31.4812](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v11.i31.4812)
**PMC:** [PMC4398727](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4398727/)

## Abstract

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Aug 21;11(31):4812-4. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v11.i31.4812.

Screening and identification of proteins interacting with nucleostemin.

Yang HX(1), Jin GL, Meng L, Zhang JZ, Liu WB, Shou CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University School of 
Oncology and Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100034, China.

AIM: To identify the proteins interacting with nucleostemin (NS), thereby 
gaining an insight into the function of NS.
METHODS: Yeast two-hybrid assay was performed to screen a human placenta cDNA 
library with the full length of NS as a bait. X-Gal assay and beta-galactosidase 
filter assay were subsequently conducted to check the positive clones and the 
gene was identified by DNA sequencing. To further confirm the interaction of two 
proteins, the DNA fragment coding NS and the DNA fragment isolated from the 
positive clone were inserted into the mammalian expression vector pcDNA3 and 
pcDNA3-myc, respectively. Then, two plasmids were cotransfected into the COS-7 
cells by DEAE-dextron. The total protein from the cotransfected cells was 
extracted and coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot were performed with 
suitable antibodies sequentially.
RESULTS: Two positive clones that interacted with NS were obtained from human 
placenta cDNA library. One was an alpha isoform of human protein phosphatase 2 
regulatory subunit B (B56) (PPP2R5A) and the other was a novel gene being highly 
homologous to the gene associated with spondylo paralysis. The 
co-immunoprecipitation also showed that NS specifically interacted with PPP2R5A.
CONCLUSION: NS and PPP2R5A interact in yeast and mammalian cells, respectively, 
which is helpful for addressing the function of NS in cancer development and 
progression.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v11.i31.4812
PMCID: PMC4398727
PMID: 16097049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
