---
pmid: '12124386'
title: The role of Asp-462 in regulating Akt activity.
authors:
- Xu J
- Liu D
- Songyang Z
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203805200
---

# The role of Asp-462 in regulating Akt activity.
**Authors:** Xu J, Liu D, Songyang Z
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203805200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203805200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):35561-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203805200. Epub
2002  Jul 17.

The role of Asp-462 in regulating Akt activity.

Xu J(1), Liu D, Songyang Z.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Protein kinase Akt, an important downstream target of phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase, is one of the major survival factors in mammalian cells. It has been 
shown that phosphorylation of the C-terminal hydrophobic motif is required for 
Akt activation. The activated Akt then phosphorylates several pro-apoptotic 
proteins and prevents apoptosis mediated by caspases and the mitochondria. 
Interestingly, Akt has also been implicated to be a direct substrate of caspases 
in apoptotic cells induced by Fas (Widmann, C., Gibson, S., and Johnson, G. L. 
(1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 7141-7147) and anoikis (Bachelder, R. E., Wendt, M. 
A., Fujita, N., Tsuruo, T., and Mercurio, A. M. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 
34702-34707). In this study we showed that cytokine withdrawal resulted in Akt 
degradation by caspases as well. Furthermore, we demonstrated residue Asp-462 of 
Akt1 which is just upstream of the hydrophobic motif to be the primary cleavage 
site. The Akt1 mutant (D462N) that prevented caspase cleavage was more stable 
during factor withdrawal and enhanced cell survival. The Akt truncation mutant 
mimicking the caspase cleavage product lost its kinase activity and functioned 
as a dominant negative to promote cell death. Our results suggest that the 
balance between Akt and caspase activity controls cell survival. In particular, 
caspases are able to render Akt inactive and dominantly inhibit the Akt pathway 
by cleaving off the C-terminal hydrophobic motif. Consequently, the survival 
signal is quickly down-regulated to allow apoptosis to occur.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203805200
PMID: 12124386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
