---
pmid: '29976570'
title: Crystal structure and pH-dependent allosteric regulation of human β-ureidopropionase,
  an enzyme involved in anticancer drug metabolism.
authors:
- Maurer D
- Lohkamp B
- Krumpel M
- Widersten M
- Dobritzsch D
journal: Biochem J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BCJ20180222
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure and pH-dependent allosteric regulation of human β-ureidopropionase, an enzyme involved in anticancer drug metabolism.
**Authors:** Maurer D, Lohkamp B, Krumpel M, Widersten M, Dobritzsch D
**Journal:** Biochem J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BCJ20180222](https://doi.org/10.1042/BCJ20180222)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2018 Jul 31;475(14):2395-2416. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20180222.

Crystal structure and pH-dependent allosteric regulation of human 
β-ureidopropionase, an enzyme involved in anticancer drug metabolism.

Maurer D(1), Lohkamp B(2), Krumpel M(2), Widersten M(1), Dobritzsch D(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University, Box 576, SE-75123 Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University, Box 576, SE-75123 Uppsala, 
Sweden dobritzsch@kemi.uu.se.

β-Ureidopropionase (βUP) catalyzes the third step of the reductive pyrimidine 
catabolic pathway responsible for breakdown of uracil-, thymine- and 
pyrimidine-based antimetabolites such as 5-fluorouracil. Nitrilase-like βUPs use 
a tetrad of conserved residues (Cys233, Lys196, Glu119 and Glu207) for catalysis 
and occur in a variety of oligomeric states. Positive co-operativity toward the 
substrate N-carbamoyl-β-alanine and an oligomerization-dependent mechanism of 
substrate activation and product inhibition have been reported for the enzymes 
from some species but not others. Here, the activity of recombinant human βUP is 
shown to be similarly regulated by substrate and product, but in a pH-dependent 
manner. Existing as a homodimer at pH 9, the enzyme increasingly associates to 
form octamers and larger oligomers with decreasing pH. Only at physiological pH 
is the enzyme responsive to effector binding, with N-carbamoyl-β-alanine causing 
association to more active higher molecular mass species, and β-alanine 
dissociation to inactive dimers. The parallel between the pH and ligand-induced 
effects suggests that protonation state changes play a crucial role in the 
allosteric regulation mechanism. Disruption of dimer-dimer interfaces by 
site-directed mutagenesis generated dimeric, inactive enzyme variants. The 
crystal structure of the T299C variant refined to 2.08 Å resolution revealed 
high structural conservation between human and fruit fly βUP, and supports the 
hypothesis that enzyme activation by oligomer assembly involves ordering of loop 
regions forming the entrance to the active site at the dimer-dimer interface, 
effectively positioning the catalytically important Glu207 in the active site.

© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20180222
PMID: 29976570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
