---
pmid: '16959576'
title: Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer's
  disease-linked mutations.
authors:
- Tu H
- Nelson O
- Bezprozvanny A
- Wang Z
- Lee SF
- Hao YH
- Serneels L
- De Strooper B
- Yu G
- Bezprozvanny I
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3241869
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial Alzheimer's disease-linked mutations.
**Authors:** Tu H, Nelson O, Bezprozvanny A, Wang Z, Lee SF, Hao YH, Serneels L, De Strooper B, Yu G, Bezprozvanny I
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059)
**PMC:** [PMC3241869](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3241869/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2006 Sep 8;126(5):981-93. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059.

Presenilins form ER Ca2+ leak channels, a function disrupted by familial 
Alzheimer's disease-linked mutations.

Tu H(1), Nelson O, Bezprozvanny A, Wang Z, Lee SF, Hao YH, Serneels L, De 
Strooper B, Yu G, Bezprozvanny I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, 
TX 75390, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and irreversible neurodegenerative 
disorder. Mutations in presenilins 1 and 2 (PS1 and PS2) account for 
approximately 40% of familial AD (FAD) cases. FAD mutations and genetic 
deletions of presenilins have been associated with calcium (Ca(2+)) signaling 
abnormalities. We demonstrate that wild-type presenilins, but not PS1-M146V and 
PS2-N141I FAD mutants, can form low-conductance divalent-cation-permeable ion 
channels in planar lipid bilayers. In experiments with PS1/2 double knockout 
(DKO) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), we find that presenilins account for 
approximately 80% of passive Ca(2+) leak from the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Deficient Ca(2+) signaling in DKO MEFs can be rescued by expression of wild-type 
PS1 or PS2 but not by expression of PS1-M146V or PS2-N141I mutants. The ER 
Ca(2+) leak function of presenilins is independent of their gamma-secretase 
activity. Our data suggest a Ca(2+) signaling function for presenilins and 
provide support for the "Ca(2+) hypothesis of AD."

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.06.059
PMCID: PMC3241869
PMID: 16959576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
