---
pmid: '21248844'
title: Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution.
authors:
- Churchman LS
- Weissman JS
journal: Nature
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3880149
doi: 10.1038/nature09652
---

# Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution.
**Authors:** Churchman LS, Weissman JS
**Journal:** Nature (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature09652](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09652)
**PMC:** [PMC3880149](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3880149/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2011 Jan 20;469(7330):368-73. doi: 10.1038/nature09652.

Nascent transcript sequencing visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution.

Churchman LS(1), Weissman JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;12(3):138-9. doi: 10.1038/nrm3066.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2011 Mar;12(3):152. doi: 10.1038/nrg2959.

Recent studies of transcription have revealed a level of complexity not 
previously appreciated even a few years ago, both in the intricate use of 
post-initiation control and the mass production of rapidly degraded transcripts. 
Dissection of these pathways requires strategies for precisely following 
transcripts as they are being produced. Here we present an approach (native 
elongating transcript sequencing, NET-seq), based on deep sequencing of 3' ends 
of nascent transcripts associated with RNA polymerase, to monitor transcription 
at nucleotide resolution. Application of NET-seq in Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
reveals that although promoters are generally capable of divergent 
transcription, the Rpd3S deacetylation complex enforces strong directionality to 
most promoters by suppressing antisense transcript initiation. Our studies also 
reveal pervasive polymerase pausing and backtracking throughout the body of 
transcripts. Average pause density shows prominent peaks at each of the first 
four nucleosomes, with the peak location occurring in good agreement with in 
vitro biophysical measurements. Thus, nucleosome-induced pausing represents a 
major barrier to transcriptional elongation in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09652
PMCID: PMC3880149
PMID: 21248844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
