---
pmid: '12718880'
title: Y14 and hUpf3b form an NMD-activating complex.
authors:
- Gehring NH
- Neu-Yilik G
- Schell T
- Hentze MW
- Kulozik AE
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00142-4
---

# Y14 and hUpf3b form an NMD-activating complex.
**Authors:** Gehring NH, Neu-Yilik G, Schell T, Hentze MW, Kulozik AE
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00142-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00142-4)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Apr;11(4):939-49. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00142-4.

Y14 and hUpf3b form an NMD-activating complex.

Gehring NH(1), Neu-Yilik G, Schell T, Hentze MW, Kulozik AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University of 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Messenger RNAs with premature translation termination codons (PTCs) are degraded 
by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). In mammals, PTCs are discriminated from 
physiological stop codons by a process thought to involve the splicing-dependent 
deposition of an exon junction complex (EJC), EJC-mediated recruitment of Upf3, 
and Upf2 binding to the N terminus of Upf3. Here, we identify a conserved domain 
of hUpf3b that mediates an interaction with the EJC protein Y14. Tethered 
function analysis shows that the Y14/hUpf3b interaction is essential for NMD, 
while surprisingly the interaction between hUpf3b and hUpf2 is not. Nonetheless, 
hUpf2 is necessary for NMD mediated by tethered Y14. RNAi-induced knockdown and 
Y14 repletion of siRNA-treated cells implicates Y14 in the degradation of 
beta-globin NS39 mRNA and demonstrates that Y14 is required for NMD induced by 
tethered hUpf3b. These results uncover a direct role of Y14 in NMD and suggest 
an unexpected hierarchy in the assembly of NMD complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00142-4
PMID: 12718880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
