---
pmid: '17631878'
title: Epidermal hyperplasia and expansion of the interfollicular stem cell compartment
  in mutant mice with a C-terminal truncation of Patched1.
authors:
- Nieuwenhuis E
- Barnfield PC
- Makino S
- Hui CC
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.06.016
---

# Epidermal hyperplasia and expansion of the interfollicular stem cell compartment in mutant mice with a C-terminal truncation of Patched1.
**Authors:** Nieuwenhuis E, Barnfield PC, Makino S, Hui CC
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.06.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.06.016)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):547-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.06.016. Epub
2007  Jun 26.

Epidermal hyperplasia and expansion of the interfollicular stem cell compartment 
in mutant mice with a C-terminal truncation of Patched1.

Nieuwenhuis E(1), Barnfield PC, Makino S, Hui CC.

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto Medical Discovery Towers, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G1L7.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is conserved from flies to humans and is indispensable 
in embryogenesis and adulthood. Patched (Ptc) encodes a receptor for Hh ligands 
and functions as a tumor suppressor. PTCH1 mutations in humans are found in 
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and irradiated Ptc1(+/-) mice recapitulate this 
phenotype. However, due to embryonic lethality associated with the Ptc1 null 
mutation, its normal function in embryonic and adult skin remains unknown. Here 
we describe the epidermal phenotypes of a spontaneous and viable allele of Ptc1, 
Ptc1(mes), in which the C-terminal domain (CTD) is truncated. Ptc1(mes/mes) 
embryos display normal epidermal and hair follicle development. Postnatal 
Ptc1(mes/mes) skin displays severe basal cell layer hyperplasia and increased 
proliferation, while stratification of the suprabasal layers is mostly normal. 
Interestingly, truncation of the Ptc1 CTD did not result in skin tumors. 
However, long term labeling studies revealed a greater than three-fold increase 
in label-retaining cells in the interfollicular epidermis of Ptc1(mes/mes) 
adults, indicating possible expansion of the epidermal stem cell compartment. 
Increased expression of regulators of epidermal homeostasis, c-Myc and p63, was 
also observed in Ptc1(mes/mes) adult skin. These results suggest that the CTD of 
Ptc1 is involved in regulating epidermal homeostasis in mature skin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.06.016
PMID: 17631878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
