---
pmid: '10318794'
title: Transmembrane topology of human glucose 6-phosphate transporter.
authors:
- Pan CJ
- Lin B
- Chou JY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.13865
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Transmembrane topology of human glucose 6-phosphate transporter.
**Authors:** Pan CJ, Lin B, Chou JY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.20.13865](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.20.13865)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):13865-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.13865.

Transmembrane topology of human glucose 6-phosphate transporter.

Pan CJ(1), Lin B, Chou JY.

Author information:
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892, USA.

Glycogen storage disease type 1b is caused by a deficiency in a glucose 
6-phosphate transporter (G6PT) that translocates glucose 6-phosphate from the 
cytoplasm to the endoplasmic reticulum lumen where the active site of glucose 
6-phosphatase is situated. Using amino- and carboxyl-terminal tagged G6PT, we 
demonstrate that proteolytic digestion of intact microsomes resulted in the 
cleavage of both tags, indicating that both termini of G6PT face the cytoplasm. 
This is consistent with ten and twelve transmembrane domain models for G6PT 
predicted by hydropathy analyses. A region of G6PT corresponding to amino acid 
residues 50-71, which constitute a transmembrane segment in the twelve-domain 
model, are situated in a 51-residue luminal loop in the ten-domain model. To 
determine which of these two models is correct, we generated two G6PT mutants, 
T53N and S55N, that created a potential Asn-linked glycosylation site at 
residues 53-55 (N53SS) or 55-57 (N55QS), respectively. N53SS or N55QS would be 
glycosylated only if it is situated in a luminal loop larger than 33 residues as 
predicted by the ten-domain model. Whereas wild-type G6PT is not a glycoprotein, 
both T53N and S55N mutants are glycosylated, strongly supporting the ten-helical 
model for G6PT.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.20.13865
PMID: 10318794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
