---
pmid: '14663827'
title: Role of Tea1p, Tea3p and Pom1p in the determination of cell ends in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Niccoli T
- Arellano M
- Nurse P
journal: Yeast
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/yea.1054
---

# Role of Tea1p, Tea3p and Pom1p in the determination of cell ends in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Niccoli T, Arellano M, Nurse P
**Journal:** Yeast (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.1054](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.1054)

## Abstract

1. Yeast. 2003 Dec;20(16):1349-58. doi: 10.1002/yea.1054.

Role of Tea1p, Tea3p and Pom1p in the determination of cell ends in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Niccoli T(1), Arellano M, Nurse P.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Cell Cycle Laboratory, 44 
Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

Schizosaccharomyces pombe cells are rod-shaped and grow along a single axis from 
their two ends. Microtubules extend from the cell centre terminating at the cell 
ends. The ERM(ezrin/radixin/moesin)-like proteins Tea1p and Tea3p, and the 
Dyrk-like kinase Pom1p are cell end markers involved in the regulation of growth 
and microtubular dynamics at the cell ends. We have analysed the relative 
contribution of these three proteins to the determination of cell ends as sites 
both for cell growth and for microtubular termination. Pom1Delta, in combination 
with Tea1Delta or Tea3Delta, has the greatest difficulty in relocalizing actin 
to the cell ends following actin depolymerization and generates the most 
defective growth pattern. Tea1Delta, in combination with Pom1Delta or Tea3Delta, 
displays the highest number of microtubules bending round the cell ends. 
Tea1DeltaPom1Delta, which has the most defective growth pattern and 
microtubules, also displays the highest number of branched cells. We show that 
Tea1p, Tea3p and Pom1p all contribute, to different extents, to the 
determination of cell ends, as sites for both cell growth and microtubular 
termination. We also show that the fission yeast cell relies on both the 
positioning of landmarks and a properly organized microtubule cytoskeleton to 
direct cell growth.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1054
PMID: 14663827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
