---
pmid: '11457850'
title: NMR spectroscopic analysis of the first two steps of the pentose-phosphate
  pathway elucidates the role of 6-phosphogluconolactonase.
authors:
- Miclet E
- Stoven V
- Michels PA
- Opperdoes FR
- Lallemand JY
- Duffieux F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105174200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# NMR spectroscopic analysis of the first two steps of the pentose-phosphate pathway elucidates the role of 6-phosphogluconolactonase.
**Authors:** Miclet E, Stoven V, Michels PA, Opperdoes FR, Lallemand JY, Duffieux F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105174200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105174200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 14;276(37):34840-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105174200. Epub
2001  Jul 16.

NMR spectroscopic analysis of the first two steps of the pentose-phosphate 
pathway elucidates the role of 6-phosphogluconolactonase.

Miclet E(1), Stoven V, Michels PA, Opperdoes FR, Lallemand JY, Duffieux F.

Author information:
(1)Département de Chimie, Synthèse Organique Groupe de RMN, Ecole polytechnique 
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France.

The pentose-phosphate pathway provides reductive power and nucleotide precursors 
to the cell through oxidative and nonoxidative branches, respectively. 
6-Phosphogluconolactonase is the second enzyme of the oxidative branch and 
catalyzes the hydrolysis of 6-phosphogluconolactones, the products of glucose 
6-phosphate oxidation by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The role of 
6-phosphogluconolactonase was still questionable, because 
6-phosphogluconolactones were believed to undergo rapid spontaneous hydrolysis. 
In this work, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy was used to characterize 
the chemical scheme and kinetic features of the oxidative branch. We show that 
6-phosphogluconolactones have in fact a nonnegligible lifetime and are highly 
electrophilic compounds. The delta form (1-5) of the lactone is the only product 
of glucose 6-phosphate oxidation. Subsequently, it leads to the gamma form (1-4) 
by intramolecular rearrangement. However, only the delta form undergoes 
spontaneous hydrolysis, the gamma form being a "dead end" of this branch. The 
delta form is the only substrate for 6-phosphogluconolactonase. Therefore, 
6-phosphogluconolactonase activity accelerates hydrolysis of the delta form, 
thus preventing its conversion into the gamma form. Furthermore, 
6-phosphogluconolactonase guards against the accumulation of 
delta-6-phosphogluconolactone, which may be toxic through its reaction with 
endogenous cellular nucleophiles. Finally, the difference between activity of 
human, Trypanosoma brucei, and Plasmodium falciparum 6-phosphogluconolactonases 
is reported and discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105174200
PMID: 11457850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
