---
pmid: '18395747'
title: Structural basis for autoinhibition of ESCRT-III CHMP3.
authors:
- Lata S
- Roessle M
- Solomons J
- Jamin M
- Gottlinger HG
- Svergun DI
- Weissenhorn W
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2756293
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030
---

# Structural basis for autoinhibition of ESCRT-III CHMP3.
**Authors:** Lata S, Roessle M, Solomons J, Jamin M, Gottlinger HG, Svergun DI, Weissenhorn W
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030)
**PMC:** [PMC2756293](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2756293/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2008 May 9;378(4):818-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030. Epub
2008  Mar 20.

Structural basis for autoinhibition of ESCRT-III CHMP3.

Lata S(1), Roessle M, Solomons J, Jamin M, Gottlinger HG, Svergun DI, 
Weissenhorn W.

Author information:
(1)Unit for Virus Host Cell Interaction, UMR 5233 UJF-EMBL-CNRS, 6 rue Jules 
Horowitz, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

Endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, ESCRT-II, 
and ESCRT-III) are selectively recruited to cellular membranes to exert their 
function in diverse processes, such as multivesicular body biogenesis, enveloped 
virus budding, and cytokinesis. ESCRT-III is composed of members of the charged 
multivesicular body protein (CHMP) family--cytosolic proteins that are targeted 
to membranes via yet unknown signals. Membrane targeting is thought to result in 
a membrane-associated protein network that presumably acts at a late budding 
step. Here we provide structural evidence based on small-angle X-ray scattering 
data that ESCRT-III CHMP3 can adopt two conformations in solution: a closed 
globular form that most likely represents the cytosolic conformation and an open 
extended conformation that might represent the activated form of CHMP3. Both the 
closed and open conformations of CHMP3 interact with AMSH with high affinity. 
Although the C-terminal region of CHMP3 is required for AMSH interaction, a 
peptide thereof reveals only weak binding to AMSH, suggesting that other regions 
of CHMP3 contribute to the high-affinity interaction. Thus, AMSH, including its 
MIT (microtubule interacting and transport) domain, interacts with ESCRT-III 
CHMP3 differently from reported Vps4 MIT domain-CHMP protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.03.030
PMCID: PMC2756293
PMID: 18395747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
