---
pmid: '11313340'
title: 'cAmp regulation of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT, EC 2.3.1.87):
  a new cell line (1E7) provides evidence of intracellular AANAT activation.'
authors:
- Coon SL
- Weller JL
- Korf HW
- Namboodiri MA
- Rollag M
- Klein DC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011298200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# cAmp regulation of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT, EC 2.3.1.87): a new cell line (1E7) provides evidence of intracellular AANAT activation.
**Authors:** Coon SL, Weller JL, Korf HW, Namboodiri MA, Rollag M, Klein DC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M011298200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M011298200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):24097-107. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M011298200. Epub 
2001 Apr 19.

cAmp regulation of arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT, EC 2.3.1.87): a 
new cell line (1E7) provides evidence of intracellular AANAT activation.

Coon SL(1), Weller JL, Korf HW, Namboodiri MA, Rollag M, Klein DC.

Author information:
(1)Section on Neuroendocrinology, Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, 
NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (serotonin N-acetyltransferase, AANAT, EC ) 
is the penultimate enzyme in melatonin synthesis. As described here, a cell line 
(1E7) expressing human AANAT (hAANAT) has been developed to study the human 
enzyme. 1E7 hAANAT is detectable in immunoblots as a 23-kDa band and is 
immunocytochemically visualized in the cytoplasm. The specific concentration of 
hAANAT in homogenates is comparable to that of the night rat pineal gland. 
Kinetics of AANAT extracted from 1E7 cells are the same as those of bacterially 
expressed hAANAT; both preparations of hAANAT are equally sensitive to the 
inhibitor CoA-S-N-acetyltryptamine. Studies of cAMP regulation indicate that 
treatment with forskolin, dibutyryl cAMP, isobutylmethylxanthine, or 
isoproterenol activate cellular hAANAT within intact 1E7 cells approximately 
8-fold without markedly increasing the abundance of AANAT protein or the 
activity of AANAT in broken cell preparations; and, that forskolin, 
isobutylmethylxanthine and isoproterenol elevate cyclic AMP production. These 
observations extend our understanding of cAMP regulation of AANAT activity, 
because it is currently thought that this only involves changes in the 
steady-state levels of AANAT protein. This previously unrecognized switching 
mechanism could function physiologically to control melatonin production without 
changing AANAT protein levels.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M011298200
PMID: 11313340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
