---
pmid: '7876265'
title: Overexpression and characterization of the human peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase
  in insect cells.
authors:
- Chu R
- Varanasi U
- Chu S
- Lin Y
- Usuda N
- Rao MS
- Reddy JK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.9.4908
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Overexpression and characterization of the human peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase in insect cells.
**Authors:** Chu R, Varanasi U, Chu S, Lin Y, Usuda N, Rao MS, Reddy JK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.9.4908](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.9.4908)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4908-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.9.4908.

Overexpression and characterization of the human peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase in 
insect cells.

Chu R(1), Varanasi U, Chu S, Lin Y, Usuda N, Rao MS, Reddy JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611.

Human liver peroxisomes contain two acyl-CoA oxidases, namely, palmitoyl-CoA 
oxidase and a branched chain acyl-CoA oxidase. The palmitoyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX) 
oxidizes the CoA esters of straight chain fatty acids and prostaglandins and 
donates electrons directly to molecular oxygen, thereby producing H2O2. The 
inducibility of this H2O2-generating ACOX in rat and mouse liver by peroxisome 
proliferators and the postulated role of the resulting oxidative stress in 
hepatocarcinogenesis generated interest in characterizing the structure and 
function of human ACOX. We have constructed a full-length cDNA encoding a 
660-amino acid residue human ACOX and produced a catalytically active human ACOX 
protein at high levels in Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf9) insect cells using the 
baculovirus vector. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that the full-length 72-kDa 
polypeptide (component A) was partially processed into its constituent 51-kDa 
(component B) and 21-kDa (component C) products, respectively. Recombinant 
protein (approximately 20 mg/l x 10(9) cells) was purified to homogeneity by a 
single-step procedure on a nickel-nitrilo-triacetic acid affinity column. Using 
the purified enzyme, Km and Vmax values for palmitoyl-CoA were found to be 10 
microM and 1.4 units/mg of protein, respectively. The maximal activities for 
saturated fatty acids were observed with C12-18 substrates. The overexpressed 
human ACOX protein was identified in the cytoplasm of the insect cells by 
immunocytochemical staining. Individual expression of either the truncated ACOX 
51-kDa (component B) or the 21-kDa (component C) revealed lack of enzyme 
activity, but co-infection of the insect cells with recombinant viruses 
expressing components B and C resulted in the formation of an enzymatically 
active heterodimeric B+C complex which could subsequently be inactivated by 
dissociating with detergent.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.9.4908
PMID: 7876265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
