---
pmid: '20227041'
title: Modulation of the vitamin D3 response by cancer-associated mutant p53.
authors:
- Stambolsky P
- Tabach Y
- Fontemaggi G
- Weisz L
- Maor-Aloni R
- Siegfried Z
- Shiff I
- Kogan I
- Shay M
- Kalo E
- Blandino G
- Simon I
- Oren M
- Rotter V
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2882298
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.025
---

# Modulation of the vitamin D3 response by cancer-associated mutant p53.
**Authors:** Stambolsky P, Tabach Y, Fontemaggi G, Weisz L, Maor-Aloni R, Siegfried Z, Shiff I, Kogan I, Shay M, Kalo E, Blandino G, Simon I, Oren M, Rotter V
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.025)
**PMC:** [PMC2882298](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2882298/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2010 Mar 16;17(3):273-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.025.

Modulation of the vitamin D3 response by cancer-associated mutant p53.

Stambolsky P(1), Tabach Y, Fontemaggi G, Weisz L, Maor-Aloni R, Siegfried Z, 
Shiff I, Kogan I, Shay M, Kalo E, Blandino G, Simon I, Oren M, Rotter V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot 76100, Israel. perrystam@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 May 18;17(5):523. Sigfried, Zahava [corrected to 
Siegfried, Zehava].

The p53 gene is mutated in many human tumors. Cells of such tumors often contain 
abundant mutant p53 (mutp53) protein, which may contribute actively to tumor 
progression via a gain-of-function mechanism. We applied ChIP-on-chip analysis 
and identified the vitamin D receptor (VDR) response element as overrepresented 
in promoter sequences bound by mutp53. We report that mutp53 can interact 
functionally and physically with VDR. Mutp53 is recruited to VDR-regulated genes 
and modulates their expression, augmenting the transactivation of some genes and 
relieving the repression of others. Furthermore, mutp53 increases the nuclear 
accumulation of VDR. Importantly, mutp53 converts vitamin D into an 
antiapoptotic agent. Thus, p53 status can determine the biological impact of 
vitamin D on tumor cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.11.025
PMCID: PMC2882298
PMID: 20227041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

The p53 tumor suppressor is a major barrier against cancer progression. The p53 pathway is impaired in almost all human cancers ( Vogelstein et al., 2000 ). About 50% of human cancers carry p53 mutations ( Soussi and Wiman, 2007 ), mostly missense mutations resulting in overproduction of mutant p53 (mutp53) protein ( Weisz et al., 2007b ). This might imply a strong selection for mutp53 expression in carcinogenesis. Indeed, p53 mutations result not only in loss of tumor suppressing activities by the mutant allele, but also in trans-dominant inactivation of the remaining wtp53 ( Shaulian et al., 1992 ). Importantly, at least some cancer-associated mutp53 variants acquire oncogenic activities, defined as gain-of-function (GOF) ( Weisz et al., 2007a ). Specifically, mutp53 can enhance proliferation, survival and tumorigenicity in mice ( Bossi et al., 2006 ; Weisz et al., 2004 ). Furthermore, at least for some types of cancer, patients harboring particular missense p53 mutations in their tumors tend to be less responsive to chemotherapy ( Soussi and Beroud, 2001 ).

Mechanistically, mutp53 can exert a dominant negative effect over the p53 family members p63 and p73 and inhibit their biochemical and biological activities ( Irwin et al., 2003 ; Lang et al., 2004 ). Moreover, mutp53 can regulate specific sets of target genes independently of p63 and p73 ( Lin et al., 1995 ; Zalcenstein et al., 2003 ; Weisz et al., 2004 ; Scian et al., 2004 ). Accordingly, the transcriptional activation domain of p53 is necessary for gene regulation by mutp53 as well as for its interference with apoptosis. Most cancer-associated p53 mutations occur in the DNA binding domain and abolish the ability of the protein to bind to the specific DNA sequences recognized by wtp53. Hence, the ability of mutp53 to regulate gene expression may require interactions with other proteins that tether it to the DNA, as suggested for NF-Y ( Di Agostino et al., 2006 ) and NF-kB ( Weisz et al., 2007a ).

In this study, we employed chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with microarray analysis (ChIP-on-chip) to identify DNA regions selectively associated with mutp53.

Discussion

The present study reveals a functional and physical interaction between mutp53 and the vitamin D transcriptional regulatory pathway. Specifically, mutp53 is tethered to chromosomal regions containing VDRE elements, presumably through association with VDR, and to augment transcription from promoters containing such elements. Moreover, in cells harboring p53 mutations, mutp53 cooperates with vitamin D3 to elicit an antiapoptotic state. This surprising effect of mutp53 is likely due to its ability to modulate, qualitatively and quantitatively, the transcriptional program orchestrated by VDR, and appears to involve augmented expression of survival genes along with reduced expression of proapoptotic genes.

Vitamin D participates diverse biological processes such as calcium homeostasis, cell proliferation, cell differentiation (see ( Deeb et al., 2007 ) for review). VDR is believed to be constantly transported into the nucleus; however after activation by vitamin D3, this transport is greatly enhanced ( Yasmin et al., 2005 ). Ligand binding induces conformational changes in VDR, exposing surfaces for transcriptional coactivator binding and dimerization. The dimerization partner is usually retinoid X receptor (RXR), which is required for full transactivation by VDR. Dimerization enables high affinity interaction with the VDRE. Transcriptional coactivators, physically recruited by VDR, then initiate transcription. We show that VDR and mutp53 (and also wt p53) engage in a physical interaction, which is significantly enhanced by vitamin D3 treatment. The high endogenous levels of mutp53 in tumor cells probably enable this interaction to exert significant biological effects. Moreover, mutp53 increases the nuclear accumulation of VDR. Notably, in lung tumors, increased nuclear localization of VDR correlates with higher histological grade ( Menezes et al., 2008 ). Remarkably, some enhancement of VDR nuclear accumulation by mutp53 can be seen even in the absence of added vitamin D. Thus, the binding of mutp53 to VDR might alter the latter's conformation in a way that mimics the effect of vitamin D3.

Increased nuclear localization of VDR is probably not the sole explanation for the effect of mutp53. Based on our findings, we propose the following additional mechanisms ( Fig. 6 ). In the case of transactivation, VDR recruits mutp53 to VDREs in target genes, and mutp53 increases VDR-dependent transcription by augmenting the recruitment of additional transcriptional coactivators, such as p300 ( Fig. 6 top). Indeed, p300 binds to the p53 TAD, which is intact in all cancer-associated hotspot p53 mutants.

The mechanism behind Vitamin D3-mediated transrepression is less well characterized. A distinct negative vitamin D response element (nVDRE) was identified in the promoters of several vitamin D3-repressed genes. nVDRE binds the transcriptional activator VDIR, which in turn recruits p300 and activates transcription. VDR, activated by vitamin D3, does not directly bind the nVDRE, but instead associates with VDIR. This leads to dissociation of p300 and recruitment of HDACs to repress transcription of the target gene. In contrast to the positive effect of mutp53 on VDR-mediated transactivation, mutp53 actually reverses VDR-mediated transrepression. In fact, the majority of genes repressed by vitamin D3 in SKBR3-p53i cells were derepressed in cells expressing endogenous p53R175H ( Figure 5 red cluster). As an example, VDR binds the nVDRE-containing region of the CYP27B promoter only in the absence of mutp53 and presence of vitamin D3, and this leads to dissociation of p300 ( Fig. 3G ) and transcriptional repression ( Fig. 3F ). We therefore propose that while VDR can repress transcription by interfering with the binding and activity of positive transcription factors (TF-X, Fig. 6 bottom), such as VDIR, engagement of VDR by mutp53 relieves this interference, allows recruitment of transcriptional coactivators, and restores transcription.

Vitamin D3 can induce apoptosis either alone or in conjunction with other drugs ( Colston et al., 1992 ; Nakagawa et al., 2005 ). Moreover, vitamin D3 has been reported to possess anti-tumor activities ( Kerner et al., 1989 ). VDR knock-out mice exposed to the chemical carcinogen DMBA develop more skin tumors and lymphomas than wild type mice, and nearly all VDR knock-out mice display in-situ hyperplasia of the mammary gland ( Zinser et al., 2002a ; Zinser et al., 2002b ). The notion that vitamin D3 is capable of exerting anti-cancer effects has spurred attempts to develop vitamin D3 analogues as cancer chemotherapy agents.

However, in addition to the well documented proapoptotic effects, there are circumstances where vitamin D3 exerts antiapoptotic effects, including increased cell survival following UV trauma and protection of some cancer cell lines from killing by cytotoxic drugs. An inhibitory effect of vitamin D3 on TNFα-induced apoptosis and on TRAIL and Fas ligand-induced apoptosis, accompanied by a decrease in Bax and upregulation of Bcl2 and p21, has also been described ( Duque et al., 2004 ). However, in SKBR3 and MDA-MB-231 cells p21 and Bcl2 protein levels did not change significantly following either mutp53 knockdown or vitamin D3 treatment ( Fig. S3J ). Interestingly, VDR is upregulated in several types of cancer, including breast and ovarian carcinomas ( Friedrich et al., 1998 ; Friedrich et al., 2002 ). Moreover, elevated VDR was reported to correlate with tumor stage ( Menezes et al., 2008 ; Sahin et al., 2005 ). Thus, the VDR pathway can lead to either death or survival, depending on the cellular context.

To date, no satisfactory mechanism was proposed to account for the seemingly conflicting effects of VDR/vitamin D3. Our findings now provide a possible explanation. Perhaps the most significant finding is that mutp53 can convert vitamin D3 from a proapoptotic agent into an antiapoptotic one. In support of this notion, vitamin D3 suppresses death receptor-mediated apoptosis in OVCAR3 ovarian carcinoma cells ( Zhang et al., 2005b ), which harbor endogenous mutp53. Conceivably, some cancers might have evolved a mechanism that allows them to capitalize more efficiently on the survival route of VDR while evading its proapoptotic effects. Our data suggests that acquisition of gain-of-function p53 mutations may constitute one such mechanism. Obviously, p53 mutations alone are not sufficient to drive the conversion of the VDR pathway into an antiapoptotic one, as not all mutp53-expressing tumor-derived cell lines are equally protected by vitamin D3. Thus, additional alterations most likely cooperate with mutp53 to orchestrate the antiapoptotic response to vitamin D3. Identification of such cooperating factors remains an important challenge.

Vitamin D and its derivatives are being extensively explored as cancer-preventive and even cancer-therapeutic agents. Our findings call for extra caution in exploring this approach. Conversely, individualized cancer therapy might be implemented also in the context of vitamin D3 treatment, where the p53 mutation status of the tumor may serve as an important aid for outcome prediction.
