---
pmid: '27616280'
title: Interactions of surface-displayed glycolytic enzymes of Mycoplasma pneumoniae
  with components of the human extracellular matrix.
authors:
- Gründel A
- Jacobs E
- Dumke R
journal: Int J Med Microbiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.09.001
---

# Interactions of surface-displayed glycolytic enzymes of Mycoplasma pneumoniae with components of the human extracellular matrix.
**Authors:** Gründel A, Jacobs E, Dumke R
**Journal:** Int J Med Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.09.001)

## Abstract

1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2016 Dec;306(8):675-685. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.09.001.
 Epub 2016 Sep 3.

Interactions of surface-displayed glycolytic enzymes of Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
with components of the human extracellular matrix.

Gründel A(1), Jacobs E(1), Dumke R(2).

Author information:
(1)Technische Universität Dresden, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, 
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 
Dresden, Germany.
(2)Technische Universität Dresden, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, 
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 
Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: roger.dumke@tu-dresden.de.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae is a major cause of community-acquired respiratory 
infections worldwide. Due to the strongly reduced genome, the number of 
virulence factors expressed by this cell wall-less pathogen is limited. To 
further understand the processes during host colonization, we investigated the 
interactions of the previously confirmed surface-located glycolytic enzymes of 
M. pneumoniae (pyruvate dehydrogenase A-C [PdhA-C], glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase [GapA], lactate dehydrogenase [Ldh], phosphoglycerate mutase 
[Pgm], pyruvate kinase [Pyk] and transketolase [Tkt]) to the human extracellular 
matrix (ECM) proteins fibrinogen (Fn), fibronectin (Fc), lactoferrin (Lf), 
laminin (Ln) and vitronectin (Vc), respectively. Concentration-dependent 
interactions between Fn and Vc and all eight recombinant proteins derived from 
glycolytic enzymes, between Ln and PdhB-C, GapA, Ldh, Pgm, Pyk and Tkt, between 
Lf and PdhA-C, GapA and Pyk, and between Fc and PdhC and GapA were demonstrated. 
In most cases, these associations are significantly influenced by ionic forces 
and by polyclonal sera against recombinant proteins. In immunoblotting, the 
complex of human plasminogen, activator (tissue-type or urokinase plasminogen 
activator) and glycolytic enzyme was not able to degrade Fc, Lf and Ln, 
respectively. In contrast, degradation of Vc was confirmed in the presence of 
all eight enzymes tested. Our data suggest that the multifaceted associations of 
surface-localized glycolytic enzymes play a potential role in the adhesion and 
invasion processes during infection of human respiratory mucosa by M. 
pneumoniae.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.09.001
PMID: 27616280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
