---
pmid: '16479015'
title: Interferon-inducible protein IFIXalpha1 functions as a negative regulator of
  HDM2.
authors:
- Ding Y
- Lee JF
- Lu H
- Lee MH
- Yan DH
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1430239
doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.5.1979-1996.2006
---

# Interferon-inducible protein IFIXalpha1 functions as a negative regulator of HDM2.
**Authors:** Ding Y, Lee JF, Lu H, Lee MH, Yan DH
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.26.5.1979-1996.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.26.5.1979-1996.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1430239](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1430239/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Mar;26(5):1979-96. doi: 10.1128/MCB.26.5.1979-1996.2006.

Interferon-inducible protein IFIXalpha1 functions as a negative regulator of 
HDM2.

Ding Y(1), Lee JF, Lu H, Lee MH, Yan DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas, M. D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The 200-amino-acid repeat (HIN-200) gene family with the hematopoietic 
interferon (IFN)-inducible nuclear protein encodes highly homologous proteins 
involved in cell growth, differentiation, autoimmunity, and tumor suppression. 
IFIX is the newest member of the human HIN-200 family and is often downregulated 
in breast tumors and breast cancer cell lines. The expression of the longest 
isoform of IFIX gene products, IFIXalpha1, is associated with growth inhibition, 
suppression of transformation, and tumorigenesis. However, the mechanism 
underlying the tumor suppression activity of IFIXalpha1 is not well understood. 
Here, we show that IFIXalpha1 downregulates HDM2, a principal negative regulator 
of p53, at the posttranslational level. IFIXalpha1 destabilizes HDM2 protein and 
promotes its ubiquitination. The E3 ligase activity of HDM2 appears to be 
required for this IFIXalpha1 effect. Importantly, HDM2 downregulation is 
required for the IFIXalpha1-mediated increase of p53 protein levels, 
transcriptional activity, and nuclear localization, suggesting that IFIXalpha1 
positively regulates p53 by acting as a negative regulator of HDM2. We found 
that IFIXalpha1 interacts with HDM2. Interestingly, the signature motif of the 
HIN-200 gene family, i.e., the 200-amino-acid HIN domain of IFIXalpha1, is 
sufficient not only for binding HDM2 but also for downregulating it, leading to 
p53 activation. Finally, we show that IFIX mediates HDM2 downregulation in an 
IFN-inducible system. Together, these results suggest that IFIXalpha1 functions 
as a tumor suppressor by repressing HDM2 function.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.26.5.1979-1996.2006
PMCID: PMC1430239
PMID: 16479015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The 200-amino-acid repeat (HIN-200) gene family with the hematopoietic interferon (IFN)-inducible nuclear protein encodes highly homologous proteins involved in cell growth, differentiation, autoimmunity, and tumor suppression. IFIX is the newest member of the human HIN-200 family and is often downregulated in breast tumors and breast cancer cell lines. The expression of the longest isoform of IFIX gene products, IFIXα1, is associated with growth inhibition, suppression of transformation, and tumorigenesis. However, the mechanism underlying the tumor suppression activity of IFIXα1 is not well understood. Here, we show that IFIXα1 downregulates HDM2, a principal negative regulator of p53, at the posttranslational level. IFIXα1 destabilizes HDM2 protein and promotes its ubiquitination. The E3 ligase activity of HDM2 appears to be required for this IFIXα1 effect. Importantly, HDM2 downregulation is required for the IFIXα1-mediated increase of p53 protein levels, transcriptional activity, and nuclear localization, suggesting that IFIXα1 positively regulates p53 by acting as a negative regulator of HDM2. We found that IFIXα1 interacts with HDM2. Interestingly, the signature motif of the HIN-200 gene family, i.e., the 200-amino-acid HIN domain of IFIXα1, is sufficient not only for binding HDM2 but also for downregulating it, leading to p53 activation. Finally, we show that IFIX mediates HDM2 downregulation in an IFN-inducible system. Together, these results suggest that IFIXα1 functions as a tumor suppressor by repressing HDM2 function.

Discussion

In this report, we present evidence suggesting that IFIXα1 functions as a negative regulator of HDM2. Consequently, IFIXα1 positively regulates p53 by stabilizing p53, leading to an increase of p53-dependent transcription and nuclear accumulation. Importantly, these IFIXα1 effects on p53 require HDM2 downregulation, suggesting that HDM2 is the primary target of IFIXα1.

IFIXα1 interacts with HDM2 and promotes its ubiquitination and degradation (Fig. 1 , 2 , and 6 ). The mechanism by which IFIXα1 promotes HDM2 ubiquitination is not clear. HIN-200 proteins are not known to possess enzymatic activity. It has been postulated that these proteins may function as nuclear scaffolds to modulate gene transcription through interaction with other proteins ( 12 ). Therefore, it is possible that IFIXα1, when binding to HDM2, may simultaneously compromise the binding of certain HDM2 interacting proteins that negatively regulate the ubiquitination of HDM2, e.g., p14ARF ( 70 , 82 ), MDMX ( 32 , 74 ), TSG101 ( 50 ), and HAUSP ( 51 ). Thus, it is conceivable that IFIXα1 may disrupt these interactions and restore the E3 ligase activity of HDM2, resulting in an increase of ubiquitination. In addition, posttranslational modifications, such as sumoylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation, are also known to regulate the E3 ligase activity of HDM2 ( 9 , 58 ). It is possible that IFIXα1 may alter certain modifications of HDM2 and tip the balance to favoring ubiquitination. HDM2 is known to be a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein ( 68 ). Moreover, since IFIXα1 binds to HDM2 through amino acid region 150 to 230, which contains nuclear export signals/NLSs (Fig. 6G ), it is also possible that IFIXα1 may regulate HDM2 ubiquitination and degradation by altering the cellular localization of HDM2.

Emerging evidence has suggested a cross talk between the IFN signaling pathway and the p53 tumor suppressor pathway. For example, it was shown that IFN-α/β transcriptionally activates p53 ( 77 ). In contrast, certain IFN-inducible proteins were shown to regulate p53 posttranscriptionally. For instance, PKR not only activates p53 transcription ( 87 ) but also binds to the C terminus of p53 and phosphorylates serine 392 ( 14 ). In turn, PKR upregulates p53-mediated transcription ( 13 ). IFI16 binds to p53 and augments the p53-mediated transcriptional activation ( 26 , 43 ). This interaction between IFI16 and p53 may contribute to the ability of IFI16 to sensitize cells to p53-dependent apoptosis induced by γ-irradiation ( 26 ). Another example is p202a, which inhibits p53-mediated transcriptional activity by presumably being a component of the p53 protein complex through binding to p53 binding protein 1 ( 15 ). Although IFIXα1 colocalizes with p53 in the nucleus (data not shown), we have not detected a physical association between IFIXα1 and p53 despite intensive efforts to look for such interaction (data not shown). Additional experiments, such as gel filtration analysis, are needed to verify this observation. However, it remains possible that the interactions between IFIXα1 and HDM2 and between p53 and HDM2 may exist as mutually exclusive complexes. If this hypothesis is proven valid, it may suggest that, unlike that between PKR, IFI16, and p202a, the interaction between IFIXα1 and p53 may not be necessary for the IFIXα1-induced p53 stabilization and transcriptional activation. Rather, our data suggest that HDM2 but not p53 is the primary target of IFIXα1. This conclusion is supported by the observation that ectopic p53 can be stabilized and activated by IFIXα1 only in the p53 −/− MEF but not in the DKO MEF (Fig. 5A and B ).

The nuclear localization of IFIX-N is somewhat expected since a putative NLS, 134 LGPQKRKK, resides within the N-terminal region of IFIXα1 ( 18 ). However, unlike IFIXγ1, which forms nuclear specks ( 18 ), IFX-N localizes throughout the nucleus (data not shown). This result suggests that the unique C-terminal 52-amino-acid region of IFIXγ1 may be responsible for the nuclear speck localization. On the other hand, the attenuated nuclear localization of IFIX-HIN (data not shown) suggests that the N-terminal NLS is required for the exclusive nuclear localization of IFIXα1. It also suggests that other NLSs may exist to direct IFIX-HIN to the nucleus. Two highly charged regions, e.g., 259 LKRKFIKKR and 306 RRAKKIPK, reside within the HIN domain and may represent such NLSs. Alternatively, it is possible that IFIX-HIN may be shuttled into the nucleus by interacting with unknown nuclear protein.

We mapped the HDM2 binding region to the HIN domain of IFIXα1 (Fig. 6H ). Remarkably, like IFIXα1, IFIX-HIN is sufficient to downregulate HDM2 and to induce p53 and p21 CIP1 (Fig. 7C and E ). This result is consistent with our previous finding that p21 CIP1 induction was observed in cells expressing IFIXα1 and IFIXβ1 but not IFIXγ1, which lacks the HIN domain ( 18 ). Thus, the N-terminal PYD domain and the C-terminal sequence of IFIXα1 appear to be dispensable for downregulating HDM2. It is thus possible that IFIX-HIN may be sufficient to destabilize HDM2. Although experiments have been performed to test this possibility, the instability of IFIX-HIN protein (Fig. 7A ) has become a challenge in this effort. Perhaps an exclusively nucleus-localized IFIX-HIN, by tagging its own NLS or a heterologous NLS, may help to solve the stability issue. Nevertheless, given that IFIX-HIN is the signature motif of HIN-200 proteins, it is possible that other HIN-200 family proteins may possess a similar activity to destabilize HDM2.

We have previously shown that IFIXα1 induced p21 CIP1 in cells with or without wild-type p53 ( 18 ). Although we show in this study that IFIXα1 induces p21 CIP1 through p53 upregulation (Fig. 3E and F , 4C , and 7B and E ), the p53-independent mechanism remains to be elucidated. Interestingly, recent reports showed that HDM2 can interact directly with p21 CIP1 protein and promotes its degradation ( 41 , 88 ). Therefore, one possible p53-independent posttranslational mechanism underlying p21 CIP1 induction may be through HDM2 downregulation by IFIXα1.

In addition to their role in innate and adaptive immunity ( 5 ), IFNs also possess proapoptosis, antiangiogenesis, and antiproliferation activities, which have been the basis for using IFNs to treat human malignancies ( 34 , 69 ). The antitumor activity of IFN is likely attributed to the tumor suppressor functions of certain IFN-inducible proteins ( 34 , 48 ). HIN-200 genes have been implicated as tumor suppressors due to their loss or reduced expression in certain human malignancies (for recent reviews, see references 2 and 54 ). IFIXα1, a novel member of the human HIN-200 gene family, is downregulated in breast cancer, and its expression is associated with growth inhibition and tumor suppression ( 18 ). Here, we present a mechanism for the IFIXα1-mediated antitumor activity. Our data show that IFIXα1 destabilizes HDM2. IFIXα1 does so by binding to HDM2 and promoting its ubiquitination and degradation. Consequently, p53 is stabilized and the p53-responsive gene products, such as p21 CIP1 , are activated, leading to growth inhibition. Therefore, the cross talk between the IFN-IFIXα1 pathway and the HDM2-p53 pathway may contribute in part to the overall IFN-mediated antitumor activity in certain human cancers.
