---
pmid: '11726552'
title: Fanconi anemia protein, FANCA, associates with BRG1, a component of the human
  SWI/SNF complex.
authors:
- Otsuki T
- Furukawa Y
- Ikeda K
- Endo H
- Yamashita T
- Shinohara A
- Iwamatsu A
- Ozawa K
- Liu JM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.23.2651
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Fanconi anemia protein, FANCA, associates with BRG1, a component of the human SWI/SNF complex.
**Authors:** Otsuki T, Furukawa Y, Ikeda K, Endo H, Yamashita T, Shinohara A, Iwamatsu A, Ozawa K, Liu JM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/10.23.2651](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/10.23.2651)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2651-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/10.23.2651.

Fanconi anemia protein, FANCA, associates with BRG1, a component of the human 
SWI/SNF complex.

Otsuki T(1), Furukawa Y, Ikeda K, Endo H, Yamashita T, Shinohara A, Iwamatsu A, 
Ozawa K, Liu JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Yakushiji 3311-1, 
Minamikawachi, Kawachi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genetic disorder that predisposes to hematopoietic 
failure, birth defects and cancer. We identified an interaction between the FA 
protein, FANCA and brm-related gene 1 (BRG1) product. BRG1 is a subunit of the 
SWI/SNF complex, which remodels chromatin structure through a DNA-dependent 
ATPase activity. FANCA was demonstrated to associate with the endogenous SWI/SNF 
complex. We also found a significant increase in the molecular chaperone, 
glucose-regulated protein 94 (GRP94) among BRG1-associated factors isolated from 
a FANCA-mutant cell line, which was not seen in either a normal control cell 
line or the mutant line complemented by wild-type FANCA. Despite this specific 
difference, FANCA did not appear to be absolutely required for in vitro 
chromatin remodeling. Finally, we demonstrated co-localization in the nucleus 
between transfected FANCA and BRG1. The physiological action of FANCA on the 
SWI/SNF complex remains to be clarified, but our work suggests that FANCA may 
recruit the SWI/SNF complex to target genes, thereby enabling coupled nuclear 
functions such as transcription and DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/10.23.2651
PMID: 11726552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
