---
pmid: '38705506'
title: Loss of αBa-crystallin, but not αA-crystallin, increases age-related cataract
  in the zebrafish lens.
authors:
- Posner M
- Garver T
- Kaye T
- Brdicka S
- Suttle M
- Patterson B
- Farnsworth DR
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2024.109918
---

# Loss of αBa-crystallin, but not αA-crystallin, increases age-related cataract in the zebrafish lens.
**Authors:** Posner M, Garver T, Kaye T, Brdicka S, Suttle M, Patterson B, Farnsworth DR
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2024.109918](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2024.109918)

## Abstract

1. Exp Eye Res. 2024 Jul;244:109918. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2024.109918. Epub 2024
May  3.

Loss of αBa-crystallin, but not αA-crystallin, increases age-related cataract in 
the zebrafish lens.

Posner M(1), Garver T(2), Kaye T(2), Brdicka S(2), Suttle M(2), Patterson B(2), 
Farnsworth DR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Toxicology, Ashland University, Ashland, OH, USA. 
Electronic address: mposner@ashland.edu.
(2)Department of Biology and Toxicology, Ashland University, Ashland, OH, USA.
(3)The RNA Institute, University at Albany, State University of New York, 
Albany, NY, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jan 03:2024.01.03.574085. doi: 10.1101/2024.01.03.574085.

The vertebrate eye lens is an unusual organ in that most of its cells lack 
nuclei and the ability to replace aging protein. The small heat shock protein 
α-crystallins evolved to become key components of this lens, possibly because of 
their ability to prevent aggregation of aging protein that would otherwise lead 
to lens opacity. Most vertebrates express two α-crystallins, αA- and 
αB-crystallin, and mutations in each are linked to human cataract. In a mouse 
knockout model only the loss of αA-crystallin led to early-stage lens cataract. 
We have used the zebrafish as a model system to investigate the role of 
α-crystallins during lens development. Interestingly, while zebrafish express 
one lens-specific αA-crystallin gene (cryaa), they express two αB-crystallin 
genes, with one evolving lens specificity (cryaba) and the other retaining the 
broad expression of its mammalian ortholog (cryabb). In this study we used 
individual mutant zebrafish lines for all three α-crystallin genes to determine 
the impact of their loss on age-related cataract. Surprisingly, unlike mouse 
knockout models, we found that the loss of the αBa-crystallin gene cryaba led to 
an increase in lens opacity compared to cryaa null fish at 24 months of age. 
Loss of αA-crystallin did not increase the prevalence of cataract. We also used 
single cell RNA-Seq and RT-qPCR data to show a shift in the lens expression of 
zebrafish α-crystallins between 5 and 10 days post fertilization (dpf), with 5 
and 6 dpf lenses expressing cryaa almost exclusively, and expression of cryaba 
and cryabb becoming more prominent after 10 dpf. These data show that cryaa is 
the primary α-crystallin during early lens development, while the protective 
role for cryaba becomes more important during lens aging. This study is the 
first to quantify cataract prevalence in wild-type aging zebrafish, showing that 
lens opacities develop in approximately 25% of fish by 18 months of age. None of 
the three α-crystallin mutants showed a compensatory increase in the expression 
of the remaining two crystallins, or in the abundant βB1-crystallin. Overall, 
these findings indicate an ontogenetic shift in the functional importance of 
individual α-crystallins during zebrafish lens development. Our finding that the 
lens-specific zebrafish αBa-crystallin plays the leading role in preventing 
age-related cataract adds a new twist to our understanding of vertebrate lens 
evolution.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2024.109918
PMID: 38705506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.
