---
pmid: '16762366'
title: Quantitative actin folding reactions using yeast CCT purified via an internal
  tag in the CCT3/gamma subunit.
authors:
- Pappenberger G
- McCormack EA
- Willison KR
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.003
---

# Quantitative actin folding reactions using yeast CCT purified via an internal tag in the CCT3/gamma subunit.
**Authors:** Pappenberger G, McCormack EA, Willison KR
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.003)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2006 Jul 7;360(2):484-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.003. Epub
2006  May 17.

Quantitative actin folding reactions using yeast CCT purified via an internal 
tag in the CCT3/gamma subunit.

Pappenberger G(1), McCormack EA, Willison KR.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research U.K., Centre for Cell and Molecular Biology, Chester Beatty 
Laboratories, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

The eukaryotic cytosolic chaperonin CCT is an essential ATP-dependent protein 
folding machine whose action is required for folding the cytoskeletal proteins 
actin and tubulin, and a small number of other substrates, including members of 
the WD40-propellor repeat-containing protein family. An efficient purification 
protocol for CCT from Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been developed. It uses the 
calmodulin binding peptide as an affinity tag in an internal loop in the apical 
domain of the CCT3 subunit, which is predicted to be located on the outside of 
the double-ring assembly. This purified yeast CCT was used for a novel 
quantitative actin-folding assay with human beta-actin or yeast ACT1p protein 
folding intermediates, Ac(I), pre-synthesised in an Escherichia coli translation 
system. The formation of native actin follows approximately a first-order 
reaction with a rate constant of about 0.03 min(-1). Yeast CCT catalyses the 
folding of yeast ACT1p and human beta-actin with nearly identical rate constants 
and yields. The results from this controlled CCT-actin folding assay are 
consistent with a model where CCT and Ac(I) are in a binding pre-equilibrium 
with a rate-limiting binding step, followed by a faster ATP-driven processing to 
native actin. In this pure in vitro system, the human beta-actin mutants, D244S 
and G150P, show impaired folding behaviour in the manner predicted by our 
sequence-specific recognition model for CCT-actin interaction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.05.003
PMID: 16762366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
