---
pmid: '9468139'
title: Retinoblastoma protein recruits histone deacetylase to repress transcription.
authors:
- Brehm A
- Miska EA
- McCance DJ
- Reid JL
- Bannister AJ
- Kouzarides T
journal: Nature
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35404
---

# Retinoblastoma protein recruits histone deacetylase to repress transcription.
**Authors:** Brehm A, Miska EA, McCance DJ, Reid JL, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T
**Journal:** Nature (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35404](https://doi.org/10.1038/35404)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):597-601. doi: 10.1038/35404.

Retinoblastoma protein recruits histone deacetylase to repress transcription.

Brehm A(1), Miska EA, McCance DJ, Reid JL, Bannister AJ, Kouzarides T.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute and Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, 
UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1998 Feb 5;391(6667):533, 535-6. doi: 10.1038/35257.

The retinoblastoma protein (Rb) silences specific genes that are active in the S 
phase of the cell cycle and which are regulated by E2F transcription factors. Rb 
binds to the activation domain of E2F and then actively represses the promoter 
by a mechanism that is poorly understood. Here we show that Rb associates with a 
histone deacetylase, HDAC1, through the Rb 'pocket' domain. Association with the 
deacetylase is reduced by naturally occurring mutations in the pocket and by 
binding of the human papilloma virus oncoprotein E7. We find that Rb can recruit 
histone deacetylase to E2F and that Rb cooperates with HDAC1 to repress the 
E2F-regulated promoter of the gene encoding the cell-cycle protein cyclin E. 
Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by trichostatin A (TSA) inhibits 
Rb-mediated repression of a chromosomally integrated E2F-regulated promoter. Our 
results indicate that histone deacetylases are important for regulating the cell 
cycle and that active transcriptional repression by Rb may involve the 
modification of chromatin structure.

DOI: 10.1038/35404
PMID: 9468139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
