---
pmid: '10467108'
title: Direct evidence for the intracellular localization of Hsp104 in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae by immunoelectron microscopy.
authors:
- Kawai R
- Fujita K
- Iwahashi H
- Komatsu Y
journal: Cell Stress Chaperones
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC312917
doi: 10.1054/csac.1999.0076
---

# Direct evidence for the intracellular localization of Hsp104 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by immunoelectron microscopy.
**Authors:** Kawai R, Fujita K, Iwahashi H, Komatsu Y
**Journal:** Cell Stress Chaperones (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1054/csac.1999.0076](https://doi.org/10.1054/csac.1999.0076)
**PMC:** [PMC312917](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC312917/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 1999 Mar;4(1):46-53. doi: 10.1054/csac.1999.0076.

Direct evidence for the intracellular localization of Hsp104 in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae by immunoelectron microscopy.

Kawai R(1), Fujita K, Iwahashi H, Komatsu Y.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Bioscience and Human-Technology, Agency of Industrial 
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. 
rkawai@bhsun6.nibh.go.jp

To reveal the intracellular localization of Hsp104 in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae before and after heat-shock, we performed immunoelectron microscopy 
after immunogold labeling with anti-Hsp104 antibody. At normal temperature (25 
degrees C), a small amount of Hsp104 was located in the cytoplasm and nucleus. 
On exposure to mild heat-shock at 40 degrees C, protein aggregates appeared in 
the cytoplasm and nucleus, and Hsp104 increased around the aggregates with 
increasing time of the mild heat-shock treatment. Moreover, at lethal heat-shock 
temperature (51 degrees C) for 20 min after mild heat treatment at 40 degrees C, 
the intracellular localization of Hsp104 and intracellular structures were 
similar to those of the mild heat-shocked cells. However, in the lethally 
heat-shocked cells, certain intracellular structures were destroyed, and Hsp104 
was not expressed. In the hsp104 null mutant strain Deltahsp104 which was 
treated at 40 degrees C, Hsp104 was not localized around the aggregates. 
Additionally, in the Deltahsp104 strain, even mild heat-shocked cells at 37 
degrees C or 40 degrees C, showed destruction of intracellular structure 
compared to the wild-type strain. Our data suggest the following: (1) Hsp104 is 
associated closely with protein aggregates during heat-shock treatment, (2) 
Hsp104 is important for maintenance of the intracellular structure under lethal 
heat-shock conditions, (3) acquisition of thermotolerance depends on the amount 
of Hsp104 produced during mild heat-shock treatment.

Copyright 1999 Harcourt Brace & Co. Ltd.

DOI: 10.1054/csac.1999.0076
PMCID: PMC312917
PMID: 10467108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
