---
pmid: '20181956'
title: Structural basis of binding of P-body-associated proteins GW182 and ataxin-2
  by the Mlle domain of poly(A)-binding protein.
authors:
- Kozlov G
- Safaee N
- Rosenauer A
- Gehring K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2859521
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.089540
---

# Structural basis of binding of P-body-associated proteins GW182 and ataxin-2 by the Mlle domain of poly(A)-binding protein.
**Authors:** Kozlov G, Safaee N, Rosenauer A, Gehring K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.089540](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.089540)
**PMC:** [PMC2859521](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2859521/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 30;285(18):13599-606. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.089540. Epub
 2010 Feb 24.

Structural basis of binding of P-body-associated proteins GW182 and ataxin-2 by 
the Mlle domain of poly(A)-binding protein.

Kozlov G(1), Safaee N, Rosenauer A, Gehring K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Groupe de Recherche axé sur la Structure des 
Protéines, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3G1Y6, Canada.

Poly(A)-binding protein (PABPC1) is involved in multiple aspects of mRNA 
processing and translation. It is a component of RNA stress granules and binds 
the RNA-induced silencing complex to promote degradation of silenced mRNAs. 
Here, we report the crystal structures of the C-terminal Mlle (or PABC) domain 
in complex with peptides from GW182 (TNRC6C) and Ataxin-2. The structures reveal 
overlapping binding sites but with unexpected diversity in the peptide 
conformation and residues involved in binding. The mutagenesis and binding 
studies show low to submicromolar binding affinity with overlapping but distinct 
specificity determinants. These results rationalize the role of the Mlle domain 
of PABPC1 in microRNA-mediated mRNA deadenylation and suggest a more general 
function in the assembly of cytoplasmic RNA granules.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.089540
PMCID: PMC2859521
PMID: 20181956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
