---
pmid: '25843012'
title: Targeting Plant Ethylene Responses by Controlling Essential Protein-Protein
  Interactions in the Ethylene Pathway.
authors:
- Bisson MM
- Groth G
journal: Mol Plant
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.03.014
---

# Targeting Plant Ethylene Responses by Controlling Essential Protein-Protein Interactions in the Ethylene Pathway.
**Authors:** Bisson MM, Groth G
**Journal:** Mol Plant (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molp.2015.03.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2015.03.014)

## Abstract

1. Mol Plant. 2015 Aug;8(8):1165-74. doi: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.03.014. Epub 2015
Apr  3.

Targeting Plant Ethylene Responses by Controlling Essential Protein-Protein 
Interactions in the Ethylene Pathway.

Bisson MM(1), Groth G(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemical Plant Physiology, Heinrich-Heine University 
Düsseldorf, D-40204 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Biochemical Plant Physiology, Heinrich-Heine University 
Düsseldorf, D-40204 Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: georg.groth@hhu.de.

The gaseous plant hormone ethylene regulates many processes of high agronomic 
relevance throughout the life span of plants. A central element in ethylene 
signaling is the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized membrane protein ethylene 
insensitive2 (EIN2). Recent studies indicate that in response to ethylene, the 
extra-membranous C-terminal end of EIN2 is proteolytically processed and 
translocated from the ER to the nucleus. Here, we report that the conserved 
nuclear localization signal (NLS) mediating nuclear import of the EIN2 
C-terminus provides an important domain for complex formation with ethylene 
receptor ethylene response1 (ETR1). EIN2 lacking the NLS domain shows strongly 
reduced affinity for the receptor. Interaction of EIN2 and ETR1 is also blocked 
by a synthetic peptide of the NLS motif. The corresponding peptide substantially 
reduces ethylene responses in planta. Our results uncover a novel mechanism and 
type of inhibitor interfering with ethylene signal transduction and ethylene 
responses in plants. Disruption of essential protein-protein interactions in the 
ethylene signaling pathway as shown in our study for the EIN2-ETR1 complex has 
the potential to guide the development of innovative ethylene antagonists for 
modern agriculture and horticulture.

Copyright © 2015 The Author. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molp.2015.03.014
PMID: 25843012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
