---
pmid: '25766235'
title: Control of mammalian G protein signaling by N-terminal acetylation and the
  N-end rule pathway.
authors:
- Park SE
- Kim JM
- Seok OH
- Cho H
- Wadas B
- Kim SY
- Varshavsky A
- Hwang CS
journal: Science
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4748709
doi: 10.1126/science.aaa3844
---

# Control of mammalian G protein signaling by N-terminal acetylation and the N-end rule pathway.
**Authors:** Park SE, Kim JM, Seok OH, Cho H, Wadas B, Kim SY, Varshavsky A, Hwang CS
**Journal:** Science (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aaa3844](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa3844)
**PMC:** [PMC4748709](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4748709/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2015 Mar 13;347(6227):1249-1252. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa3844.

Control of mammalian G protein signaling by N-terminal acetylation and the N-end 
rule pathway.

Park SE(#)(1), Kim JM(#)(1), Seok OH(1), Cho H(1), Wadas B(2), Kim SY(3)(4), 
Varshavsky A(2), Hwang CS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 
Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, South Korea.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
(3)Medical Genomics Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon, South Korea.
(4)Department of Functional Genomics, University of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, South Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Trends Biochem Sci. 2015 Aug;40(8):422-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2015.05.003.

Rgs2, a regulator of G proteins, lowers blood pressure by decreasing signaling 
through Gαq. Human patients expressing Met-Leu-Rgs2 (ML-Rgs2) or Met-Arg-Rgs2 
(MR-Rgs2) are hypertensive relative to people expressing wild-type Met-Gln-Rgs2 
(MQ-Rgs2). We found that wild-type MQ-Rgs2 and its mutant, MR-Rgs2, were 
destroyed by the Ac/N-end rule pathway, which recognizes N(α)-terminally 
acetylated (Nt-acetylated) proteins. The shortest-lived mutant, ML-Rgs2, was 
targeted by both the Ac/N-end rule and Arg/N-end rule pathways. The latter 
pathway recognizes unacetylated N-terminal residues. Thus, the Nt-acetylated 
Ac-MX-Rgs2 (X = Arg, Gln, Leu) proteins are specific substrates of the mammalian 
Ac/N-end rule pathway. Furthermore, the Ac/N-degron of Ac-MQ-Rgs2 was 
conditional, and Teb4, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-embedded ubiquitin 
ligase, was able to regulate G protein signaling by targeting Ac-MX-Rgs2 
proteins for degradation through their N(α)-terminal acetyl group.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aaa3844
PMCID: PMC4748709
PMID: 25766235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
