---
pmid: '15240551'
title: Sox2 deficiency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the adult
  mouse brain.
authors:
- Ferri AL
- Cavallaro M
- Braida D
- Di Cristofano A
- Canta A
- Vezzani A
- Ottolenghi S
- Pandolfi PP
- Sala M
- DeBiasi S
- Nicolis SK
journal: Development
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.01204
---

# Sox2 deficiency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the adult mouse brain.
**Authors:** Ferri AL, Cavallaro M, Braida D, Di Cristofano A, Canta A, Vezzani A, Ottolenghi S, Pandolfi PP, Sala M, DeBiasi S, Nicolis SK
**Journal:** Development (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.01204](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.01204)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3805-19. doi: 10.1242/dev.01204. Epub 2004 Jul
7.

Sox2 deficiency causes neurodegeneration and impaired neurogenesis in the adult 
mouse brain.

Ferri AL(1), Cavallaro M, Braida D, Di Cristofano A, Canta A, Vezzani A, 
Ottolenghi S, Pandolfi PP, Sala M, DeBiasi S, Nicolis SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Piazza della Scienza 2, 20126 Milano, Italy.

In many species, the Sox2 transcription factor is a marker of the nervous system 
from the beginning of its development, and we have previously shown that Sox2 is 
expressed in embryonic neural stem cells. It is also expressed in, and is 
essential for, totipotent inner cell mass stem cells and other multipotent cell 
lineages, and its ablation causes early embryonic lethality. To investigate the 
role of Sox2 in the nervous system, we generated different mouse mutant alleles: 
a null allele (Sox2beta-geo 'knock-in'), and a regulatory mutant allele 
(Sox2DeltaENH), in which a neural cell-specific enhancer is deleted. Sox2 is 
expressed in embryonic early neural precursors of the ventricular zone and, in 
the adult, in ependyma (a descendant of the ventricular zone). It is also 
expressed in the vast majority of dividing precursors in the neurogenic regions, 
and in a small proportion of differentiated neurones, particularly in the 
thalamus, striatum and septum. Compound Sox2(beta-geo/DeltaENH) heterozygotes 
show important cerebral malformations, with parenchymal loss and ventricle 
enlargement, and L-dopa-rescuable circling behaviour and epilepsy. We observed 
striking abnormalities in neurones; degeneration and cytoplasmic protein 
aggregates, a feature common to diverse human neurodegenerative diseases, are 
observed in thalamus, striatum and septum. Furthermore, ependymal cells show 
ciliary loss and pathological lipid inclusions. Finally, precursor cell 
proliferation and the generation of new neurones in adult neurogenic regions are 
greatly decreased, and GFAP/nestin-positive hippocampal cells, which include the 
earliest neurogenic precursors, are strikingly diminished. These findings 
highlight a crucial and unexpected role for Sox2 in the maintenance of neurones 
in selected brain areas, and suggest a contribution of neural cell proliferative 
defects to the pathological phenotype.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.01204
PMID: 15240551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
