---
pmid: '14622290'
title: Identification and characterization of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A-2.
authors:
- Clement PM
- Henderson CA
- Jenkins ZA
- Smit-McBride Z
- Wolff EC
- Hershey JW
- Park MH
- Johansson HE
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03806.x
---

# Identification and characterization of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A-2.
**Authors:** Clement PM, Henderson CA, Jenkins ZA, Smit-McBride Z, Wolff EC, Hershey JW, Park MH, Johansson HE
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03806.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03806.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2003 Nov;270(21):4254-63. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03806.x.

Identification and characterization of eukaryotic initiation factor 5A-2.

Clement PM(1), Henderson CA, Jenkins ZA, Smit-McBride Z, Wolff EC, Hershey JW, 
Park MH, Johansson HE.

Author information:
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Dental and 
Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

The phylogenetically conserved eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A 
(eIF5A) is the only known cellular protein to contain the post-translationally 
derived amino acid hypusine [Nepsilon-(4-amino-2-hydroxybutyl)lysine]. Both 
eIF5A and its hypusine modification are essential for sustained cell 
proliferation. Normally only one eIF5A protein is expressed in human cells. 
Recently, we identified a second human EIF5A gene that would encode an isoform 
(eIF5A-2) of 84% sequence identity. Overexpression of eIF5A-2 mRNA in certain 
human cancer cells, in contrast to weak normal expression limited to human 
testis and brain, suggests EIF5A2 as a potential oncogene. However, eIF5A-2 
protein has not been described in human or mammalian cells heretofore. Here, we 
describe the identification of eIF5A-2 protein in human colorectal and ovarian 
cancer lines, SW-480 and UACC-1598, that overexpress eIF5A-2 mRNAs. Functional 
characterization of the human isoforms revealed that either human EIF5A gene can 
complement growth of a yeast strain in which the yeast EIF5A genes were 
disrupted. This indicates functional similarity of the human isoforms in yeast 
and suggests that eIF5A-2 has an important role in eukaryotic cell survival 
similar to that of the ubiquitous eIF5A-1. Detectable structural differences 
were also noted, including lack of immunological cross-reactivity, formation of 
different complexes with deoxyhypusine synthase, and Km values (1.5 +/- 0.2 vs. 
8.3 +/- 1.4 microm for eIF5A-1 and -2, respectively) as substrates for 
deoxyhypusine synthase in vitro. These physical characteristics and distinct 
amino acid sequences in the C-terminal domain together with differences in gene 
expression patterns imply differentiated, tissue-specific functions of the 
eIF5A-2 isoform in the mammalian organism and in cancer.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03806.x
PMID: 14622290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
