---
pmid: '15650327'
title: 'Site-directed mutagenesis of human brain GABA transaminase: lysine-357 is
  involved in cofactor binding at the active site.'
authors:
- Kim DW
- Yoon CS
- Eum WS
- Lee BR
- An JJ
- Lee SH
- Lee SR
- Ahn JY
- Kwon OS
- Kang TC
- Won MH
- Cho SW
- Lee KS
- Park J
- Choi SY
journal: Mol Cells
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Site-directed mutagenesis of human brain GABA transaminase: lysine-357 is involved in cofactor binding at the active site.
**Authors:** Kim DW, Yoon CS, Eum WS, Lee BR, An JJ, Lee SH, Lee SR, Ahn JY, Kwon OS, Kang TC, Won MH, Cho SW, Lee KS, Park J, Choi SY
**Journal:** Mol Cells (2004)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cells. 2004 Dec 31;18(3):314-9.

Site-directed mutagenesis of human brain GABA transaminase: lysine-357 is 
involved in cofactor binding at the active site.

Kim DW(1), Yoon CS, Eum WS, Lee BR, An JJ, Lee SH, Lee SR, Ahn JY, Kwon OS, Kang 
TC, Won MH, Cho SW, Lee KS, Park J, Choi SY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering and Research Institute for Bioscience and 
Biotechnology, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, Korea.

gamma-Aminobutyrate transaminase (GABA-T), a key enzyme of the GABA shunt, 
converts the major inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, to succinic semialdehyde. 
Although GABA-T is a pivotal factor implicated in the pathogenesis of various 
neurological disorders, its function remains to be elucidated. In an effort to 
clarify the structural and functional roles of specific lysyl residue in human 
brain GABA-T, we constructed human brain GABA-T mutants, in which the lysyl 
residue at position 357 was mutated to various amino acids including asparagine 
(K357N). The purified mutant GABA-T enzymes displayed neither catalytic activity 
nor absorption bands at 330 and 415 nm that are characteristic of 
pyridoxal-5'-phosphate (PLP) covalently linked to the protein. The wild type 
apoenzyme reconstituted with exogenous PLP had catalytic activity, while the 
mutant apoenzymes did not. These results indicate that lysine 357 is essential 
for catalytic function, and is involved in binding PLP at the active site.

PMID: 15650327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
