---
pmid: '26503781'
title: The Catalytic Activity of the Ubp3 Deubiquitinating Protease Is Required for
  Efficient Stress Granule Assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Nostramo R
- Varia SN
- Zhang B
- Emerson MM
- Herman PK
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4702605
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00609-15
---

# The Catalytic Activity of the Ubp3 Deubiquitinating Protease Is Required for Efficient Stress Granule Assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Nostramo R, Varia SN, Zhang B, Emerson MM, Herman PK
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00609-15](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00609-15)
**PMC:** [PMC4702605](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4702605/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 26;36(1):173-83. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00609-15. Print 2016
 Jan 1.

The Catalytic Activity of the Ubp3 Deubiquitinating Protease Is Required for 
Efficient Stress Granule Assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Nostramo R(1), Varia SN(1), Zhang B(1), Emerson MM(1), Herman PK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, 
USA herman.81@osu.edu.

The interior of the eukaryotic cell is a highly compartmentalized space 
containing both membrane-bound organelles and the recently identified 
nonmembranous ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules. This study examines in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae the assembly of one conserved type of the latter 
compartment, known as the stress granule. Stress granules form in response to 
particular environmental cues and have been linked to a variety of human 
diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. To further our understanding 
of these structures, a candidate genetic screen was employed to identify 
regulators of stress granule assembly in quiescent cells. These studies 
identified a ubiquitin-specific protease, Ubp3, as having an essential role in 
the assembly of these RNP granules. This function was not shared by other 
members of the Ubp protease family and required Ubp3 catalytic activity as well 
as its interaction with the cofactor Bre5. Interestingly, the loss of stress 
granules was correlated with a decrease in the long-term survival of 
stationary-phase cells. This phenotype is similar to that observed in mutants 
defective for the formation of a related RNP complex, the Processing body. 
Altogether, these observations raise the interesting possibility of a general 
role for these types of cytoplasmic RNP granules in the survival of G0-like 
resting cells.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00609-15
PMCID: PMC4702605
PMID: 26503781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
