---
pmid: '10973982'
title: HEAT repeats mediate plasma membrane localization of Tor2p in yeast.
authors:
- Kunz J
- Schneider U
- Howald I
- Schmidt A
- Hall MN
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007296200
---

# HEAT repeats mediate plasma membrane localization of Tor2p in yeast.
**Authors:** Kunz J, Schneider U, Howald I, Schmidt A, Hall MN
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M007296200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M007296200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):37011-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M007296200.

HEAT repeats mediate plasma membrane localization of Tor2p in yeast.

Kunz J(1), Schneider U, Howald I, Schmidt A, Hall MN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Biozentrum, University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The subcellular distribution of Tor1p and Tor2p, two phosphatidylinositol kinase 
homologs and targets of the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, was analyzed. We found that Tor protein is peripherally associated 
with membranes. Subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence studies showed 
that Tor1p and Tor2p associate with the plasma membrane and a second fraction 
that is distinct from Golgi, vacuoles, mitochondria, and nucleus and may 
represent vesicular structures. Pulse-chase experiments showed that association 
of Tor protein with plasma membrane and the second compartment is fast, does not 
appear to involve components of endocytic, secretory, or Golgi to vacuole 
transport pathways, and is not affected by the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin. 
Deletion analysis reveals that two domains within Tor2p independently mediate 
localization to both compartments. These domains are composed of HEAT repeats 
that are thought to act as protein-protein interaction surfaces. Our studies 
therefore place Tor proteins at the site of action of their known downstream 
effectors and suggest that they may be part of a multiprotein complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M007296200
PMID: 10973982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
