---
pmid: '11756520'
title: M5 muscarinic receptors are required for prolonged accumbal dopamine release
  after electrical stimulation of the pons in mice.
authors:
- Forster GL
- Yeomans JS
- Takeuchi J
- Blaha CD
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC6757584
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-j0001.2002
---

# M5 muscarinic receptors are required for prolonged accumbal dopamine release after electrical stimulation of the pons in mice.
**Authors:** Forster GL, Yeomans JS, Takeuchi J, Blaha CD
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-j0001.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-j0001.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6757584](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6757584/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Jan 1;22(1):RC190. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-j0001.2002.

M5 muscarinic receptors are required for prolonged accumbal dopamine release 
after electrical stimulation of the pons in mice.

Forster GL(1), Yeomans JS, Takeuchi J, Blaha CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia 2109.

Midbrain dopamine neurons are activated directly by cholinergic agonists or by 
stimulation of the cholinergic neurons in the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus 
(LDT) of the pons in rats. In urethane-anesthetized mice, electrical stimulation 
of the LDT resulted in a rapid, stimulus-time-locked increase in dopamine 
release in the nucleus accumbens (NAc), followed several minutes later by a 
prolonged increase in dopamine release. In mutant mice with truncated M5 
receptors, the prolonged phase of dopamine release was absent, but the initial, 
rapid phase of dopamine release was fully observed. We conclude that M5 
muscarinic receptors on midbrain dopamine neurons mediate a prolonged 
facilitation of dopamine release in the NAc. These results imply that M5 
muscarinic receptors play an important role in motivational behaviors driven by 
dopamine activity in the accumbens.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-01-j0001.2002
PMCID: PMC6757584
PMID: 11756520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
