---
pmid: '16007207'
title: Hepatitis C virus core variants isolated from liver tumor but not from adjacent
  non-tumor tissue interact with Smad3 and inhibit the TGF-beta pathway.
authors:
- Pavio N
- Battaglia S
- Boucreux D
- Arnulf B
- Sobesky R
- Hermine O
- Brechot C
journal: Oncogene
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208749
---

# Hepatitis C virus core variants isolated from liver tumor but not from adjacent non-tumor tissue interact with Smad3 and inhibit the TGF-beta pathway.
**Authors:** Pavio N, Battaglia S, Boucreux D, Arnulf B, Sobesky R, Hermine O, Brechot C
**Journal:** Oncogene (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1208749](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1208749)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 8;24(40):6119-32. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208749.

Hepatitis C virus core variants isolated from liver tumor but not from adjacent 
non-tumor tissue interact with Smad3 and inhibit the TGF-beta pathway.

Pavio N(1), Battaglia S, Boucreux D, Arnulf B, Sobesky R, Hermine O, Brechot C.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U370, Paris V University, Pasteur Institute, 156 rue de Vaugirard 
75730 Paris cedex 15, France. pavio@necker.fr

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major risk factor for human hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) but the mechanisms underlying HCV-induced carcinogenesis are 
still poorly understood. We have hypothesized that viral variants, selected 
during long-term infection, might contribute to cellular transformation. To 
address this issue, we have investigated the effect of natural HCV core variants 
isolated from liver tumors (T), or their non-tumor (NT) counterparts, on the 
tumor growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) pathway, a major regulator of cellular 
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. We have found a significant 
reduction in TGF-beta reporter gene activity with the expression of core 
sequences isolated from liver tumors. In contrast, moderate or no effects were 
observed with non-tumor mutants or a core reference sequence. The molecular 
mechanisms have been characterized and involved the inhibition, by tumor-derived 
cores, of the DNA-binding activity of the Smad3/4 transcription factors complex. 
This inhibition occurs through a direct interaction between the central domain 
(amino acids 59-126) of tumor-derived core and the MH1 DNA-binding domain of 
Smad3, thus preventing its binding to DNA. We have therefore identified a new 
cell-signaling pathway targeted by HCV core and inhibited by tumor-derived core 
sequences. These results suggest that during chronic infection, there is 
selection of viral variants that may promote cell transformation by providing, 
to clonally expanding cells, resistance to TGF-beta antiproliferative effects.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1208749
PMID: 16007207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
