---
pmid: '26408532'
title: Opposing Effects on Two Phases of Defense Responses from Concerted Actions
  of HEAT SHOCK COGNATE70 and BONZAI1 in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Gou M
- Zhang Z
- Zhang N
- Huang Q
- Monaghan J
- Yang H
- Shi Z
- Zipfel C
- Hua J
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC4634071
doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00970
---

# Opposing Effects on Two Phases of Defense Responses from Concerted Actions of HEAT SHOCK COGNATE70 and BONZAI1 in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Gou M, Zhang Z, Zhang N, Huang Q, Monaghan J, Yang H, Shi Z, Zipfel C, Hua J
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.15.00970](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.15.00970)
**PMC:** [PMC4634071](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4634071/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2015 Nov;169(3):2304-23. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00970. Epub 2015
Sep  25.

Opposing Effects on Two Phases of Defense Responses from Concerted Actions of 
HEAT SHOCK COGNATE70 and BONZAI1 in Arabidopsis.

Gou M(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhang N(1), Huang Q(1), Monaghan J(1), Yang H(1), Shi 
Z(1), Zipfel C(1), Hua J(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biology Section, School of Integrated Plant Science, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853 (M.G., Z.Z., N.Z., Q.H., H.Y., Z.S., 
J.H.);State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, China (Z.Z.);State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute 
of Nuclear Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China 
(N.Z.);Institute of Nuclear and Biological Technology, Xinjiang Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi 830091, China (Q.H.);The Sainsbury Laboratory, 
Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom (J.M., C.Z.); andShanghai 
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200032, China (Z.S.).
(2)Plant Biology Section, School of Integrated Plant Science, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, New York 14853 (M.G., Z.Z., N.Z., Q.H., H.Y., Z.S., 
J.H.);State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, China (Z.Z.);State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute 
of Nuclear Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310029, China 
(N.Z.);Institute of Nuclear and Biological Technology, Xinjiang Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Urumqi 830091, China (Q.H.);The Sainsbury Laboratory, 
Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom (J.M., C.Z.); andShanghai 
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200032, China (Z.S.) jh299@cornell.edu.

The plant immune system consists of multiple layers of responses targeting 
various phases of pathogen infection. Here, we provide evidence showing that two 
responses, one controlling stomatal closure and the other mediated by 
intracellular receptor proteins, can be regulated by the same proteins but in an 
antagonistic manner. The HEAT SHOCK COGNATE70 (HSC70), while previously known as 
a negative regulator of stomatal closure, is a positive regulator of immune 
responses mediated by the immune receptor protein SUPPRESSOR OF NPR1-1, 
CONSTITUTIVE1 (SNC1) as well as basal defense responses. In contrast to HSC70, a 
calcium-binding protein, BONZAI1 (BON1), promotes abscisic acid- and 
pathogen-triggered stomatal closure in addition to and independent of its 
previously known negative role in SNC1 regulation. BON1 likely regulates 
stomatal closure through activating SUPPESSOR OF THE G2 ALLELE OF SKP1 VARIANT B 
and inhibiting HSC70. New functions of BON1 and HSC70 identified in this study 
thus reveal opposite effects of each of them on immunity. The opposing roles of 
these regulators at different phases of plant immune responses exemplify the 
complexity in immunity regulation and suggest that immune receptors may guard 
positive regulators functioning at stomatal closure control.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.15.00970
PMCID: PMC4634071
PMID: 26408532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The plant immune system consists of multiple layers of responses targeting various phases of pathogen infection. Here, we provide evidence showing that two responses, one controlling stomatal closure and the other mediated by intracellular receptor proteins, can be regulated by the same proteins but in an antagonistic manner. The HEAT SHOCK COGNATE70 (HSC70), while previously known as a negative regulator of stomatal closure, is a positive regulator of immune responses mediated by the immune receptor protein SUPPRESSOR OF NPR1-1, CONSTITUTIVE1 (SNC1) as well as basal defense responses. In contrast to HSC70, a calcium-binding protein, BONZAI1 (BON1), promotes abscisic acid- and pathogen-triggered stomatal closure in addition to and independent of its previously known negative role in SNC1 regulation. BON1 likely regulates stomatal closure through activating SUPPESSOR OF THE G2 ALLELE OF SKP1 VARIANT B and inhibiting HSC70. New functions of BON1 and HSC70 identified in this study thus reveal opposite effects of each of them on immunity. The opposing roles of these regulators at different phases of plant immune responses exemplify the complexity in immunity regulation and suggest that immune receptors may guard positive regulators functioning at stomatal closure control.
