---
pmid: '21994944'
title: Sorting protein-related receptor SorLA controls regulated secretion of glial
  cell line-derived neurotrophic factor.
authors:
- Geng Z
- Xu FY
- Huang SH
- Chen ZY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3308893
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246413
---

# Sorting protein-related receptor SorLA controls regulated secretion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor.
**Authors:** Geng Z, Xu FY, Huang SH, Chen ZY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.246413](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.246413)
**PMC:** [PMC3308893](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3308893/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41871-41882. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246413.
Epub  2011 Oct 12.

Sorting protein-related receptor SorLA controls regulated secretion of glial 
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor.

Geng Z(1), Xu FY(1), Huang SH(1), Chen ZY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental 
Disorders, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental 
Disorders, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, P.R. 
China. Electronic address: zheyuchen@sdu.edu.cn.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), after secreted from cells, 
plays a critical role in central and peripheral neuron survival and function. 
The secretion of GDNF can be either constitutive or regulated by physiological 
stimuli; however, the detailed mechanism driving GDNF secretion is still 
unknown. Here, we report that sorting protein-related receptor with A-type 
repeats (SorLA), a member of the mammal Vps10p domain receptor, interacts with 
GDNF and is localized to GDNF-containing vesicles. Overexpression of SorLA 
significantly increases, and knockdown of SorLA by siRNA decreases, the 
regulated secretion of GDNF in PC12 and MN9D cells but has no effect on GDNF 
constitutive secretion. In addition, overexpression of a truncated form of SorLA 
also impairs GDNF-regulated secretion. Finally, we found that the prodomain of 
GDNF mediates the interaction of GDNF with SorLA under acidic conditions. 
Moreover, overexpression of SorLA could enhance the regulated secretion of the 
GDNF prodomain-GFP fusion protein, suggesting that the prodomain of GDNF is 
responsible for its regulated secretion. Together, these findings will advance 
our understanding of the molecular mechanism underlying GDNF-regulated 
secretion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.246413
PMCID: PMC3308893
PMID: 21994944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
