---
pmid: '17407445'
title: A structural insight into the inhibition of human and Leishmania donovani ornithine
  decarboxylases by 1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane.
authors:
- Dufe VT
- Ingner D
- Heby O
- Khomutov AR
- Persson L
- Al-Karadaghi S
journal: Biochem J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1904517
doi: 10.1042/BJ20070188
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A structural insight into the inhibition of human and Leishmania donovani ornithine decarboxylases by 1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane.
**Authors:** Dufe VT, Ingner D, Heby O, Khomutov AR, Persson L, Al-Karadaghi S
**Journal:** Biochem J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20070188](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20070188)
**PMC:** [PMC1904517](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1904517/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2007 Jul 15;405(2):261-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20070188.

A structural insight into the inhibition of human and Leishmania donovani 
ornithine decarboxylases by 1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane.

Dufe VT(1), Ingner D, Heby O, Khomutov AR, Persson L, Al-Karadaghi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics, Lund University, S-221 00 Lund, Sweden.

The critical role of polyamines in key processes such as cell growth, 
differentiation and macromolecular synthesis makes the enzymes involved in their 
synthesis potential targets in the treatment of certain types of cancer and 
parasitic diseases. Here we present a study on the inhibition of human and 
Leishmania donovani ODC (ornithine decarboxylase), the first committed enzyme in 
the polyamine biosynthesis pathway, by APA (1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane). The 
present study shows APA to be a potent inhibitor of both human and L. donovani 
ODC with a K(i) value of around 1.0 nM. We also show that L. donovani ODC binds 
the substrate, the co-enzyme pyridoxal 5'-phosphate and the irreversible 
inhibitor alpha-difluoromethylornithine (a curative agent of West African 
sleeping sickness) with less affinity than human ODC. We have also determined 
the three-dimensional structure of human ODC in complex with APA, which revealed 
the mode of the inhibitor binding to the enzyme. In contrast with earlier 
reports, the structure showed no indication of oxime formation between APA and 
PLP (pyridoxal 5'-phosphate). Homology modelling suggests a similar mode of 
binding of APA to L. donovani ODC. A comparison of the ODC-APA-PLP structure 
with earlier ODC structures also shows that the protease-sensitive loop 
(residues 158-168) undergoes a large conformational change and covers the active 
site of the protein. The understanding of the structural mode of APA binding may 
constitute the basis for the development of more specific inhibitors of L. 
donovani ODC.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20070188
PMCID: PMC1904517
PMID: 17407445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The critical role of polyamines in key processes such as cell growth, differentiation and macromolecular synthesis makes the enzymes involved in their synthesis potential targets in the treatment of certain types of cancer and parasitic diseases. Here we present a study on the inhibition of human and Leishmania donovani ODC (ornithine decarboxylase), the first committed enzyme in the polyamine biosynthesis pathway, by APA (1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane). The present study shows APA to be a potent inhibitor of both human and L. donovani ODC with a K i value of around 1.0 nM. We also show that L. donovani ODC binds the substrate, the co-enzyme pyridoxal 5′-phosphate and the irreversible inhibitor α-difluoromethylornithine (a curative agent of West African sleeping sickness) with less affinity than human ODC. We have also determined the three-dimensional structure of human ODC in complex with APA, which revealed the mode of the inhibitor binding to the enzyme. In contrast with earlier reports, the structure showed no indication of oxime formation between APA and PLP (pyridoxal 5′-phosphate). Homology modelling suggests a similar mode of binding of APA to L. donovani ODC. A comparison of the ODC–APA–PLP structure with earlier ODC structures also shows that the protease-sensitive loop (residues 158–168) undergoes a large conformational change and covers the active site of the protein. The understanding of the structural mode of APA binding may constitute the basis for the development of more specific inhibitors of L. donovani ODC.

INTRODUCTION

The first and rate-limiting step in the polyamine biosynthetic pathway is the conversion of ornithine into putrescine. This reaction is catalysed by ODC (ornithine decarboxylase), a PLP (pyridoxal 5′-phosphate, vitamin B 6 )-dependent enzyme, known to form obligate dimers in eukaryotes [ 1 ]. The critical role of polyamines in key processes such as cell growth, differentiation and macromolecular synthesis makes the enzymes involved in their synthesis potential targets in the treatment of certain types of cancer [ 2 , 3 ] and parasitic diseases [ 4 – 6 ]. Thus the irreversible ODC inhibitor, DFMO (α-difluoromethylornithine) is currently used for the treatment of patients with advanced West African sleeping sickness, caused by the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei gambiense [ 6 , 7 ]. DFMO also exhibits some activity against other parasitic protozoa, like Plasmodium falciparum , Plasmodium berghei [ 8 ] and Leishmania donovani [ 9 ]. Another compound, APA (1-amino-oxy-3-aminopropane), an isosteric analogue of putrescine, is a more potent inhibitor of ODC with inhibition constants in the nM range [ 10 , 11 ]. APA and its derivatives exert antiproliferative effects on various tumour cells and parasites [ 12 – 17 ]. Similar to other amino-oxy analogues, the inhibition of ODC by APA has been suggested to proceed through the formation of an oxime with PLP in the enzyme's active-site [ 10 , 18 , 19 ].

The X-ray structures of ODC from mouse [ 20 ], T. brucei [ 21 , 22 ] and human [ 23 ] show a dimeric enzyme in which each N-terminal domain is a TIM-like α/β-barrel and each C-terminal domain forms a β-sheet. The two active sites are found at the dimer interface, between the N-terminal domain of one monomer and the C-terminal domain of the other, with Lys 69 and Cys 360 contributing to each active site from opposite monomers [ 24 , 25 ]. The structures also identified the residues important for PLP binding and interactions with DFMO [ 21 , 26 ]. In the present study, we show the kinetic parameters of inhibition of human and L. donovani ODC by APA, as well as the crystal structure of the complex between APA and human ODC. The structure shows that APA is bound in the substrate-binding pocket in close proximity to PLP. However, no oxime formation is observed between the inhibitor and PLP. Examination of the structure of L. donovani ODC using homology modelling shows a high degree of similarity between the human and parasite enzyme active sites, which may explain the similarity in the kinetic parameters of inhibition of the two enzymes by APA.

DISCUSSION

L. donovani ODC has been cloned previously [ 39 ], and its kinetic parameters were subsequently analysed together with those of the mouse and T. brucei enzymes [ 40 , 41 ]. The K m and k cat reported here for L. donovani ODC are similar to the values reported earlier by Osterman et al. [ 40 ]. Also the K m value for the human ODC is similar to that reported for the mouse enzyme, although the k cat is somewhat lower [ 40 ]. Our results clearly confirm that L. donovani ODC has kinetic properties that are distinct from those of the human ODC. Thus the binding affinity for L -ornithine and PLP is 5- and 11-fold lower respectively for L. donovani compared with the human enzyme. In addition, the apparent dissociation constant ( K d ) for DFMO was 5-fold higher for L. donovani . Since DFMO binding mimics substrate binding to ODC, the difference in K d is in good agreement with the observed difference in affinity for L -ornithine. These results, together with the observation that L. donovani ODC was not able to form cross-species heterodimers with the T. brucei and mouse enzymes [ 40 ], indicate that L. donovani ODC has a potential of being targeted for drug development against leishmaniasis.

The present study shows that L. donovani and human ODC are strongly inhibited by APA, with K i values around 1.0 nM. Comparable results were reported for the mouse and P. falciparum ODC, which had K i values of 3.2 nM and 3 nM respectively [ 13 , 15 ]. Recent results also show that treatment with APA and its derivatives reduces the intracellular polyamine concentrations, with a concomitant antiproliferative effect in cultured cancer cells [ 15 ]. It also shows clear anti-parasitic effect in P. falciparum and L. donovani cells [ 13 , 15 , 17 ].

The first step in the reaction mechanism of ODC is expected to be the formation of a Schiff base between L -ornithine and PLP, and the loss of the bond between Lys 69 and PLP [ 42 ]. The aminooxy group of APA is unprotonated at physiological pH and is believed to form an oxime with PLP [ 18 ], which would mimic the Schiff base formed between the substrate and PLP [ 22 , 36 , 37 , 43 , 44 ]. The structure of the complex between APA and human ODC clearly shows that APA competes with L -ornithine for the substrate-binding site, although the Lys 69 -PLP Schiff base link is broken and no oxime was formed between APA and PLP. APA is also bound in a bent conformation, with its amino-oxy group pointing away from PLP. One possible explanation for the absence of the oxime formation could be the presence of cadaverine in close vicinity to the active site. Cadaverine may affect the position of PLP, which appears to be slightly different in the present complex, as compared with the mouse ODC–PLP complex. It should be noted that the cadaverine-binding site found between the two domains in the present study is different from the site occupied by geneticin in complex with T. brucei ODC. Geneticin ( K i 5–8 mM) used at a concentration of 200 mM in the crystallization process was able to sufficiently inhibit the slow decarboxylation of D -ornithine by ODC, allowing the observation of D -ornithine bound in the active site [ 39 ].

Further understanding of the sequences of human and L. donovani enzymes as well as the role of the N-terminal extension in L. donovani ODC may help in future development of new drugs against leishmaniasis.
