---
pmid: '28065609'
title: Sexually Dimorphic Differentiation of a C. elegans Hub Neuron Is Cell Autonomously
  Controlled by a Conserved Transcription Factor.
authors:
- Serrano-Saiz E
- Oren-Suissa M
- Bayer EA
- Hobert O
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5805387
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.045
---

# Sexually Dimorphic Differentiation of a C. elegans Hub Neuron Is Cell Autonomously Controlled by a Conserved Transcription Factor.
**Authors:** Serrano-Saiz E, Oren-Suissa M, Bayer EA, Hobert O
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.045)
**PMC:** [PMC5805387](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5805387/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2017 Jan 23;27(2):199-209. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.045. Epub
2017  Jan 5.

Sexually Dimorphic Differentiation of a C. elegans Hub Neuron Is Cell 
Autonomously Controlled by a Conserved Transcription Factor.

Serrano-Saiz E(1), Oren-Suissa M(2), Bayer EA(2), Hobert O(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, New York, NY 10027, USA. Electronic address: es2754@columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, New York, NY 10027, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, New York, NY 10027, USA. Electronic address: or38@columbia.edu.

Functional and anatomical sexual dimorphisms in the brain are either the result 
of cells that are generated only in one sex or a manifestation of sex-specific 
differentiation of neurons present in both sexes. The PHC neuron pair of the 
nematode C. elegans differentiates in a strikingly sex-specific manner. In 
hermaphrodites the PHC neurons display a canonical pattern of synaptic 
connectivity similar to that of other sensory neurons, but in males PHC 
differentiates into a densely connected hub sensory neuron/interneuron, 
integrating a large number of male-specific synaptic inputs and conveying them 
to both male-specific and sex-shared circuitry. We show that the differentiation 
into such a hub neuron involves the sex-specific scaling of several components 
of the synaptic vesicle machinery, including the vesicular glutamate transporter 
eat-4/VGLUT, induction of neuropeptide expression, changes in axonal projection 
morphology, and a switch in neuronal function. We demonstrate that these 
molecular and anatomical remodeling events are controlled cell autonomously by 
the phylogenetically conserved Doublesex homolog dmd-3, which is both required 
and sufficient for sex-specific PHC differentiation. Cellular specificity of 
dmd-3 action is ensured by its collaboration with non-sex-specific terminal 
selector-type transcription factors, whereas the sex specificity of dmd-3 action 
is ensured by the hermaphrodite-specific transcriptional master regulator of 
hermaphroditic cell identity tra-1, which represses the transcription of dmd-3 
in hermaphrodite PHC. Taken together, our studies provide mechanistic insights 
into how neurons are specified in a sexually dimorphic manner.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.11.045
PMCID: PMC5805387
PMID: 28065609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Male and female brains display sexual dimorphisms on the level of function, anatomy and gene expression. In theory, such dimorphisms can be a reflection of two distinct scenarios, one in which dimorphisms are the result of the presence of neurons exclusively in one sex but not the other, and another in which neurons are present in both sexes (“sex-shared neurons”) but acquire sex-specific features [ 1 , 2 ]. These scenarios are hard to untangle in vertebrate nervous systems, since their cellular complexity confounds the visualization and systematic comparison of individual neuron types between the two sexes. In contrast, clear evidence exists for both scenarios in the Drosophila nervous system, that is, both sex-specific neurons, as well as sex-specific anatomical features of sex-shared neurons have been unambiguously mapped [ 1 – 5 ]. However, dimorphic features of shared neurons have so far been only studied on a relatively coarse level and, aside from the well-characterized sex-specific regulatory factors Fruitless and Doublesex [ 2 ], there are relatively few molecular and functional features that have been mapped onto sex-shared, but sexually dimorphic neurons.

In the nematode C. elegans, sexually dimorphic features have been analyzed with unprecedented anatomical and molecular resolution. Like in other organisms, the C. elegans nervous system contains sex-specific neurons found exclusively in either the male or the hermaphrodite (a somatic female)[ 6 , 7 ]. Moreover, there are neurons present in both sexes that share an identical lineage history, position, molecular features and overall appearance but that display sexually dimorphic synaptic connectivity patterns [ 8 , 9 ]. In one set of striking examples, the sex-shared phasmid neurons PHA and PHB connect in a sexually dimorphic manner to distinct downstream interneurons which are also sex-shared [ 8 , 9 ].

Apart from sexual dimorphisms of synaptic connectivity between sex-shared neurons, there are also sexually dimorphic synaptic connections between sex-shared neurons and sex-specific neurons [ 8 ]. Relatively few sex-shared neurons receive synapses from sex-specific neurons and these neurons can be considered “hub neurons” since they connect sex-specific network modules to the shared and non-sex specific “core nervous system” [ 8 ]. The most remarkable examples of such hub neurons are the PHC sensory neuron, and the DD6 and PDB motorneurons. All three neurons are sex-shared and receive a tremendous amount of additional synapses from male-specific neurons [ 8 ]. PHC stands out among those, because unlike DD6 and PDB, it is not a motor neuron that directly connects male-specific sensory inputs into muscle. As schematically diagrammed in Fig. 1A , PHC rather connects in a sexually dimorphic manner to a diverse set of inter- and motorneurons and of all neurons in the animal, it is the neuron that receives the most male-specific synaptic inputs from a variety of different sensory neurons. This is in notable contrast to the synaptic connectivity of PHC in hermaphrodites, where PHC appears to be a canonical sensory neuron receiving few synaptic inputs and generating modest outputs on a number of interneurons ( Fig. 1A )[ 9 ]. Taken together, PHC undergoes a sexual differentiation process in males that transforms this neuron from a conventional sensory neuron to a hub neuron with sensory and interneuron properties. In this manuscript we assign sex-specific functions to PHC, describe a number of distinct molecular features of the PHC neurons, which parallel its differentiation into a hub neuron and identify a transcription factor required and sufficient for male-specific differentiation of PHC into a hub neuron.

DISCUSSION

While sexually dimorphic neuronal projection patterns have been observed in many different species from flies to humans [ 3 , 4 , 31 ], the simplicity and well-described nature of the C. elegans nervous system reveals neuronal sexual dimorphisms with unrivaled anatomical, cellular and molecular resolution. The case of the PHC neurons particularly stands out because among sex-shared neurons, PHC displays the largest extent of sexually dimorphic connectivity [ 8 ]. Other sensory neurons, like PHA or PHB, also switch synaptic partners between the different sexes [ 8 ], but they do not differentiate into a densely connected hub neuron as PHC does. Differentiation into a sex-specific hub neuron is not only characterized by changes of en passant synaptic target choices, but apparently requires the coordination of a multitude of anatomical and molecular processes. These include the sex-specific extension of the PHC axon, changes in neuropeptide usage and a transcriptional scaling phenomenon that affects the synaptic vesicle machinery. Cellular differentiation is often accompanied by the scaling of specific subcellular structures and their molecular components in order to adapt to the specialized needs of a cell [ 32 ], but such scaling phenomena have not previously been described in the context of the synaptic vesicle machinery. To the contrary, the expression levels of synaptic vesicle components are particularly resilient to genetic perturbations, a robustness that is ensured by their control through multiple redundant cis -regulatory elements [ 33 ].

Two remarkable aspects of the sex-specific differentiation process of PHC into a hub neuron are (a) its cellular autonomy and hence independence from other cellular network components and (b) the apparent coordination of different aspects of this sex-specific differentiation process by a single transcription factor, dmd-3. dmd-3 is required and sufficient to trigger the male-specific program of this neuron, including the scaling of the synaptic machinery. dmd-3 operates in a highly context-dependent manner. As previously shown, dmd-3 is required in skin cells for their remodeling during male tail morphogenesis [ 29 , 30 ], in male-specific cholinergic ray neurons for their differentiation [ 34 ] and, as we have shown here, is independently required in a sex-shared neuron to remodel specific anatomical and molecular features. The specificity of action of dmd-3 is determined by cell type-specific combinations of cofactors. In the case of the hypodermis and male-specific cholinergic neurons, DMD-3 interacts with another DMD factor (MAB-23)[ 29 , 34 ], while in PHC dmd-3 cooperates with the unc-86 and ceh-14 homeobox genes. For dmd-3 to exert its effect on eat-4/VGLUT scaling, unc-86 and ceh-14 are required as permissive co-factors. One unanticipated conclusion from the cis -regulatory analysis of the synaptic scaling process is that the sex-specificity of this transcriptional regulatory phenomenon is not merely assured by one sex-specific regulatory factor that operates in one sex to either activate or repress a specific gene ( Fig. 5D ). Rather, sex-specific eat-4/VGLUT expression requires sex-specific repression in one sex (mediated by a specific cis -regulatory element that may be directly or indirectly controlled by TRA-1) and sex-specific activation in the opposite sex (mediated by a specific cis -regulatory element that may be directly or indirectly controlled by DMD-3).

The C. elegans genome encodes eleven predicted DM domain proteins, most of them uncharacterized. We hypothesize that these DM proteins may also intersect with other non-sex-specific differentiation programs to control sex-specific features in the nervous system, such as dimorphisms in synaptic wiring or the hermaphrodite-specific neurotransmitter switch of the AIM interneurons ( Fig. 5D ). Vertebrate genomes also encode multiple DM domain proteins [ 27 ] but their function in sexually dimorphic brain development awaits characterization. In the context of gonad development, DM domain proteins represent the only unifying theme of the otherwise very divergent regulatory mechanisms of sex determination and sexual differentiation throughout the animal kingdom [ 27 ].
