---
pmid: '19804758'
title: The Argonaute CSR-1 and its 22G-RNA cofactors are required for holocentric
  chromosome segregation.
authors:
- Claycomb JM
- Batista PJ
- Pang KM
- Gu W
- Vasale JJ
- van Wolfswinkel JC
- Chaves DA
- Shirayama M
- Mitani S
- Ketting RF
- Conte D Jr
- Mello CC
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2766185
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.014
---

# The Argonaute CSR-1 and its 22G-RNA cofactors are required for holocentric chromosome segregation.
**Authors:** Claycomb JM, Batista PJ, Pang KM, Gu W, Vasale JJ, van Wolfswinkel JC, Chaves DA, Shirayama M, Mitani S, Ketting RF, Conte D Jr, Mello CC
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.014)
**PMC:** [PMC2766185](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2766185/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 Oct 2;139(1):123-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.014.

The Argonaute CSR-1 and its 22G-RNA cofactors are required for holocentric 
chromosome segregation.

Claycomb JM(1), Batista PJ, Pang KM, Gu W, Vasale JJ, van Wolfswinkel JC, Chaves 
DA, Shirayama M, Mitani S, Ketting RF, Conte D Jr, Mello CC.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA 01606, USA.

RNAi-related pathways regulate diverse processes, from developmental timing to 
transposon silencing. Here, we show that in C. elegans the Argonaute CSR-1, the 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase EGO-1, the Dicer-related helicase DRH-3, and the 
Tudor-domain protein EKL-1 localize to chromosomes and are required for proper 
chromosome segregation. In the absence of these factors chromosomes fail to 
align at the metaphase plate and kinetochores do not orient to opposing spindle 
poles. Surprisingly, the CSR-1-interacting small RNAs (22G-RNAs) are antisense 
to thousands of germline-expressed protein-coding genes. Nematodes assemble 
holocentric chromosomes in which continuous kinetochores must span the expressed 
domains of the genome. We show that CSR-1 interacts with chromatin at target 
loci but does not downregulate target mRNA or protein levels. Instead, our 
findings support a model in which CSR-1 complexes target protein-coding domains 
to promote their proper organization within the holocentric chromosomes of C. 
elegans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.09.014
PMCID: PMC2766185
PMID: 19804758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
