---
pmid: '9342315'
title: Protein-protein interactions among the Aux/IAA proteins.
authors:
- Kim J
- Harter K
- Theologis A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC23574
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.11786
---

# Protein-protein interactions among the Aux/IAA proteins.
**Authors:** Kim J, Harter K, Theologis A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.22.11786](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.22.11786)
**PMC:** [PMC23574](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23574/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 28;94(22):11786-91. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.22.11786.

Protein-protein interactions among the Aux/IAA proteins.

Kim J(1), Harter K, Theologis A.

Author information:
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, 800 Buchanan Street, Albany, CA 94710, USA.

The plant hormone indoleacetic acid (IAA) transcriptionally activates early 
genes in plants. The Aux/IAA family of early genes encodes proteins that are 
short-lived and nuclear-localized. They also contain a putative prokaryotic 
betaalphaalpha DNA binding motif whose formation requires protein dimerization. 
Here, we show that the pea PS-IAA4 and Arabidopsis IAA1 and IAA2 proteins 
perform homo- and heterotypic interactions in yeast using the two-hybrid system. 
Gel-filtration chromatography and chemical cross-linking experiments demonstrate 
that the PS-IAA4 and IAA1 proteins interact to form homodimers in vitro. 
Deletion analysis of PS-IAA4 indicates that the betaalphaalpha containing acidic 
C terminus of the protein is necessary for homotypic interactions in the yeast 
two-hybrid system. Screening an Arabidopsis lambda-ACT cDNA library using IAA1 
as a bait reveals heterotypic interactions of IAA1 with known and newly 
discovered members of the Arabidopsis Aux/IAA gene family. The new member IAA24 
has similarity to ARF1, a transcription factor that binds to an auxin response 
element. Combinatorial interactions among the various members of the Aux/IAA 
gene family may regulate a variety of late genes as well as serve as 
autoregulators of early auxin-regulated gene expression. These interactions 
provide a molecular basis for the developmental and tissue-specific manner of 
auxin action.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.11786
PMCID: PMC23574
PMID: 9342315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
