---
pmid: '32001091'
title: Structure and Roles of V-type ATPases.
authors:
- Vasanthakumar T
- Rubinstein JL
journal: Trends Biochem Sci
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2019.12.007
---

# Structure and Roles of V-type ATPases.
**Authors:** Vasanthakumar T, Rubinstein JL
**Journal:** Trends Biochem Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tibs.2019.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2019.12.007)

## Abstract

1. Trends Biochem Sci. 2020 Apr;45(4):295-307. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2019.12.007. 
Epub 2020 Jan 28.

Structure and Roles of V-type ATPases.

Vasanthakumar T(1), Rubinstein JL(2).

Author information:
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada; Department of 
Biochemistry, The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada. Electronic 
address: thamiya.vasanthakumar@mail.utoronto.ca.
(2)The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 0A4, Canada; Department of 
Biochemistry, The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada; Department 
of Medical Biophysics, The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada. 
Electronic address: john.rubinstein@utoronto.ca.

V-ATPases are membrane-embedded protein complexes that function as ATP 
hydrolysis-driven proton pumps. V-ATPases are the primary source of organellar 
acidification in all eukaryotes, making them essential for many fundamental 
cellular processes. Enzymatic activity can be modulated by regulated and 
reversible disassembly of the complex, and several subunits of mammalian 
V-ATPase have multiple isoforms that are differentially localized. Although the 
biochemical properties of the different isoforms are currently unknown, 
mutations in specific subunit isoforms have been associated with various 
diseases, making V-ATPases potential drug targets. V-ATPase structure and 
activity have been best characterized in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, where recent 
structures have revealed details about the dynamics of the enzyme, the proton 
translocation pathway, and conformational changes associated with regulated 
disassembly and autoinhibition.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2019.12.007
PMID: 32001091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
