---
pmid: '18662986'
title: Glyceroneogenesis is the dominant pathway for triglyceride glycerol synthesis
  in vivo in the rat.
authors:
- Nye CK
- Hanson RW
- Kalhan SC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2562054
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804393200
---

# Glyceroneogenesis is the dominant pathway for triglyceride glycerol synthesis in vivo in the rat.
**Authors:** Nye CK, Hanson RW, Kalhan SC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M804393200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M804393200)
**PMC:** [PMC2562054](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2562054/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 10;283(41):27565-27574. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804393200.
Epub  2008 Jul 28.

Glyceroneogenesis is the dominant pathway for triglyceride glycerol synthesis in 
vivo in the rat.

Nye CK(1), Hanson RW(1), Kalhan SC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106; Departments of Gastroenterology and Pathobiology, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44195.
(2)Departments of Gastroenterology and Pathobiology, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio 44195; Department of Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College 
of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44195. Electronic address: satish.kalhan@case.edu.

Triglyceride synthesis in mammalian tissues requires glycerol 3-phosphate as the 
source of triglyceride glycerol. In this study the relative contribution of 
glyceroneogenesis and glycolysis to triglyceride glycerol synthesis was 
quantified in vivo in adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and liver of the rat in 
response to a chow diet (controls), 48-h fast, and lipogenic (high sucrose) 
diet. The rate of glyceroneogenesis was quantified using the tritium 
([(3)H(2)]O) labeling of body water, and the contribution of glucose, via 
glycolysis, was determined using a [U-(14)C]glucose tracer. In epididymal and 
mesenteric adipose tissue of control rats, glyceroneogenesis accounted for 
approximately 90% of triglyceride glycerol synthesis. Fasting for 48 h did not 
alter glyceroneogenesis in adipose tissue, whereas the contribution of glucose 
was negligible. In response to sucrose feeding, the synthesis of triglyceride 
glycerol via both glyceroneogenesis and glycolysis nearly doubled (versus 
controls); however, glyceroneogenesis remained quantitatively higher as compared 
with the contribution of glucose. Enhancement of triglyceride-fatty acid cycling 
by epinephrine infusion resulted in a higher rate of glyceroneogenesis in 
adipose tissue, as compared with controls, whereas the contribution of glucose 
via glycolysis was not measurable. Glyceroneogenesis provided the majority of 
triglyceride glycerol in the gastrocnemius and soleus. In the liver the 
fractional contribution of glyceroneogenesis remained constant (approximately 
60%) under all conditions and was higher than that of glucose. Thus, 
glyceroneogenesis, in contrast to glucose, via glycolysis, is quantitatively the 
predominant source of triglyceride glycerol in adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, 
and liver of the rat during fasting and high sucrose feeding.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M804393200
PMCID: PMC2562054
PMID: 18662986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
