---
pmid: '12093361'
title: Deficiency of dolichyl-P-Man:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase causes
  congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig.
authors:
- Thiel C
- Schwarz M
- Hasilik M
- Grieben U
- Hanefeld F
- Lehle L
- von Figura K
- Körner C
journal: Biochem J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1222867
doi: 10.1042/BJ20020794
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Deficiency of dolichyl-P-Man:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig.
**Authors:** Thiel C, Schwarz M, Hasilik M, Grieben U, Hanefeld F, Lehle L, von Figura K, Körner C
**Journal:** Biochem J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20020794](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20020794)
**PMC:** [PMC1222867](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1222867/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2002 Oct 1;367(Pt 1):195-201. doi: 10.1042/BJ20020794.

Deficiency of dolichyl-P-Man:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase causes 
congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ig.

Thiel C(1), Schwarz M, Hasilik M, Grieben U, Hanefeld F, Lehle L, von Figura K, 
Körner C.

Author information:
(1)Georg-August-Universität zu Göttingen, Abteilung Biochemie II, 
Heinrich-Düker-Weg 12, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Deficiency of the endoplasmic reticulum enzyme dolichyl-phosphate mannose 
(Dol-P-Man):Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase leads to a new type 
of congenital disorder of glycosylation, designated type Ig. The patient 1 
presented with a multisystemic disorder with microcephaly, developmental 
retardation, convulsions and dysmorphic signs. The isoelectric focusing pattern 
of the patient's serum transferrin showed the partial loss of complete N-glycan 
side chains. In skin fibroblasts from the patient, the activity of 
Dol-P-Man:Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol mannosyltransferase was severely reduced 
leading to the accumulation of Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol, which was transferred to 
newly synthesized glycoproteins. Sequencing of the 
Dol-P-Man:Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol mannosyltransferase cDNA revealed a compound 
heterozygosity for two point mutations, leading to the exchange of leucine(158) 
for a proline residue and a premature translation stop with loss of the 
C-terminal 74 amino acids. The parents were heterozygous for one of the two 
mutations. Retroviral expression of the wild-type 
Dol-P-Man:Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol mannosyltransferase cDNA in patient's 
fibroblasts normalized the mannosyltransferase activity.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20020794
PMCID: PMC1222867
PMID: 12093361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
