---
pmid: '12006501'
title: 'Crystal structure of the tetrameric Mad1-Mad2 core complex: implications of
  a ''safety belt'' binding mechanism for the spindle checkpoint.'
authors:
- Sironi L
- Mapelli M
- Knapp S
- De Antoni A
- Jeang KT
- Musacchio A
journal: EMBO J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC126000
doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2496
---

# Crystal structure of the tetrameric Mad1-Mad2 core complex: implications of a 'safety belt' binding mechanism for the spindle checkpoint.
**Authors:** Sironi L, Mapelli M, Knapp S, De Antoni A, Jeang KT, Musacchio A
**Journal:** EMBO J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/21.10.2496](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/21.10.2496)
**PMC:** [PMC126000](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC126000/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2002 May 15;21(10):2496-506. doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2496.

Crystal structure of the tetrameric Mad1-Mad2 core complex: implications of a 
'safety belt' binding mechanism for the spindle checkpoint.

Sironi L(1), Mapelli M, Knapp S, De Antoni A, Jeang KT, Musacchio A.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology, European 
Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

The spindle checkpoint protein Mad1 recruits Mad2 to unattached kinetochores and 
is essential for Mad2-Cdc20 complex formation in vivo but not in vitro. The 
crystal structure of the Mad1-Mad2 complex reveals an asymmetric tetramer, with 
elongated Mad1 monomers parting from a coiled-coil to form two connected 
sub-complexes with Mad2. The Mad2 C-terminal tails are hinged mobile elements 
wrapping around the elongated ligands like molecular 'safety belts'. We show 
that Mad1 is a competitive inhibitor of the Mad2-Cdc20 complex, and propose that 
the Mad1-Mad2 complex acts as a regulated gate to control Mad2 release for Cdc20 
binding. Mad1-Mad2 is strongly stabilized in the tetramer, but a 1:1 Mad1-Mad2 
complex slowly releases Mad2 for Cdc20 binding, driven by favourable binding 
energies. Thus, the rate of Mad2 binding to Cdc20 during checkpoint activation 
may be regulated by conformational changes that destabilize the tetrameric 
Mad1-Mad2 assembly to promote Mad2 release. We also show that unlocking the Mad2 
C-terminal tail is required for ligand release from Mad2, and that the 'safety 
belt' mechanism may prolong the lifetime of Mad2-ligand complexes.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2496
PMCID: PMC126000
PMID: 12006501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
