---
pmid: '16854980'
title: Dynamic and functional assembly of the AAA peroxins, Pex1p and Pex6p, and their
  membrane receptor Pex26p.
authors:
- Tamura S
- Yasutake S
- Matsumoto N
- Fujiki Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605159200
---

# Dynamic and functional assembly of the AAA peroxins, Pex1p and Pex6p, and their membrane receptor Pex26p.
**Authors:** Tamura S, Yasutake S, Matsumoto N, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M605159200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M605159200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 22;281(38):27693-704. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605159200. Epub 
2006 Jul 19.

Dynamic and functional assembly of the AAA peroxins, Pex1p and Pex6p, and their 
membrane receptor Pex26p.

Tamura S(1), Yasutake S, Matsumoto N, Fujiki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University Graduate 
School, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

Two AAA peroxins, Pex1p and Pex6p, are encoded by PEX1 and PEX6, the causal 
genes for peroxisome biogenesis disorders of complementation group 1 (CG1) and 
CG4, respectively. PEX26 responsible for peroxisome biogenesis disorders of CG8 
encodes Pex26p, the recruiter of Pex1p.Pex6p complexes to peroxisomes. We herein 
assigned the binding regions between human Pex1p and Pex6p and elucidated 
pivotal roles of the AAA cassettes, called D1 and D2 domains, in Pex1p-Pex6p 
interaction and peroxisome biogenesis. ATP binding in both AAA cassettes but not 
ATP hydrolysis in D2 of both Pex1p and Pex6p was prerequisite for Pex1p-Pex6p 
interaction and their peroxisomal localization. The AAA cassettes, D1 and D2, 
were essential for peroxisome-restoring activity of Pex1p and Pex6p. In HEK293 
cells, endogenous Pex1p was partly localized likely as a homo-oligomer in the 
cytoplasm, while Pex6p and Pex26p were predominantly localized on peroxisomes. 
Interaction of Pex1p with Pex6p conferred a conformational change and 
dissociation of the Pex1p oligomer. These results suggested that Pex1p possesses 
two distinct oligomeric forms, a homo-oligomer in the cytosol and a 
hetero-oligomer on peroxisome membranes, possibly playing distinct functions in 
peroxisome biogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M605159200
PMID: 16854980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
