---
pmid: '18274552'
title: Ribosomal proteins are targets for the NEDD8 pathway.
authors:
- Xirodimas DP
- Sundqvist A
- Nakamura A
- Shen L
- Botting C
- Hay RT
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2267383
doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.10
---

# Ribosomal proteins are targets for the NEDD8 pathway.
**Authors:** Xirodimas DP, Sundqvist A, Nakamura A, Shen L, Botting C, Hay RT
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2008.10](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2008.10)
**PMC:** [PMC2267383](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2267383/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2008 Mar;9(3):280-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.10. Epub 2008 Feb 15.

Ribosomal proteins are targets for the NEDD8 pathway.

Xirodimas DP(1), Sundqvist A, Nakamura A, Shen L, Botting C, Hay RT.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. 
d.xirodimas@dundee.ac.uk

Identification of the molecular targets for post-translational modifications is 
an important step for explaining the regulated pathways. The ubiquitin-like 
molecule NEDD8 is implicated in the regulation of cell proliferation, viability 
and development. By combining proteomics and in vivo NEDDylation assays, we 
identified a subset of ribosomal proteins as novel targets for the NEDD8 
pathway. We further show that the lack of NEDDylation in cells causes ribosomal 
protein instability. Our studies identify a novel and specific role of the NEDD8 
pathway in protecting a subset of ribosomal proteins from destabilization.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2008.10
PMCID: PMC2267383
PMID: 18274552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
