---
pmid: '11443198'
title: 'Insulin inhibits intranuclear nuclear factor kappaB and stimulates IkappaB
  in mononuclear cells in obese subjects: evidence for an anti-inflammatory effect?'
authors:
- Dandona P
- Aljada A
- Mohanty P
- Ghanim H
- Hamouda W
- Assian E
- Ahmad S
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.7.7623
---

# Insulin inhibits intranuclear nuclear factor kappaB and stimulates IkappaB in mononuclear cells in obese subjects: evidence for an anti-inflammatory effect?
**Authors:** Dandona P, Aljada A, Mohanty P, Ghanim H, Hamouda W, Assian E, Ahmad S
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.86.7.7623](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.7.7623)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jul;86(7):3257-65. doi: 10.1210/jcem.86.7.7623.

Insulin inhibits intranuclear nuclear factor kappaB and stimulates IkappaB in 
mononuclear cells in obese subjects: evidence for an anti-inflammatory effect?

Dandona P(1), Aljada A, Mohanty P, Ghanim H, Hamouda W, Assian E, Ahmad S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism, State University of New 
York at Buffalo and Kaleida Health, Buffalo, New York 14209, USA.

In view of the fact that insulin resistance is associated with atherogenesis and 
that troglitazone, an insulin sensitizer, has anti-inflammatory effects, which 
may be potentially antiatherogenic in the long term, we have now investigated 
whether insulin has potential anti-inflammatory effects. We infused 2.0 to 2.5 
IU/h in 5% dextrose (100 mL/h) iv into 10 obese subjects for 4 h followed by 5% 
dextrose alone for 2 h. The rate of insulin infusion was varied to maintain 
glucose concentrations as close to the baseline as possible. Blood samples were 
obtained before and at 2, 4, and 6 h. Subjects were also infused with 5% 
dextrose without insulin and with saline on separate occasions. Intranuclear 
nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) in mononuclear cells fell at 2 and further at 4 
h, reverting toward the baseline at 6 h (P < 0.05). IkappaB increased 
significantly at 2 h, increasing further at 4 h and remaining elevated at 6 h (P 
< 0.001). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by mononuclear cells fell 
significantly at 2 h and fell further at 4 h; it partially reverted to baseline 
at 6 h (P < 0.005). p47(phox) subunit, the key protein of nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate oxidase also fell at 2 h and 4 h, reverting toward the 
baseline at 6 h (P < 0.05). In addition, soluble intercellular adhesion 
molecule-1 (sICAM-1), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) fell significantly following insulin 
infusion. Glucose or saline infusions without insulin caused no alteration in 
NFkappaB, IkappaB, ROS generation, p47(phox) subunit, sICAM-1, MCP-1, or PAI-1. 
We conclude that insulin has a potent acute anti-inflammatory effect including a 
reduction in intranuclear NFkappaB, an increase in IkappaB, and decreases in ROS 
generation, p47(phox) subunit, plasma soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 
(sICAM-1), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), and plasminogen activator 
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1. This acute anti-inflammatory effect, if demonstrated in the 
long term, may have implications for atherosclerosis and its complications.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.86.7.7623
PMID: 11443198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
