---
pmid: '24931469'
title: Molecular basis of substrate recognition and degradation by human presequence
  protease.
authors:
- King JV
- Liang WG
- Scherpelz KP
- Schilling AB
- Meredith SC
- Tang WJ
journal: Structure
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4128088
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.05.003
---

# Molecular basis of substrate recognition and degradation by human presequence protease.
**Authors:** King JV, Liang WG, Scherpelz KP, Schilling AB, Meredith SC, Tang WJ
**Journal:** Structure (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2014.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2014.05.003)
**PMC:** [PMC4128088](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4128088/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2014 Jul 8;22(7):996-1007. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2014.05.003. Epub
2014  Jun 12.

Molecular basis of substrate recognition and degradation by human presequence 
protease.

King JV(1), Liang WG(1), Scherpelz KP(2), Schilling AB(3), Meredith SC(4), Tang 
WJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, 929 E. 
57(th) Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(3)Mass Spectrometry, Metabolomics, and Proteomics Facility, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(5)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, 929 E. 
57(th) Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: wtang@uchicago.edu.

Human presequence protease (hPreP) is an M16 metalloprotease localized in 
mitochondria. There, hPreP facilitates proteostasis by utilizing an ∼13,300-Å(3) 
catalytic chamber to degrade a diverse array of potentially toxic peptides, 
including mitochondrial presequences and β-amyloid (Aβ), the latter of which 
contributes to Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. Here, we report crystal 
structures for hPreP alone and in complex with Aβ, which show that hPreP uses 
size exclusion and charge complementation for substrate recognition. These 
structures also reveal hPreP-specific features that permit a diverse array of 
peptides, with distinct distributions of charged and hydrophobic residues, to be 
specifically captured, cleaved, and have their amyloidogenic features destroyed. 
SAXS analysis demonstrates that hPreP in solution exists in dynamic equilibrium 
between closed and open states, with the former being preferred. Furthermore, Aβ 
binding induces the closed state and hPreP dimerization. Together, these data 
reveal the molecular basis for flexible yet specific substrate recognition and 
degradation by hPreP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2014.05.003
PMCID: PMC4128088
PMID: 24931469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
