---
pmid: '10660536'
title: Rab24 is an atypical member of the Rab GTPase family. Deficient GTPase activity,
  GDP dissociation inhibitor interaction, and prenylation of Rab24 expressed in cultured
  cells.
authors:
- Erdman RA
- Shellenberger KE
- Overmeyer JH
- Maltese WA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.6.3848
---

# Rab24 is an atypical member of the Rab GTPase family. Deficient GTPase activity, GDP dissociation inhibitor interaction, and prenylation of Rab24 expressed in cultured cells.
**Authors:** Erdman RA, Shellenberger KE, Overmeyer JH, Maltese WA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.6.3848](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.6.3848)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 11;275(6):3848-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.6.3848.

Rab24 is an atypical member of the Rab GTPase family. Deficient GTPase activity, 
GDP dissociation inhibitor interaction, and prenylation of Rab24 expressed in 
cultured cells.

Erdman RA(1), Shellenberger KE, Overmeyer JH, Maltese WA.

Author information:
(1)Weis Center for Research, Penn State College of Medicine, Danville, 
Pennsylvania 17822, USA.

The function of Rab24 is currently unknown, but other members of the Rab GTPase 
family are known to participate in various protein trafficking pathways. Rab 
proteins are thought to cycle on and off vesicle membranes in conjunction with 
changes in their guanine nucleotide state. The present studies indicate that 
Rab24 possesses several unusual characteristics that distinguish it from other 
Rab proteins. 1) Based on [(32)P]orthophosphate labeling of protein-bound 
nucleotide, Rab24 exists predominantly in the GTP state when expressed in 
cultured cells. The low GTPase activity is related to the presence of serine 
instead of glutamine at the position cognate to Ras Gln-61. 2) Posttranslational 
geranylgeranylation of Rab24, determined by metabolic labeling or detergent 
partitioning assays, is inefficient when compared with other Rabs ending with 
the common CXC and CC carboxyl-terminal motifs. This is partly due to the 
presence of two histidines distal to the target cysteines, but also involves 
other unidentified features. 3) Most of the Rab24 in the cytoplasmic compartment 
of cultured cells is not associated with Rab GDP dissociation inhibitors. These 
findings indicate that, if Rab24 functions in vesicular transport processes, it 
may operate through a novel mechanism that does not depend on GTP hydrolysis or 
GDP dissociation inhibitor-mediated recycling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.6.3848
PMID: 10660536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
