---
pmid: '28735869'
title: DHU1 negatively regulates UV-B signaling via its direct interaction with COP1
  and RUP1.
authors:
- Kim SH
- Kim H
- Chung S
- Lee JH
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.07.110
---

# DHU1 negatively regulates UV-B signaling via its direct interaction with COP1 and RUP1.
**Authors:** Kim SH, Kim H, Chung S, Lee JH
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.07.110](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.07.110)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017 Sep 16;491(2):285-290. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.07.110. Epub 2017 Jul 21.

DHU1 negatively regulates UV-B signaling via its direct interaction with COP1 
and RUP1.

Kim SH(1), Kim H(1), Chung S(2), Lee JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology Education, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, 
South Korea.
(2)Underwood International College, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, South Korea.
(3)Department of Biology Education, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, 
South Korea. Electronic address: jhlee72@pusan.ac.kr.

Although DWD HYPERSENSITIVE TO UV-B 1 (DHU1) is reported to be a negative 
regulator in UV-B mediated cellular responses, its detailed role in UV-B 
signaling is still elusive. To further understand the action mechanism of DHU1 
in UV-B response, physical and genetic interactions of DHU1 with various UV-B 
signaling components were investigated. Yeast two hybrid assay results suggested 
that DHU1 directly interacts with COP1 and RUP1, implying a functional 
connection with both COP1 and RUP1. In spite of the physical association between 
DHU1 and COP1, loss of DHU1 did not affect protein stability of COP1. Epistatic 
analysis showed that the functional loss of both DHU1 and UVR8 leads to 
alleviation of UV-B hypersensitivity displayed in dhu1-1. Moreover, phenotypic 
studies with dhu1-1 cop1-6 and dhu1-1 hy5-215 revealed that COP1 and HY5 are 
epistatic to DHU1, indicating that UV-B hypersensitivity of dhu1-1 requires both 
COP1 and HY5. In the case of dhu1-1 rup1-1, UV-B responsiveness was similar to 
that of both dhu1-1 and rup1-1, implying that DHU1 and RUP1 are required for 
each other's function. Collectively, these results show that the role of DHU1 as 
a negative regulator in UV-B response may be derived from its direct interaction 
with COP1 by sequestering COP1 from the active UVR8-COP1 complex, resulting in a 
decrease in the COP1 population that positively participates in UV-B signaling 
together with UVR8. Furthermore, this inhibitory role of DHU1 in UV-B signaling 
is likely to be functionally connected to RUP1. This study will serve as a 
platform to further understand more detailed action mechanism of DHU1 in UV-B 
response and DHU1-mediated core UV-B signaling in Arabidopsis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2017.07.110
PMID: 28735869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
