---
pmid: '18261907'
title: Coactivation of G protein signaling by cell-surface receptors and an intracellular
  exchange factor.
authors:
- Lee MJ
- Dohlman HG
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2693726
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.007
---

# Coactivation of G protein signaling by cell-surface receptors and an intracellular exchange factor.
**Authors:** Lee MJ, Dohlman HG
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.007)
**PMC:** [PMC2693726](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2693726/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2008 Feb 12;18(3):211-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.007.

Coactivation of G protein signaling by cell-surface receptors and an 
intracellular exchange factor.

Lee MJ(1), Dohlman HG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7365, USA.

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) mediate responses to a broad range of 
chemical and environmental signals. In yeast, a pheromone-binding GPCR triggers 
events leading to the fusion of haploid cells. In general, GPCRs function as 
guanine-nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs); upon agonist binding, the receptor 
induces a conformational change in the G protein alpha subunit, resulting in 
exchange of guanine diphosphate (GDP) for guanine triphosphate (GTP) and in 
signal initiation. Signaling is terminated when GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP [1]. 
This well-established paradigm has in recent years been revised to include new 
components that rates of GDP release, GTP binding [2-8], and GTP hydrolysis[9, 
10]. Here we report the discovery of a nonreceptor GEF, Arr4. Like receptors, 
Arr4 binds directly to the G protein,accelerates guanine-nucleotide exchange, 
and stabilizes the nucleotide-free state of the a subunit. Moreover, Arr4 
promotes G protein-dependent cellular responses, including mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) phosphorylation,new-gene transcription, and mating. In 
contrast to knownGPCRs, however, Arr4 is not a transmembrane receptor,but rather 
a soluble intracellular protein. Our data suggest that intracellular proteins 
function in cooperation with mating pheromones to amplify G protein signaling, 
thereby leading to full pathway activation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.007
PMCID: PMC2693726
PMID: 18261907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
