---
pmid: '10954706'
title: Identification of Mrj, a DnaJ/Hsp40 family protein, as a keratin 8/18 filament
  regulatory protein.
authors:
- Izawa I
- Nishizawa M
- Ohtakara K
- Ohtsuka K
- Inada H
- Inagaki M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003492200
---

# Identification of Mrj, a DnaJ/Hsp40 family protein, as a keratin 8/18 filament regulatory protein.
**Authors:** Izawa I, Nishizawa M, Ohtakara K, Ohtsuka K, Inada H, Inagaki M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003492200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003492200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34521-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003492200.

Identification of Mrj, a DnaJ/Hsp40 family protein, as a keratin 8/18 filament 
regulatory protein.

Izawa I(1), Nishizawa M, Ohtakara K, Ohtsuka K, Inada H, Inagaki M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya, Aichi 464-8681, Japan.

To elucidate the function of keratins 8 and 18 (K8/18), major components of the 
intermediate filaments of simple epithelia, we searched for K8/18-binding 
proteins by screening a yeast two-hybrid library. We report here that human Mrj, 
a DnaJ/Hsp40 family protein, directly binds to K18. Among the interactions 
between DnaJ/Hsp40 family proteins and various intermediate filament proteins 
that we tested using two-hybrid methods, Mrj specifically interacted with K18. 
Immunostaining with anti-Mrj antibody showed that Mrj colocalized with K8/18 
filaments in HeLa cells. Mrj was immunoprecipitated not only with K18, but also 
with the stress-induced and constitutively expressed heat shock protein Hsp/c70. 
Mrj bound to K18 through its C terminus and interacted with Hsp/c70 via its N 
terminus, which contains the J domain. Microinjection of anti-Mrj antibody 
resulted in the disorganization of K8/18 filaments, without effects on the 
organization of actin filaments and microtubules. Taken together, these results 
suggest that Mrj may play an important role in the regulation of K8/18 filament 
organization as a K18-specific co-chaperone working together with Hsp/c70.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003492200
PMID: 10954706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
