---
pmid: '20925061'
title: 'Molecular characterization of a trafficking organelle: dissecting the axonal
  paths of calsyntenin-1 transport vesicles.'
authors:
- Steuble M
- Gerrits B
- Ludwig A
- Mateos JM
- Diep TM
- Tagaya M
- Stephan A
- Schätzle P
- Kunz B
- Streit P
- Sonderegger P
journal: Proteomics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000384
---

# Molecular characterization of a trafficking organelle: dissecting the axonal paths of calsyntenin-1 transport vesicles.
**Authors:** Steuble M, Gerrits B, Ludwig A, Mateos JM, Diep TM, Tagaya M, Stephan A, Schätzle P, Kunz B, Streit P, Sonderegger P
**Journal:** Proteomics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.201000384](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201000384)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2010 Nov;10(21):3775-88. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000384.

Molecular characterization of a trafficking organelle: dissecting the axonal 
paths of calsyntenin-1 transport vesicles.

Steuble M(1), Gerrits B, Ludwig A, Mateos JM, Diep TM, Tagaya M, Stephan A, 
Schätzle P, Kunz B, Streit P, Sonderegger P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Kinesin motors play crucial roles in the delivery of membranous cargo to its 
destination and thus for the establishment and maintenance of cellular 
polarization. Recently, calsyntenin-1 was identified as a cargo-docking protein 
for Kinesin-1-mediated axonal transport of tubulovesicular organelles along 
axons of central nervous system neurons. To further define the function of 
calsyntenin-1, we immunoisolated calsyntenin-1 organelles from murine brain 
homogenates and determined their proteome by MS. We found that calsyntenin-1 
organelles are endowed with components of the endosomal trafficking machinery 
and contained the β-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Detailed biochemical 
analyses of calsyntenin-1 immunoisolates in conjunction with immunocytochemical 
colocalization studies with cultured hippocampal neurons, using endosomal marker 
proteins for distinct subcompartments of the endosomal pathways, indicated that 
neuronal axons contain at least two distinct, nonoverlapping 
calsyntenin-1-containing transport packages: one characterized as 
early-endosomal, APP positive, the other as recycling-endosomal, APP negative. 
We postulate that calsyntenin-1 acts as a general mediator of anterograde axonal 
transportation of endosomal vesicles. In this role, calsyntenin-1 may actively 
contribute to axonal growth and pathfinding in the developing as well as to the 
maintenance of neuronal polarity in the adult nervous system; further, it may 
actively contribute to the stabilization of APP during its anterograde axonal 
trajectory.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201000384
PMID: 20925061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
