---
pmid: '27543824'
title: Conserved functions of human Pelota in mRNA quality control of nonstop mRNA.
authors:
- Ikeuchi K
- Yazaki E
- Kudo K
- Inada T
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12366
---

# Conserved functions of human Pelota in mRNA quality control of nonstop mRNA.
**Authors:** Ikeuchi K, Yazaki E, Kudo K, Inada T
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/1873-3468.12366](https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.12366)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2016 Sep;590(18):3254-63. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12366. Epub 2016
Sep  7.

Conserved functions of human Pelota in mRNA quality control of nonstop mRNA.

Ikeuchi K(1), Yazaki E(1), Kudo K(1), Inada T(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Science, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai, Japan. tinada@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

Dom34-Hbs1 plays crucial roles in Nonstop Decay (NSD) and No-Go Decay (NGD). 
Here, we report a conserved function of human Pelota (hPelota) in mRNA quality 
control of nonstop mRNA. hPelota facilitated the expression of the nonstop 
products from GFP-Rz mRNA, which lacks a termination codon and a poly(A) tail, 
in exosome-defective mutant cells. hPelota promoted the dissociation of stalled 
ribosomes at the 3' end of GFP-Rz mRNA, and mutations in domain A diminished 
this activity. The hPelota-R45A mutant associated with ribosomes but was 
defective in peptide release. Finally, hPelota promoted the degradation of 
GFP-Rz mRNA and suppressed the sequential endonucleolytic cleavages caused by 
stalled ribosomes at the 3' end of mRNA in dom34∆ mutant cells.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1002/1873-3468.12366
PMID: 27543824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
