---
pmid: '20176978'
title: An auxiliary silencer and a boundary element maintain high levels of silencing
  proteins at HMR in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Lynch PJ
- Rusche LN
journal: Genetics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2870948
doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.113100
---

# An auxiliary silencer and a boundary element maintain high levels of silencing proteins at HMR in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Lynch PJ, Rusche LN
**Journal:** Genetics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.109.113100](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.109.113100)
**PMC:** [PMC2870948](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2870948/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2010 May;185(1):113-27. doi: 10.1534/genetics.109.113100. Epub 2010 
Feb 22.

An auxiliary silencer and a boundary element maintain high levels of silencing 
proteins at HMR in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Lynch PJ(1), Rusche LN.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy and Department of Biochemistry, Duke 
University, Durham, NC 27708, USA.

Heterochromatin is notable for its capacity to propagate along a chromosome. The 
prevailing model for this spreading process postulates that silencing proteins 
are first recruited to silencer sequences and then spread from these sites 
independently of the silencers. However, we found that in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae silencers also influence the extent of silenced chromatin domains. We 
compared the abilities of two different silencers, HMR-E and a telomeric repeat, 
to promote silencing and found that the HMR-E silencer contributed to an 
increased steady-state association of Sir proteins over a region of several 
kilobase pairs compared to the telomeric repeat, even though both silencers 
recruited similar levels of Sir proteins. We also discovered that, although the 
HMR-E silencer alone was sufficient to block transcription of the HMR locus, a 
secondary silencer, HMR-I, boosted the level of Sir proteins at HMR, apparently 
beyond the level necessary to repress transcription. Finally, we discovered that 
a tRNA(Thr) gene near HMR-I helped maintain silenced chromatin and 
transcriptional repression under conditions of reduced deacetylase activity. 
This study highlights the importance of auxiliary elements, such as HMR-I and 
the tRNA(Thr) gene, in enhancing the association of Sir silencing proteins with 
appropriate genomic locations, thereby buffering the capacity of silenced 
chromatin to assemble under suboptimal conditions.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.109.113100
PMCID: PMC2870948
PMID: 20176978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
