---
pmid: '16131612'
title: A pathway for the biogenesis of trans-acting siRNAs in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Yoshikawa M
- Peragine A
- Park MY
- Poethig RS
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1221887
doi: 10.1101/gad.1352605
---

# A pathway for the biogenesis of trans-acting siRNAs in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Yoshikawa M, Peragine A, Park MY, Poethig RS
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1352605](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1352605)
**PMC:** [PMC1221887](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221887/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2005 Sep 15;19(18):2164-75. doi: 10.1101/gad.1352605. Epub 2005 Aug
 30.

A pathway for the biogenesis of trans-acting siRNAs in Arabidopsis.

Yoshikawa M(1), Peragine A, Park MY, Poethig RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6018, USA.

The Arabidopsis genes, TAS2 and TAS1a, produce structurally similar noncoding
transcripts that are transformed into short (21-nucleotide [nt]) and long
(24-nt) siRNAs by RNA silencing pathways. Some of these short siRNAs direct the
cleavage of protein-coding transcripts, and thus function as trans-acting siRNAs
(ta-siRNAs). Using genetic analysis, we defined the pathway by which ta-siRNAs
and other short siRNAs are generated from these loci. This process is initiated
by the miR173-directed cleavage of a primary poly(A) transcript. The 3' fragment
is then transformed into short siRNAs by the sequential activity of SGS3, RDR6,
and DCL4: SGS3 stabilizes the fragment, RDR6 produces a complementary strand,
and DCL4 cleaves the resulting double-stranded molecule into short siRNAs,
starting at the end with the miR173 cleavage site and proceeding in 21-nt
increments from this point. The 5' cleavage fragment is also processed by this
pathway, but less efficiently. The DCL3-dependent pathway that generates long
siRNAs does not require miRNA-directed cleavage and plays a minor role in the
silencing of these loci. Our results define the core components of a
post-transcriptional gene silencing pathway in Arabidopsis and reveal some of
the features that direct transcripts to this pathway.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1352605
PMCID: PMC1221887
PMID: 16131612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
