---
pmid: '31881451'
title: Minority stress, social integration, and the mental health needs of LGBTQ asylum
  seekers in North America.
authors:
- Fox SD
- Griffin RH
- Pachankis JE
journal: Soc Sci Med
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112727
---

# Minority stress, social integration, and the mental health needs of LGBTQ asylum seekers in North America.
**Authors:** Fox SD, Griffin RH, Pachankis JE
**Journal:** Soc Sci Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112727](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112727)

## Abstract

1. Soc Sci Med. 2020 Feb;246:112727. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112727. Epub 
2019 Dec 13.

Minority stress, social integration, and the mental health needs of LGBTQ asylum 
seekers in North America.

Fox SD(1), Griffin RH(2), Pachankis JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Yale School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA. 
Electronic address: sfox1@bidmc.harvard.edu.
(2)Northeastern University, College of Professional Studies, Boston, MA, USA; 
KAYAK Software Corporation, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Drawing on theoretical accounts of LGBTQ minority stress and models 
of social integration and immigrant health, the present study examines sexual 
and gender minority status - heretofore overlooked in crossnational frameworks 
of immigrant health - as an important determinant of asylum seeker mental 
health. With the goal of spurring intervention development among this 
population, this study also aims to characterize LGBTQ asylum seekers' interest 
in interventions aimed at alleviating minority stress, barriers to social 
integration, and associated mental distress.
METHOD: Respondents (n = 308) completed an online survey which included the 
Refugee Health Screener (RHS-15), and a battery of measures of minority 
stressors and barriers to social integration.
RESULTS: Most respondents (80.20%) screened positive for mental distress. 
Consistent with minority stress theory, loneliness (OR = 1.14, 95% CI = 1.11, 
1.16) and LGBTQ identity disclosure (OR = 3.46, 95% CI = 1.85, 6.50) were 
strongly associated with screening positive for mental distress. Consistent with 
theories of immigrant social integration, those who had been granted asylum (OR 
= 0.36, 95% CI = 0.25, 0.53) or had higher English language proficiency (OR = 
0.35, 95% CI = 0.21, 0.60) were less likely to screen positive. In an 
exploratory analysis, the association between transgender identity and mental 
distress approached significance (OR = 3.60, 95% CI = 1.00, 7.2). As preliminary 
justification for applying these findings to practice, most of those who 
screened positive for distress were interested in receiving mental health 
counseling (70.45%). Most participants wanted more LGBTQ friends (83.1%), wanted 
to mentor an LGBTQ newcomer (83.8%), and were interested in joining an LGBTQ 
community center (68.2%).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that LGBTQ asylum seekers are highly likely 
to experience mental distress that is influenced by unique social factors, 
including barriers to social integration, and are motivated to participate in 
interventions aimed at addressing their mental health needs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112727
PMID: 31881451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
