---
pmid: '22835334'
title: Replacement of charged and polar residues in the coiled-coiled interface of
  huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1) causes aggregation and cell death.
authors:
- Fontaine SN
- Bauer SP
- Lin X
- Poorfarahani S
- Ybe JA
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.011
---

# Replacement of charged and polar residues in the coiled-coiled interface of huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1) causes aggregation and cell death.
**Authors:** Fontaine SN, Bauer SP, Lin X, Poorfarahani S, Ybe JA
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.011)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3030-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.011.
Epub  2012 Jul 23.

Replacement of charged and polar residues in the coiled-coiled interface of 
huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1) causes aggregation and cell death.

Fontaine SN(1), Bauer SP, Lin X, Poorfarahani S, Ybe JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University 
Bloomington, Bloomington, IN 47405, United States.

HIP1 crystal structures solved in our laboratory revealed abnormalities in the 
coiled-coil region, suggesting intrinsic plasticity. To test this, specific 
amino acids in the coiled-coil were mutated. The apparent thermal stability of 
HIP1 was altered when Thr528 and Glu531 were replaced by leucine, and was 
enhanced when Lys510 was also mutated. In cells, HIP1 mutant expression produced 
aggregation. MTS and flow cytometry indicate a correlation between aggregated 
HIP1 and enhanced cell death. These data support the idea that flexibility of 
the HIP1 coiled-coil domain is important for normal function and may lead to new 
insights into Huntington's disease.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.011
PMID: 22835334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
