---
pmid: '15704212'
title: Physiological effects of unassembled chaperonin Cct subunits in the yeast Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Kabir MA
- Kaminska J
- Segel GB
- Bethlendy G
- Lin P
- Della Seta F
- Blegen C
- Swiderek KM
- Zoładek T
- Arndt KT
- Sherman F
journal: Yeast
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/yea.1210
---

# Physiological effects of unassembled chaperonin Cct subunits in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Kabir MA, Kaminska J, Segel GB, Bethlendy G, Lin P, Della Seta F, Blegen C, Swiderek KM, Zoładek T, Arndt KT, Sherman F
**Journal:** Yeast (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/yea.1210](https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.1210)

## Abstract

1. Yeast. 2005 Feb;22(3):219-39. doi: 10.1002/yea.1210.

Physiological effects of unassembled chaperonin Cct subunits in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kabir MA(1), Kaminska J, Segel GB, Bethlendy G, Lin P, Della Seta F, Blegen C, 
Swiderek KM, Zoładek T, Arndt KT, Sherman F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Eukaryotic chaperonins, the Cct complexes, are assembled into two rings, each of 
which is composed of a stoichiometric array of eight different subunits, which 
are denoted Cct1p-Cct8p. Overexpression of a single CCT gene in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae causes an increase of the corresponding Cct subunit, but not of the 
Cct complex. Nevertheless, overexpression of certain Cct subunits, especially 
CCT6, suppresses a wide range of abnormal phenotypes, including those caused by 
the diverse types of conditional mutations tor2-21, lst8-2 and rsp5-9 and those 
caused by the concomitant overexpression of Sit4p and Sap155p. The examination 
of 73 altered forms of Cct6p revealed that the cct6-24 mutation, containing 
GDGTT --> AAAAA replacements of the conserved ATP-binding motif, was unable to 
suppress any of these traits, although the cct6-24 allele was completely 
functional for growth. These results provide evidence for functional differences 
among Cct subunits and for physiological properties of unassembled subunits. We 
suggest that the suppression is due to the competition of specific Cct subunits 
for activities that normally modify various cellular components. Furthermore, we 
also suggest that the Cct subunits can act as suppressors only in certain 
states, such as when associated with ATP.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/yea.1210
PMID: 15704212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
