---
pmid: '14960280'
title: Ozz-E3, a muscle-specific ubiquitin ligase, regulates beta-catenin degradation
  during myogenesis.
authors:
- Nastasi T
- Bongiovanni A
- Campos Y
- Mann L
- Toy JN
- Bostrom J
- Rottier R
- Hahn C
- Conaway JW
- Harris AJ
- D'Azzo A
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(04)00020-6
---

# Ozz-E3, a muscle-specific ubiquitin ligase, regulates beta-catenin degradation during myogenesis.
**Authors:** Nastasi T, Bongiovanni A, Campos Y, Mann L, Toy JN, Bostrom J, Rottier R, Hahn C, Conaway JW, Harris AJ, D'Azzo A
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1534-5807(04)00020-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1534-5807(04)00020-6)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2004 Feb;6(2):269-82. doi: 10.1016/s1534-5807(04)00020-6.

Ozz-E3, a muscle-specific ubiquitin ligase, regulates beta-catenin degradation 
during myogenesis.

Nastasi T(1), Bongiovanni A, Campos Y, Mann L, Toy JN, Bostrom J, Rottier R, 
Hahn C, Conaway JW, Harris AJ, D'Azzo A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The identities of the ubiquitin-ligases active during myogenesis are largely 
unknown. Here we describe a RING-type E3 ligase complex specified by the adaptor 
protein, Ozz, a novel SOCS protein that is developmentally regulated and 
expressed exclusively in striated muscle. In mice, the absence of Ozz results in 
overt maturation defects of the sarcomeric apparatus. We identified beta-catenin 
as one of the target substrates of the Ozz-E3 in vivo. In the differentiating 
myofibers, Ozz-E3 regulates the levels of sarcolemma-associated beta-catenin by 
mediating its degradation via the proteasome. Expression of beta-catenin mutants 
that reduce the binding of Ozz to endogenous beta-catenin leads to 
Mb-beta-catenin accumulation and myofibrillogenesis defects similar to those 
observed in Ozz null myocytes. These findings reveal a novel mechanism of 
regulation of Mb-beta-catenin and the role of this pool of the protein in 
myofibrillogenesis, and implicate the Ozz-E3 ligase in the process of myofiber 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1016/s1534-5807(04)00020-6
PMID: 14960280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
