---
pmid: '9388232'
title: Dimerization properties of human BAD. Identification of a BH-3 domain and analysis
  of its binding to mutant BCL-2 and BCL-XL proteins.
authors:
- Ottilie S
- Diaz JL
- Horne W
- Chang J
- Wang Y
- Wilson G
- Chang S
- Weeks S
- Fritz LC
- Oltersdorf T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.49.30866
---

# Dimerization properties of human BAD. Identification of a BH-3 domain and analysis of its binding to mutant BCL-2 and BCL-XL proteins.
**Authors:** Ottilie S, Diaz JL, Horne W, Chang J, Wang Y, Wilson G, Chang S, Weeks S, Fritz LC, Oltersdorf T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.49.30866](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.49.30866)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):30866-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.49.30866.

Dimerization properties of human BAD. Identification of a BH-3 domain and 
analysis of its binding to mutant BCL-2 and BCL-XL proteins.

Ottilie S(1), Diaz JL, Horne W, Chang J, Wang Y, Wilson G, Chang S, Weeks S, 
Fritz LC, Oltersdorf T.

Author information:
(1)IDUN Pharmaceuticals Inc., La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Bad, an inducer of programmed cell death, was recently isolated from a mouse 
cDNA library by its ability to bind to the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2. 
Sequence analysis suggested that Bad was a member of the BCL-2 gene family that 
encodes both inducers and inhibitors of programmed cell death. To further 
analyze the role of BAD in the network of homo- and heterodimers formed by the 
BCL-2 family, we have cloned the human homologue of BAD and assessed its 
biological activity and its interactions with wild type and mutant BCL-2 family 
proteins. Our results indicate that the human BAD protein, like its mouse 
homologue, is able to induce apoptosis when transfected into mammalian cells. 
Furthermore, in yeast two-hybrid assays as well as quantitative in vitro 
interaction assays, human Bad interacted with BCL-2 and BCL-XL. Sequence 
alignments of human BAD revealed the presence of a BH-3 homology domain as seen 
in other BCL-2 family proteins. Peptides derived from this domain were able to 
completely inhibit the dimerization of BAD with BCL-XL. Thus, as previously 
shown for BAX, BAK, BCL-2, and BCL-XL, the BH3 domain of BAD is required for its 
dimerization with other BCL-2 family proteins. BAD was further analyzed for its 
ability to bind to various mutants of BCL-2 and BCL-XL that have lost the 
ability to bind BAX and BAK, some of which retain biological activity and some 
of which do not. Surprisingly, all of the mutated BCL-2 and BCL-XL proteins 
analyzed strongly interacted with human BAD. Our data thus indicate that 
mutations in BCL-2 and BCL-XL can differentially affect the heterodimeric 
binding of different death-promoting proteins and have implications concerning 
the relationship between heterodimerization and biological activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.49.30866
PMID: 9388232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
