---
pmid: '18331830'
title: Fast skeletal muscle troponin I is a co-activator of estrogen receptor-related
  receptor alpha.
authors:
- Li Y
- Chen B
- Chen J
- Lou G
- Chen S
- Zhou D
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.147
---

# Fast skeletal muscle troponin I is a co-activator of estrogen receptor-related receptor alpha.
**Authors:** Li Y, Chen B, Chen J, Lou G, Chen S, Zhou D
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.147](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.147)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1034-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.147. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Fast skeletal muscle troponin I is a co-activator of estrogen receptor-related 
receptor alpha.

Li Y(1), Chen B, Chen J, Lou G, Chen S, Zhou D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Third Military Medical 
University, No. 30 Gaotanyan Street, Chongqing 400038, China.

ERRalpha (estrogen receptor-related receptor alpha) is a member of the nuclear 
receptor superfamily. To further our understanding of the detailed molecular 
mechanism of transcriptional regulation by ERRalpha, we searched for 
ERRalpha-interacting proteins using a yeast two-hybrid system by screening a 
human mammary gland cDNA expression library with the ligand-binding domain (LBD) 
of ERRalpha as the "bait". Fast skeletal muscle troponin I (TNNI2), along with 
several known nuclear receptor co-activators, were isolated. We demonstrated 
that TNNI2 localizes to the cell nucleus and interacts with ERRalpha in 
co-immunoprecipitation experiments. GST pull-down assays also revealed that 
TNNI2 interacts directly with ERRalpha. Through luciferase reporter gene assays, 
TNNI2 was found to enhance the transactivity of ERRalpha. Combining mutagenesis 
and yeast two-hybrid assays, we mapped the ERRalpha-interacting domain on TNNI2 
to a region encompassing amino acids 1-128. These findings reveal a new function 
for TNNI2 as a co-activator of ERRalpha.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.147
PMID: 18331830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
