---
pmid: '32430360'
title: De novo variants in SIAH1, encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are associated
  with developmental delay, hypotonia and dysmorphic features.
authors:
- Buratti J
- Ji L
- Keren B
- Lee Y
- Booke S
- Erdin S
- Kim SY
- Palculict TB
- Meiner V
- Chae JH
- Woods CG
- Tam A
- Héron D
- Cong F
- Harel T
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106335
---

# De novo variants in SIAH1, encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are associated with developmental delay, hypotonia and dysmorphic features.
**Authors:** Buratti J, Ji L, Keren B, Lee Y, Booke S, Erdin S, Kim SY, Palculict TB, Meiner V, Chae JH, Woods CG, Tam A, Héron D, Cong F, Harel T
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106335](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106335)

## Abstract

1. J Med Genet. 2021 Mar;58(3):205-212. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106335. Epub 
2020 May 19.

De novo variants in SIAH1, encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are associated with 
developmental delay, hypotonia and dysmorphic features.

Buratti J(1), Ji L(2), Keren B(1), Lee Y(3), Booke S(4), Erdin S(5)(6), Kim 
SY(7), Palculict TB(8), Meiner V(9), Chae JH(7), Woods CG(10), Tam A(4), Héron 
D(11), Cong F(2), Harel T(12).

Author information:
(1)Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance 
publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical 
Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(10)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Univeristy of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(11)Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence "déficiences intellectuelles 
de causes rares", AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel tamarhe@hadassah.org.il.

BACKGROUND: Ubiquitination has a central role in numerous biological processes, 
including cell development, stress responses and ageing. Perturbed 
ubiquitination has been implicated in human diseases ranging from cancer to 
neurodegenerative diseases. SIAH1 encodes a RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase 
involved in protein ubiquitination. Among numerous other roles, SIAH1 regulates 
metabotropic glutamate receptor signalling and affects neural cell fate. 
Moreover, SIAH1 positively regulates Wnt signalling through ubiquitin-mediated 
degradation of Axin and accumulation of β-catenin.
METHODS: Trio exome sequencing followed by Sanger validation was undertaken in 
five individuals with syndromic developmental delay. Three-dimensional 
structural modelling was used to predict pathogenicity of affected residues. Wnt 
stimulatory activity was measured by luciferase reporter assays and Axin 
degradation assays in HEK293 cells transfected with wild-type and mutant SIAH1 
expression plasmids.
RESULTS: We report five unrelated individuals with shared features of 
developmental delay, infantile hypotonia, dysmorphic features and 
laryngomalacia, in whom exome sequencing identified de novo monoallelic variants 
in SIAH1. In silico protein modelling suggested alteration of conserved 
functional sites. In vitro experiments demonstrated loss of Wnt stimulatory 
activity with the SIAH1 mutants, suggesting variant pathogenicity.
CONCLUSION: Our results lend support to SIAH1 as a candidate Mendelian disease 
gene for a recognisable syndrome, further strengthening the connection between 
SIAH1 and neurodevelopmental disorders. Furthermore, the results suggest that 
dysregulation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway may be involved in the pathogenesis.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2019-106335
PMID: 32430360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: TBP is an employee of 
GeneDx.
