---
pmid: '15889146'
title: Replication fork blockage by RTS1 at an ectopic site promotes recombination
  in fission yeast.
authors:
- Ahn JS
- Osman F
- Whitby MC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1142605
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600670
---

# Replication fork blockage by RTS1 at an ectopic site promotes recombination in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Ahn JS, Osman F, Whitby MC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600670](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600670)
**PMC:** [PMC1142605](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1142605/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2005 Jun 1;24(11):2011-23. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600670. Epub 2005
May  5.

Replication fork blockage by RTS1 at an ectopic site promotes recombination in 
fission yeast.

Ahn JS(1), Osman F, Whitby MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Homologous recombination is believed to play important roles in processing 
stalled/blocked replication forks in eukaryotes. In accordance with this, 
recombination is induced by replication fork barriers (RFBs) within the rDNA 
locus. However, the rDNA locus is a specialised region of the genome, and 
therefore the action of recombinases at its RFBs may be atypical. We show here 
for the first time that direct repeat recombination, dependent on Rad22 and 
Rhp51, is induced by replication fork blockage at a site-specific RFB (RTS1) 
within a 'typical' genomic locus in fission yeast. Importantly, when the RFB is 
positioned between the direct repeat, conservative gene conversion events 
predominate over deletion events. This is consistent with recombination 
occurring without breakage of the blocked fork. In the absence of the RecQ 
family DNA helicase Rqh1, deletion events increase dramatically, which 
correlates with the detection of one-sided DNA double-strand breaks at or near 
RTS1. These data indicate that Rqh1 acts to prevent blocked replication forks 
from collapsing and thereby inducing deletion events.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600670
PMCID: PMC1142605
PMID: 15889146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Homologous recombination is believed to play important roles in processing stalled/blocked replication forks in eukaryotes. In accordance with this, recombination is induced by replication fork barriers (RFBs) within the rDNA locus. However, the rDNA locus is a specialised region of the genome, and therefore the action of recombinases at its RFBs may be atypical. We show here for the first time that direct repeat recombination, dependent on Rad22 and Rhp51, is induced by replication fork blockage at a site-specific RFB ( RTS1 ) within a ‘typical' genomic locus in fission yeast. Importantly, when the RFB is positioned between the direct repeat, conservative gene conversion events predominate over deletion events. This is consistent with recombination occurring without breakage of the blocked fork. In the absence of the RecQ family DNA helicase Rqh1, deletion events increase dramatically, which correlates with the detection of one-sided DNA double-strand breaks at or near RTS1 . These data indicate that Rqh1 acts to prevent blocked replication forks from collapsing and thereby inducing deletion events.

Introduction

The path of a replication fork is often littered with obstacles that prevent its easy passage. Such obstacles can be accidental, for example lesions in the DNA template or proteins bound to the DNA template, or can be programmed ( Rothstein et al , 2000 ). The appropriate response to these obstacles is important for both efficient DNA synthesis and the maintenance of genome stability.

Proteins that promote homologous recombination play important roles in processing stalled and blocked replication forks ( McGlynn and Lloyd, 2002 ; Michel et al , 2004 ). For example, they can promote fork reversal where the nascent strands are unwound from their templates and annealed to each other ( McGlynn and Lloyd, 2002 ). Fork reversal may enable polymerases to switch templates and bypass DNA lesions ( Higgins et al , 1976 ), as well as provide room for DNA repair enzymes to remove blocking lesions in the DNA template ( Courcelle et al , 2003 ). Recombination proteins can also protect the replication fork from excessive nucleolytic attack ( Courcelle et al , 2003 ), and help the restart of replication by generating DNA structures at which replication proteins can reload ( Liu et al , 1999 ). However, the cell has to be circumspect about its use of recombination. Inappropriate recombination can result in genome instability, for example recombination between repetitive DNA elements can result in the expansion and contraction of tandem arrays, or even translocations between different chromosomes. Such events are hallmarks of a number of diseases including cancer.

Studies of replication fork stalling in Escherichia coli have established that the way in which a blocked replication fork is processed depends on the type of block ( Michel et al , 2004 ). For example, an ultra violet light (UV)-induced lesion in the leading strand template may be side-stepped by a recombination-mediated transient switch of the polymerase onto the nascent lagging strand ( Higgins et al , 1976 ), whereas a UV-induced lesion in the lagging strand template may be left unreplicated, the resultant daughter strand gap being repaired by recombination postreplication ( Rupp and Howard-Flanders, 1968 ). At other types of stalled or blocked replication fork, it may be sufficient to simply stabilise the fork until the block is removed and DNA synthesis can be resumed. This appears to be true in yeast for forks that are stalled by dNTP depletion mediated by the drug hydroxyurea (HU), which inhibits ribonucleotide reductase. The maintenance of fork stability here depends on the intra-S checkpoint kinase Rad53 ( Lopes et al , 2001 ; Sogo et al , 2002 ).

Members of the RecQ family of DNA helicases, which includes Sgs1 and Rqh1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe , respectively, and BLM and WRN in humans, also play crucial roles in maintaining fork stability ( Hickson, 2003 ). The importance of this is underlined by the fact that defects in BLM and WRN give rise to the cancer-prone diseases Blooms syndrome and Werners syndrome, respectively. In S. cerevisiae , Sgs1 prevents polymerase dissociation from replication forks stalled by HU treatment ( Cobb et al , 2003 ). RecQ helicases may also reset reversed replication forks by branch migrating Holliday junctions (HJs) that are formed when nascent strands anneal to each other ( Doe et al , 2000 ; Karow et al , 2000 ). It has been suggested that this activity might prevent replication fork breakage by the XPF-related endonuclease Mus81-Eme1 ( Kaliraman et al , 2001 ; Doe et al , 2002 ). The ability to branch migrate HJs may also be used by RecQ helicases to abort inappropriate recombination at stalled forks, and, together with Topoisomerase III, to process double HJ intermediates as noncrossover recombinants ( Ira et al , 2003 ; Wu and Hickson, 2003 ). These activities would reduce the risk of genome rearrangements caused by crossing over between repeated DNA sequences.

A growing number of programmed replication fork barriers (RFBs) or pause sites have been identified ( Rothstein et al , 2000 ). Important roles for RFBs include ensuring the successful merging of opposing replication forks, and promoting the avoidance of collisions between replication forks and transcription complexes ( Brewer and Fangman, 1988 ; Krabbe et al , 1997 ; Rothstein et al , 2000 ). Unlike most accidental blockades, the majority of programmed RFBs are unidirectional. Replication can therefore be completed when the blocked fork merges with the opposing fork. In theory, recombination at such blocked forks would be an unnecessary risk, and therefore should be suppressed. However, like accidental blockades, programmed RFBs can elicit different responses. In E. coli , replication forks blocked at Ter sites bound by the Tus protein remain stable, and only provoke recombination if a subsequent round of replication runs into the back of them to generate free double-strand ends ( Bidnenko et al , 2002 ). In contrast, forks blocked at RFBs in the rDNA locus of S. cerevisiae appear to more directly stimulate recombination resulting in the expansion and contraction of the array, as well as the production of extrachromosomal rDNA circles (ERCs) ( Kobayashi et al , 1998 ; Weitao et al , 2003b ; Burkhalter and Sogo, 2004 ).

Here, we have analysed whether a third RFB, RTS1 , provokes recombination in S. pombe . RTS1 ensures that replication of the mat1 locus in S. pombe occurs in the centromere-proximal direction ( Dalgaard and Klar, 2001 ; Vengrova et al , 2002 ). This is necessary for laying down an imprint, which stimulates mating-type switching in the next generation ( Dalgaard and Klar, 1999 ). Essential to RTS1 function are four repeated ∼55 bp motifs, whose function is enhanced by an ∼60 bp purine-rich region ( Codlin and Dalgaard, 2003 ). The barrier function of these cis -acting elements depends on the Swi1–Swi3 complex and the trans -acting replication termination factors Rtf1 and Rtf2 ( Dalgaard and Klar, 2000 ).

We show that replication fork blockage by RTS1 massively stimulates recombination between repeated DNA sequences with a bias toward conservative gene conversion events. This recombination, like that induced by stochastic events, depends on the S. pombe homologues of the recombinases Rad51 (called Rhp51) and Rad52 (called Rad22). These data provide the first demonstration that a site-specific replication fork blockage outside of the rDNA locus directly stimulates recombination. We also show that RTS1 -induced recombination is constrained by Rqh1. In particular, rqh1 − mutants exhibit a dramatic increase in deletion recombinants, which correlates with the detection of one-sided double-strand breaks (DSBs) in the vicinity of the RFB. This provides further evidence that RecQ DNA helicases protect stalled replication forks from collapse.

Discussion

Direct repeats of mutant heteroalleles are widely used to monitor the frequency of inter/intra-chromatid recombination in mitotic cells ( Klein, 1995 ). We have further developed this system here to monitor the effect of a site-specific RFB on recombination. Previous studies on the effects of RFBs on recombination in eukaryotes have concentrated on the RFB at the rDNA locus in S. cerevisiae . However, the rDNA is an atypical locus, making extrapolations to the wider genome uncertain. Furthermore, it contains other factors that stimulate recombination, namely the HOT1 site and collisions between replication forks and RNA polymerases ( Voelkel-Meiman et al , 1987 ; Takeuchi et al , 2003 ), which complicate analysis of the contribution that the RFB makes to recombination. Our system avoids these complications and uncertainties by using the RTS1 RFB positioned at a ‘typical' genomic locus. With this we have confirmed that replication fork blockage by a programmed RFB can induce deletion recombination. It also strongly induces conservative gene conversion events, and we believe that this is the first time that this has been shown for a site-specific RFB. Recombination that is stimulated by replication fork blockage at RTS1 depends mainly on known pathways, which are catalysed by the Rhp51 and Rad22 recombinases ( Doe et al , 2004 ). Furthermore, this recombination is controlled by the Rqh1 DNA helicase. In particular, Rqh1 greatly limits the formation of deletion recombinants seemingly by preventing replication fork breakage.

Media and general genetic methods

Media for growing S. pombe and general genetic methods are as described ( Gutz et al , 1974 ).
