---
pmid: '7684374'
title: Human glyoxalase I. cDNA cloning, expression, and sequence similarity to glyoxalase
  I from Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- Kim NS
- Umezawa Y
- Ohmura S
- Kato S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# Human glyoxalase I. cDNA cloning, expression, and sequence similarity to glyoxalase I from Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Kim NS, Umezawa Y, Ohmura S, Kato S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 May 25;268(15):11217-21.

Human glyoxalase I. cDNA cloning, expression, and sequence similarity to 
glyoxalase I from Pseudomonas putida.

Kim NS(1), Umezawa Y, Ohmura S, Kato S.

Author information:
(1)Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology (KAST), Japan.

Glyoxalase I (EC 4.4.1.5) catalyzes the transformation of methylglyoxal and 
glutathione to S-lactoylglutathione. We have isolated human cDNA clones encoding 
glyoxalase I from a phorbol myristate acetate-treated U937 cDNA library. This 
cDNA encodes a protein of 184 amino acids with a calculated M(r) of 20,719. The 
amino acid composition calculated from the deduced amino acid sequence agreed 
with that reported for glyoxalase I purified from human erythrocytes. The 
Escherichia coli cells carrying the expression vector of this cDNA acquired 
methylglyoxal resistance and the cell lysate showed the high activity of 
glyoxalase I. The amino acid sequence of human glyoxalase I exhibited 57% 
identity with Pseudomonas putida glyoxalase I at the C-terminal two-thirds, 
suggesting that the two enzymes may have originated from a common ancestor.

PMID: 7684374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
