---
pmid: '10200318'
title: Genetic background changes the pattern of forebrain commissure defects in transgenic
  mice underexpressing the beta-amyloid-precursor protein.
authors:
- Magara F
- Müller U
- Li ZW
- Lipp HP
- Weissmann C
- Stagljar M
- Wolfer DP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC16388
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.8.4656
---

# Genetic background changes the pattern of forebrain commissure defects in transgenic mice underexpressing the beta-amyloid-precursor protein.
**Authors:** Magara F, Müller U, Li ZW, Lipp HP, Weissmann C, Stagljar M, Wolfer DP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.8.4656](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.8.4656)
**PMC:** [PMC16388](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC16388/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 13;96(8):4656-61. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.8.4656.

Genetic background changes the pattern of forebrain commissure defects in 
transgenic mice underexpressing the beta-amyloid-precursor protein.

Magara F(1), Müller U, Li ZW, Lipp HP, Weissmann C, Stagljar M, Wolfer DP.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 
Zurich, Switzerland.

We previously have reported corpus callosum defects in transgenic mice 
expressing the beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) with a deletion of exon 
2 and at only 5% of normal levels. This finding indicates a possible involvement 
of betaAPP in the regulation or guidance of axon growth during neural 
development. To determine to what degree the betaAPP mutation interacts with 
genetic background alleles that predispose for forebrain commissure defects in 
some mouse lines, we have assessed the size of the forebrain commissures in a 
sample of 298 mice. Lines with mixed genetic background were compared with 
congenic lines obtained by backcrossing to the parental strains C57BL/6 and 
129/SvEv. Mice bearing a null mutation of the betaAPP gene also were included in 
the analysis. We show that, independently of genetic background, both lack and 
underexpression of betaAPP are associated with reduced brain weight and reduced 
size of forebrain commissures, especially of the ventral hippocampal commissure. 
In addition, both mutations drastically increase the frequency and severity of 
callosal agenesis and hippocampal commissure defects in mouse lines with 
129/SvEv or 129/Ola background.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.8.4656
PMCID: PMC16388
PMID: 10200318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
