---
pmid: '15641778'
title: Assembly of human frataxin is a mechanism for detoxifying redox-active iron.
authors:
- O'Neill HA
- Gakh O
- Park S
- Cui J
- Mooney SM
- Sampson M
- Ferreira GC
- Isaya G
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi048459j
---

# Assembly of human frataxin is a mechanism for detoxifying redox-active iron.
**Authors:** O'Neill HA, Gakh O, Park S, Cui J, Mooney SM, Sampson M, Ferreira GC, Isaya G
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi048459j](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi048459j)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2005 Jan 18;44(2):537-45. doi: 10.1021/bi048459j.

Assembly of human frataxin is a mechanism for detoxifying redox-active iron.

O'Neill HA(1), Gakh O, Park S, Cui J, Mooney SM, Sampson M, Ferreira GC, Isaya 
G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Mitochondrial function depends on a continuous supply of iron to the iron-sulfur 
cluster (ISC) and heme biosynthetic pathways as well as on the ability to 
prevent iron-catalyzed oxidative damage. The mitochondrial protein frataxin 
plays a key role in these processes by a novel mechanism that remains to be 
fully elucidated. Recombinant yeast and human frataxin are able to 
self-associate in large molecular assemblies that bind and store iron as a 
ferrihydrite mineral. Moreover, either single monomers or polymers of human 
frataxin have been shown to serve as donors of Fe(II) to ISC scaffold proteins, 
oxidatively inactivated [3Fe-4S](+) aconitase, and ferrochelatase. These results 
suggest that frataxin can use different molecular forms to accomplish its 
functions. Here, stable monomeric and assembled forms of human frataxin purified 
from Escherichia coli have provided a tool for testing this hypothesis at the 
biochemical level. We show that human frataxin can enhance the availability of 
Fe(II) in monomeric or assembled form. However, the monomer is unable to prevent 
iron-catalyzed radical reactions and the formation of insoluble ferric iron 
oxides. In contrast, the assembled protein has ferroxidase activity and 
detoxifies redox-active iron by sequestering it in a protein-protected 
compartment.

DOI: 10.1021/bi048459j
PMID: 15641778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
