---
pmid: '8661025'
title: 'The human gene CGT encoding the UDP-galactose ceramide galactosyl transferase
  (cerebroside synthase): cloning, characterization, and assignment to human chromosome
  4, band q26.'
authors:
- Bosio A
- Binczek E
- Le Beau MM
- Fernald AA
- Stoffel W
journal: Genomics
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0242
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human gene CGT encoding the UDP-galactose ceramide galactosyl transferase (cerebroside synthase): cloning, characterization, and assignment to human chromosome 4, band q26.
**Authors:** Bosio A, Binczek E, Le Beau MM, Fernald AA, Stoffel W
**Journal:** Genomics (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1996.0242](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1996.0242)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1996 May 15;34(1):69-75. doi: 10.1006/geno.1996.0242.

The human gene CGT encoding the UDP-galactose ceramide galactosyl transferase 
(cerebroside synthase): cloning, characterization, and assignment to human 
chromosome 4, band q26.

Bosio A(1), Binczek E, Le Beau MM, Fernald AA, Stoffel W.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität Köln, 
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 52, Cologne, D-50931, Germany.

We have previously cloned the human UDP-galactose ceramide galactosyltransferase 
(CGT, E.C. 2.4.1.45) cDNA. Its open reading frame encodes the key enzyme in the 
biosynthesis of the glycosphingolipids, cerebrosides and sulfatides, essential 
constituents of the myelin membrane of the central nervous system (CNS) and PNS. 
Expression of the CGT gene and of the myelin-specific proteins in the terminal 
differentiated oligodendrocyte of CNS and in Schwann cells of PNS is 
cell-specific and highly time-regulated. The CGT gene therefore is important in 
the differentiation program of the oligodendrocyte lineage. Here we report the 
structural organization and the chromosomal localization of the human CGT gene. 
The coding sequence is separated into five exons, which are distributed over >40 
kb. The CGT locus was mapped to the distal region of human chromosome 4, band 
q26. The organization of the CGT gene and of the UGT 
(uridylglucuronosyltransferases) gene family suggests a correlation to 
functional domains of the encoded proteins.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1996.0242
PMID: 8661025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
