---
reference_id: PMID:17210684
title: Daxx cooperates with the Axin/HIPK2/p53 complex to induce cell death.
authors:
- Li Q
- Wang X
- Wu X
- Rui Y
- Liu W
- Wang J
- Wang X
- Liou YC
- Ye Z
- Lin SC
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1671
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism"
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Axin Protein
- Carrier Proteins/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cell Nucleus/metabolism, radiation effects"
- Co-Repressor Proteins
- Cytochromes c/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Molecular Chaperones
- Nuclear Proteins/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Repressor Proteins/metabolism
- Transcriptional Activation
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
- Ultraviolet Rays
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Daxx cooperates with the Axin/HIPK2/p53 complex to induce cell death.
**Authors:** Li Q, Wang X, Wu X, Rui Y, Liu W, Wang J, Wang X, Liou YC, Ye Z, Lin SC
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1671](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1671)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2007 Jan 1;67(1):66-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1671.

Daxx cooperates with the Axin/HIPK2/p53 complex to induce cell death.

Li Q(1), Wang X, Wu X, Rui Y, Liu W, Wang J, Wang X, Liou YC, Ye Z, Lin SC.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Cell Biology and Tumor Cell 
Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Fujian 361005, China.

Daxx, a death domain-associated protein, has been implicated in proapoptosis, 
antiapoptosis, and transcriptional regulation. Many factors known to play 
critically important roles in controlling apoptosis and gene transcription have 
been shown to associate with Daxx, including the Ser/Thr protein kinase HIPK2, 
promyelocytic leukemia protein, histone deacetylases, and the chromatin 
remodeling protein ATRX. Although it is clear that Daxx may exert multiple 
functions, the underlying mechanisms remain far from clear. Here, we show that 
Axin, originally identified for its scaffolding role to control beta-catenin 
levels in Wnt signaling, strongly associates with Daxx at endogenous levels. The 
Daxx/Axin complex formation is enhanced by UV irradiation. Axin tethers Daxx to 
the tumor suppressor p53, and cooperates with Daxx, but not DaxxDeltaAxin, which 
is unable to interact with Axin, to stimulate HIPK2-mediated Ser(46) 
phosphorylation and transcriptional activity of p53. Interestingly, Axin and 
Daxx seem to selectively activate p53 target genes, with strong activation of 
PUMA, but not p21 or Bax. Daxx-stimulated p53 transcriptional activity was 
significantly diminished by small interfering RNA against Axin; Daxx fails to 
inhibit colony formation in Axin(-/-) cells. Moreover, UV-induced cell death was 
attenuated by the knockdown of Axin and Daxx. All these results show that Daxx 
cooperates with Axin to stimulate p53, and implicate a direct role for Axin, 
HIPK2, and p53 in the proapoptotic function of Daxx. We have hence unraveled a 
novel aspect of p53 activation and shed new light on the ultimate understanding 
of the Daxx protein, perhaps most pertinently, in relation to stress-induced 
cell death.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1671
PMID: 17210684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]