---
pmid: '21952047'
title: PKC alpha regulates Sendai virus-mediated interferon induction through HDAC6
  and β-catenin.
authors:
- Zhu J
- Coyne CB
- Sarkar SN
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3243614
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.351
---

# PKC alpha regulates Sendai virus-mediated interferon induction through HDAC6 and β-catenin.
**Authors:** Zhu J, Coyne CB, Sarkar SN
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.351](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.351)
**PMC:** [PMC3243614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3243614/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 27;30(23):4838-49. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.351.

PKC alpha regulates Sendai virus-mediated interferon induction through HDAC6 and 
β-catenin.

Zhu J(1), Coyne CB, Sarkar SN.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Recognition of viral RNA by cytoplasmic retinoic acid inducible gene I 
(RIG-I)-like receptors initiates signals leading to the induction of type I 
interferon (IFN) transcription via transcription factors such as interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). Here, we describe a 
new signalling pathway that involves protein kinase C alpha (PKCα), histone 
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and beta-catenin (β-catenin), which is essential for IFN 
gene induction following virus infection. Knockdown of PKCα in various human 
cells, including primary cells, inhibited Sendai virus (SeV)-mediated IFN 
induction and enhanced virus replication. In the absence of this pathway IRF3 
becomes activated, but does not bind to its promoter and is thus unable to 
support transcription. Mechanistically, SeV infection induced the activation of 
PKCα, which promoted its interaction with HDAC6 and enhanced its deacetylation 
activity in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Further downstream, HDAC6 caused 
deacetylation of β-catenin and enhanced its nuclear translocation and promoter 
binding. In the nucleus, β-catenin acted as a co-activator for IRF3-mediated 
transcription. Our findings suggest an important role of a novel signalling 
pathway mediated by PKCα-HDAC6-β-catenin in controlling IRF3-mediated 
transcription.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.351
PMCID: PMC3243614
PMID: 21952047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
