---
pmid: '28575652'
title: Mutations in KDSR Cause Recessive Progressive Symmetric Erythrokeratoderma.
authors:
- Boyden LM
- Vincent NG
- Zhou J
- Hu R
- Craiglow BG
- Bayliss SJ
- Rosman IS
- Lucky AW
- Diaz LA
- Goldsmith LA
- Paller AS
- Lifton RP
- Baserga SJ
- Choate KA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5473720
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in KDSR Cause Recessive Progressive Symmetric Erythrokeratoderma.
**Authors:** Boyden LM, Vincent NG, Zhou J, Hu R, Craiglow BG, Bayliss SJ, Rosman IS, Lucky AW, Diaz LA, Goldsmith LA, Paller AS, Lifton RP, Baserga SJ, Choate KA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.003)
**PMC:** [PMC5473720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5473720/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Jun 1;100(6):978-984. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.003.

Mutations in KDSR Cause Recessive Progressive Symmetric Erythrokeratoderma.

Boyden LM(1), Vincent NG(2), Zhou J(3), Hu R(3), Craiglow BG(3), Bayliss SJ(4), 
Rosman IS(4), Lucky AW(5), Diaz LA(6), Goldsmith LA(6), Paller AS(7), Lifton 
RP(1), Baserga SJ(8), Choate KA(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(4)Division of Dermatology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(5)Dermatologists of Southwest Ohio, Cincinnatti, OH 45247, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27516, USA.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA; Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Molecular Biophysics and 
Biochemistry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(9)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA; Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Pathology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address: keith.choate@yale.edu.

The discovery of new genetic determinants of inherited skin disorders has been 
instrumental to the understanding of epidermal function, differentiation, and 
renewal. Here, we show that mutations in KDSR (3-ketodihydrosphingosine 
reductase), encoding an enzyme in the ceramide synthesis pathway, lead to a 
previously undescribed recessive Mendelian disorder in the progressive symmetric 
erythrokeratoderma spectrum. This disorder is characterized by severe lesions of 
thick scaly skin on the face and genitals and thickened, red, and scaly skin on 
the hands and feet. Although exome sequencing revealed several of the KDSR 
mutations, we employed genome sequencing to discover a pathogenic 346 kb 
inversion in multiple probands, and cDNA sequencing and a splicing assay 
established that two mutations, including a recurrent silent third base change, 
cause exon skipping. Immunohistochemistry and yeast complementation studies 
demonstrated that the mutations cause defects in KDSR function. Systemic 
isotretinoin therapy has achieved nearly complete resolution in the two probands 
in whom it has been applied, consistent with the effects of retinoic acid on 
alternative pathways for ceramide generation.

Copyright © 2017 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2017.05.003
PMCID: PMC5473720
PMID: 28575652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
