---
pmid: '23850451'
title: Structural determinants and mechanism of mammalian CRM1 allostery.
authors:
- Dölker N
- Blanchet CE
- Voß B
- Haselbach D
- Kappel C
- Monecke T
- Svergun DI
- Stark H
- Ficner R
- Zachariae U
- Grubmüller H
- Dickmanns A
journal: Structure
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.05.015
---

# Structural determinants and mechanism of mammalian CRM1 allostery.
**Authors:** Dölker N, Blanchet CE, Voß B, Haselbach D, Kappel C, Monecke T, Svergun DI, Stark H, Ficner R, Zachariae U, Grubmüller H, Dickmanns A
**Journal:** Structure (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2013.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2013.05.015)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2013 Aug 6;21(8):1350-60. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.05.015. Epub 2013
 Jul 11.

Structural determinants and mechanism of mammalian CRM1 allostery.

Dölker N(1), Blanchet CE, Voß B, Haselbach D, Kappel C, Monecke T, Svergun DI, 
Stark H, Ficner R, Zachariae U, Grubmüller H, Dickmanns A.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Theoretische und Computergestützte Biophysik, 
Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Am Faßberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, 
Germany.

Proteins carrying nuclear export signals cooperatively assemble with the export 
factor CRM1 and the effector protein RanGTP. In lower eukaryotes, this 
cooperativity is coupled to CRM1 conformational changes; however, it is unknown 
if mammalian CRM1 maintains its compact conformation or shows similar structural 
flexibility. Here, combinations of small-angle X-ray solution scattering and 
electron microscopy experiments with molecular dynamics simulations reveal 
pronounced conformational flexibility in mammalian CRM1 and demonstrate that 
RanGTP binding induces association of its N- and C-terminal regions to form a 
toroid structure. The CRM1 toroid is stabilized mainly by local interactions 
between the terminal regions, rather than by global strain. The CRM1 acidic loop 
is key in transmitting the effect of this RanGTP-induced global conformational 
change to the NES-binding cleft by shifting its population to the open state, 
which displays enhanced cargo affinity. Cooperative CRM1 export complex assembly 
thus constitutes a highly dynamic process, encompassing an intricate interplay 
of global and local structural changes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2013.05.015
PMID: 23850451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
