---
reference_id: PMID:38065098
title: SAP30BP interacts with RBM17/SPF45 to promote splicing in a subset of human short introns.
authors:
- Fukumura K
- Sperotto L
- Seuß S
- Kang HS
- Yoshimoto R
- Sattler M
- Mayeda A
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113534
keywords:
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- "Splicing Factor U2AF/genetics, metabolism"
- RNA Splicing/genetics
- "RNA Splicing Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Spliceosomes/metabolism
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U2 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- RNA Precursors/metabolism
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# SAP30BP interacts with RBM17/SPF45 to promote splicing in a subset of human short introns.
**Authors:** Fukumura K, Sperotto L, Seuß S, Kang HS, Yoshimoto R, Sattler M, Mayeda A
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113534](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113534)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2023 Dec 26;42(12):113534. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113534. Epub 
2023 Dec 7.

SAP30BP interacts with RBM17/SPF45 to promote splicing in a subset of human 
short introns.

Fukumura K(1), Sperotto L(2), Seuß S(2), Kang HS(2), Yoshimoto R(3), Sattler 
M(2), Mayeda A(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Center for Medical Science, Fujita 
Health University, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. Electronic address: 
fukumura@fujita-hu.ac.jp.
(2)Institute of Structural Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany; Bavarian NMR Center, TUM School of Natural Sciences, 85748 Garching, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, Setsunan 
University, Hirakata, Osaka 673-0101, Japan.
(4)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Center for Medical Science, Fujita 
Health University, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. Electronic address: 
mayeda@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2023 Dec 7;83(23):4222-4238.e10. doi: 
10.1016/j.molcel.2023.10.034.

Human pre-mRNA splicing requires the removal of introns with highly variable 
lengths, from tens to over a million nucleotides. Therefore, mechanisms of 
intron recognition and splicing are likely not universal. Recently, we reported 
that splicing in a subset of human short introns with truncated polypyrimidine 
tracts depends on RBM17 (SPF45), instead of the canonical splicing factor U2 
auxiliary factor (U2AF) heterodimer. Here, we demonstrate that SAP30BP, a factor 
previously implicated in transcriptional control, is an essential splicing 
cofactor for RBM17. In vitro binding and nuclear magnetic resonance analyses 
demonstrate that a U2AF-homology motif (UHM) in RBM17 binds directly to a newly 
identified UHM-ligand motif in SAP30BP. We show that this RBM17-SAP30BP 
interaction is required to specifically recruit RBM17 to phosphorylated SF3B1 
(SF3b155), a U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (U2 snRNP) component in active 
spliceosomes. We propose a mechanism for splicing in a subset of short introns, 
in which SAP30BP guides RBM17 in the assembly of active spliceosomes.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113534
PMID: 38065098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.