---
pmid: '9442054'
title: DNA-dependent protein kinase interacts with antigen receptor response element
  binding proteins NF90 and NF45.
authors:
- Ting NS
- Kao PN
- Chan DW
- Lintott LG
- Lees-Miller SP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.2136
---

# DNA-dependent protein kinase interacts with antigen receptor response element binding proteins NF90 and NF45.
**Authors:** Ting NS, Kao PN, Chan DW, Lintott LG, Lees-Miller SP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.4.2136](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.4.2136)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 23;273(4):2136-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.2136.

DNA-dependent protein kinase interacts with antigen receptor response element 
binding proteins NF90 and NF45.

Ting NS(1), Kao PN, Chan DW, Lintott LG, Lees-Miller SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is composed of a large catalytic 
subunit of approximately 470 kDa (DNA-PKcs) and the DNA-binding protein, Ku. 
Absence of DNA-PK activity confers sensitivity to x-rays and defects in both DNA 
double-strand break repair and V(D)J recombination. However the precise function 
of DNA-PK in DNA double-strand break repair is not known. Here we show, using 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, that polypeptides in a fraction purified 
from human cells interact with DNA-PK and stabilize the formation of a complex 
containing DNA-PKcs-Ku and DNA. Five polypeptides in this fraction have been 
identified by amino-terminal sequence analysis and/or immunoblotting. These 
proteins are NF90 and NF45, which are the 90- and 45-kDa subunits of a protein 
known to bind specifically to the antigen receptor response element of the 
interleukin 2 promoter, and the alpha, beta, and gamma subunits of eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor eIF-2. We also show that NF90, NF45, and eIF-2 
beta are substrates for DNA-PK in vitro. In addition, recombinant NF90 promotes 
formation of a complex between DNA-PKcs, Ku, and DNA, and antibodies to 
recombinant NF90 or recombinant NF45 immunoprecipitate DNA-PKcs in vitro. 
Together, our data suggest that NF90, in complex with NF45, interacts with 
DNA-PKcs and Ku on DNA and that NF90 and NF45 may be important for the function 
of DNA-PK.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.4.2136
PMID: 9442054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
