---
pmid: '9543386'
title: C-TAK1 protein kinase phosphorylates human Cdc25C on serine 216 and promotes
  14-3-3 protein binding.
authors:
- Peng CY
- Graves PR
- Ogg S
- Thoma RS
- Byrnes MJ 3rd
- Wu Z
- Stephenson MT
- Piwnica-Worms H
journal: Cell Growth Differ
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
---

# C-TAK1 protein kinase phosphorylates human Cdc25C on serine 216 and promotes 14-3-3 protein binding.
**Authors:** Peng CY, Graves PR, Ogg S, Thoma RS, Byrnes MJ 3rd, Wu Z, Stephenson MT, Piwnica-Worms H
**Journal:** Cell Growth Differ (1998)

## Abstract

1. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Mar;9(3):197-208.

C-TAK1 protein kinase phosphorylates human Cdc25C on serine 216 and promotes 
14-3-3 protein binding.

Peng CY(1), Graves PR, Ogg S, Thoma RS, Byrnes MJ 3rd, Wu Z, Stephenson MT, 
Piwnica-Worms H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Cdc25C is a dual-specificity protein kinase that controls entry into mitosis by 
dephosphorylating Cdc2 on both threonine 14 and tyrosine 15. Cdc25C is 
phosphorylated on serine 216 throughout interphase but not during mitosis. 
Serine 216 phosphorylation mediates the binding of 14-3-3 protein to Cdc25C, and 
Cdc25C/14-3-3 complexes are present throughout interphase but not during 
mitosis. Here we report the cloning of a human kinase denoted C-TAK1 (for Cdc 
twenty-five C associated protein kinase) that phosphorylates Cdc25C on serine 
216 in vitro. C-TAK1 is ubiquitously expressed in human tissues and cell lines 
and is distinct from the DNA damage checkpoint kinase Chk1, shown previously to 
phosphorylate Cdc25C on serine 216. Cotransfection of Cdc25C with C-TAK1 
resulted in enhanced phosphorylation of Cdc25C on serine 216. In addition, a 
physical interaction between C-TAK1 and Cdc25C was observed upon transient 
overexpression in COS-7 cells. Finally, coproduction of Cdc25C and C-TAK1 in 
bacteria resulted in the stoichiometric phosphorylation of Cdc25C on serine 216 
and facilitated 14-3-3 protein binding in vitro. Taken together, these results 
suggest that one function of C-TAK1 may be to regulate the interactions between 
Cdc25C and 14-3-3 in vivo by phosphorylating Cdc25C on serine 216.

PMID: 9543386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
