---
pmid: '10604883'
title: 'Novel modulator for endothelial adhesion molecules: adipocyte-derived plasma
  protein adiponectin.'
authors:
- Ouchi N
- Kihara S
- Arita Y
- Maeda K
- Kuriyama H
- Okamoto Y
- Hotta K
- Nishida M
- Takahashi M
- Nakamura T
- Yamashita S
- Funahashi T
- Matsuzawa Y
journal: Circulation
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.100.25.2473
---

# Novel modulator for endothelial adhesion molecules: adipocyte-derived plasma protein adiponectin.
**Authors:** Ouchi N, Kihara S, Arita Y, Maeda K, Kuriyama H, Okamoto Y, Hotta K, Nishida M, Takahashi M, Nakamura T, Yamashita S, Funahashi T, Matsuzawa Y
**Journal:** Circulation (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.100.25.2473](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.100.25.2473)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 1999 Dec 21-28;100(25):2473-6. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.100.25.2473.

Novel modulator for endothelial adhesion molecules: adipocyte-derived plasma 
protein adiponectin.

Ouchi N(1), Kihara S, Arita Y, Maeda K, Kuriyama H, Okamoto Y, Hotta K, Nishida 
M, Takahashi M, Nakamura T, Yamashita S, Funahashi T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. ouchi@imed2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Among the many adipocyte-derived endocrine factors, we recently 
found an adipocyte-specific secretory protein, adiponectin, which was decreased 
in obesity. Although obesity is associated with increased cardiovascular 
mortality and morbidity, the molecular basis for the link between obesity and 
vascular disease has not been fully clarified. The present study investigated 
whether adiponectin could modulate endothelial function and relate to coronary 
disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: For the in vitro study, human aortic endothelial cells 
(HAECs) were preincubated for 18 hours with the indicated amount of adiponectin, 
then exposed to tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) (10 U/mL) or vehicle for 
the times indicated. The adhesion of human monocytic cell line THP-1 cells to 
HAECs was determined by adhesion assay. The surface expression of vascular cell 
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 
(E-selectin), and intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) was measured by 
cell ELISA. Physiological concentrations of adiponectin dose-dependently 
inhibited TNF-alpha-induced THP-1 adhesion and expression of VCAM-1, E-selectin, 
and ICAM-1 on HAECs. For the in vivo study, the concentrations of adiponectin in 
human plasma were determined by a sandwich ELISA system that we recently 
developed. Plasma adiponectin concentrations were significantly lower in 
patients with coronary artery disease than those in age- and body mass 
index-adjusted control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that adiponectin modulates endothelial 
inflammatory response and that the measurement of plasma adiponectin levels may 
be helpful in assessment of CAD risk.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.100.25.2473
PMID: 10604883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
