---
pmid: '20334433'
title: The p12 subunit of human polymerase delta modulates the rate and fidelity of
  DNA synthesis.
authors:
- Meng X
- Zhou Y
- Lee EY
- Lee MY
- Frick DN
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2860660
doi: 10.1021/bi100042b
---

# The p12 subunit of human polymerase delta modulates the rate and fidelity of DNA synthesis.
**Authors:** Meng X, Zhou Y, Lee EY, Lee MY, Frick DN
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi100042b](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi100042b)
**PMC:** [PMC2860660](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2860660/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2010 May 4;49(17):3545-54. doi: 10.1021/bi100042b.

The p12 subunit of human polymerase delta modulates the rate and fidelity of DNA 
synthesis.

Meng X(1), Zhou Y, Lee EY, Lee MY, Frick DN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.

This study examines the role of the p12 subunit in the function of the human DNA 
polymerase delta (Pol delta) holoenzyme by comparing the kinetics of DNA 
synthesis and degradation catalyzed by the four-subunit complex, the 
three-subunit complex lacking p12, and site-directed mutants of each lacking 
proofreading exonuclease activity. Results show that p12 modulates the rate and 
fidelity of DNA synthesis by Pol delta. All four complexes synthesize DNA in a 
rapid burst phase and a slower, more linear phase. In the presence of p12, the 
burst rates of DNA synthesis are approximately 5 times faster, while the 
affinity of the enzyme for its DNA and dNTP substrates appears unchanged. The 
p12 subunit alters Pol delta fidelity by modulating the proofreading 3' to 5' 
exonuclease activity. In the absence of p12, Pol delta is more likely to 
proofread DNA synthesis because it cleaves single-stranded DNA twice as fast and 
transfers mismatched DNA from the polymerase to the exonuclease sites 9 times 
faster. Pol delta also extends mismatched primers 3 times more slowly in the 
absence of p12. Taken together, the changes that p12 exerts on Pol delta are 
ones that can modulate its fidelity of DNA synthesis. The loss of p12, which 
occurs in cells upon exposure to DNA-damaging agents, converts Pol delta to a 
form that has an increased capacity for proofreading.

DOI: 10.1021/bi100042b
PMCID: PMC2860660
PMID: 20334433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

This study examines the role of the p12 subunit in the function of the human DNA polymerase δ (Pol δ) holoenzyme by comparing the kinetics of DNA synthesis and degradation catalyzed by the four subunit complex, the three subunit complex lacking p12, and site directed mutants of each lacking proofreading exonuclease activity. Results show that p12 modulates the rate and fidelity of DNA synthesis by Pol δ. All four complexes synthesize DNA in a rapid burst phase and a slower, more linear phase. In the presence of p12, the burst rates of DNA synthesis are about five times faster, while the affinity of the enzyme for its DNA and dNTP substrates appears unchanged. The p12 subunit alters Pol δ fidelity by modulating the proofreading 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity. In the absence of p12, Pol δ is more likely to proofread DNA synthesis because it cleaves single-stranded DNA twice as fast and transfers mismatched DNA from the polymerase to the exonuclease sites 9 times faster. Pol δ also extends mismatched primers 3 times more slowly in the absence of p12. Taken together, the changes that p12 exerts on Pol δ are ones that can modulate its fidelity of DNA synthesis. The loss of p12, which occurs in cells upon exposure to DNA damaging agents, converts Pol δ to a form that has an increased capacity for proofreading.

Results

The abilities of Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 to synthesize DNA have been compared previously only by examining the ability of catalytic amounts of each complex to extend various primers annealed to various templates ( 26 , 27 ). In all these prior assays, Pol δ4 synthesized more DNA than Pol δ3, but it is not clear from those results whether Pol δ4 is a faster DNA polymerase than Pol δ3. It has long been established that the rate-limiting step in standard polymerase assays, where the enzyme is allowed to catalyze multiple reactions, is not DNA synthesis but rather template release ( 30 , 31 ). Similarly, prior assays indicating that Pol δ3 degrades DNA faster than Pol δ4 were done with limiting amounts of enzyme, so observed rates could reflect differences in the amounts of active enzyme in each preparation rather than different exonuclease functions per se ( 27 ). The goal of this study is to compare the polymerase and exonuclease functions of Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 under conditions where rates of DNA synthesis and degradation can be more accurately measured.

Discussion

We have investigated the kinetic properties of human Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 with two goals in mind, first, to understand the role of the p12 subunit in Pol δ catalysis, and second, to gain insights into a rationale for the removal of the p12 subunit during DNA damage, based on their altered properties. We examined the polymerase and exonuclease functions of Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 using pre-steady state kinetic methods to obtain values for kinetic parameters that might provide more information on how p12 alters the catalytic functions of Pol δ. Pre-steady state kinetic analyses have provided powerful tools for understanding the kinetic mechanisms for DNA polymerase functions, and have complemented the structural studies that have lead to current models for the mechanisms whereby the exquisite fidelity of DNA polymerases is achieved ( 3 , 4 ).

The above experiments have provided estimates the constants in scheme 1 : K DNA , K dNTP , k pol , k pol-exo and k exo for Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 ( Table 1 ). Note that scheme 1 is simpler than minimal kinetic mechanisms that have been determined for other DNA polymerases like those encoded by bacteriophages or prokaryotes ( 25 , 38 ) in that the various steps in DNA synthesis are not delineated. In other words, k pol in scheme 1 may include more than one sub-steps, such a conformational change and chemical step. Scheme 1 is also intended to mainly highlight the fact that because the exonuclease active site (exo) is spatially separated from the polymerase active site (pol) ( 6 ), the primer terminus has to be translocated, or switched, to the exo site for proofreading to take place ( 3 , 34 ). Kinetic analyses of polymerase mutants have provided significant insights into understanding how alterations in the rates of these parameters affect the fidelity of DNA polymerases. Alterations in the switching rates from pol to exo sites ( k pol-exo ) affect the efficiency of proofreading, while reductions in k pol that occur by mutation or by encounter of a mismatched terminus lead to a kinetic barrier that favors translocation of the DNA from the pol to the exo site ( 3 , 35 ). Our findings show that two key rate constants, k pol and k pol-exo , are affected by the absence or presence of p12 in the Pol δ enzyme.

The difference in k pol implies that p12 accelerates the rate of DNA synthesis by about 4.6-fold. The k pol of 87 s -1 for Pol δ4 is higher than the value of 21 s -1 previously reported for the p125/p50 dimer calf thymus Pol δ ( 39 ), which is closer to the k pol of 19 s -1 for Pol δ3 ( Table 1 ). However, since the calf thymus experiments were performed at a higher temperature (37 °C) than our studies (24 °C) such a comparison might not be meaningful. Nevertheless, these findings show that p12 has a crucial role in modulating Pol δ catalysis, in which it is able to modulate the rate-limiting step(s) involved in the catalysis of phosphodiester bond formation. This capacity has important implications for the changes that take place when p12 is removed; decreases in k pol have been well established to form a kinetic barrier that increases the probability of switching of the primer terminus from the pol to the exo site, thereby providing a basis for increased proofreading ( 3 ). Thus, p12 acts as a gearshift that regulates k pol in a manner that will alter the proofreading capacity of Pol δ.

The second step altered by p12 is k pol-exo , a rate constant describing the switching of the primer terminus from the pol to the exo sites, a step which plays a critical role in proofreading. This alteration has significant implications for the effects of p12 on the capacity of Pol δ to perform proofreading. The alterations of the balance between polymerase and exonuclease activities that we observed are ones that are well established to alter the proofreading of DNA polymerases, and to generate mutator or antimutator phenotypes in related enzymes that reduce the mutation frequency during replication ( 3 , 35 - 37 ). We have performed experiments which assess the degree of editing by Pol δ4 and Pol δ3 on oligonucleotide substrates and observed the expected increase in editing ( Fig. 5 ). The characteristics displayed by Pol δ3 allow for a prediction that it would display greater fidelity when synthesizing DNA in vitro , and possibly in vivo . Future studies will be needed to obtain quantitative assessments of alterations in the fidelity of DNA synthesis by Pol δ4 and Pol δ3.

Our findings are illustrated in the diagram in Fig. 6A , which shows the directional shifts in k pol , k pol-exo , and the ratio k pol-exo / k pol when p12 is absent or present. The functions of p12 can be viewed as that of a gearshift. The presence of p12 increases the rate of polymerization, and slows the switching rate. When p12 is removed from the Pol δ complex, there is a downshift in the rate of phosphodiester bond formation. This will facilitate proofreading via the kinetic barrier effect, in which reduction of k pol favors the probability of primer terminus translocation from the pol to exo sites. Coupled with this, removal of p12 increases the rates of translocation of primer from the pol to exo site, a change that further enhances proofreading. Thus, p12 functions as a gearshift whose effect on the catalytic properties of Pol δ changes two of the key rate constants that govern proofreading efficiency. Taken together, our data provide a mechanistic basis for the earlier observations that Pol δ3 exhibits behaviors consistent with an increased level of proofreading ( 27 ).

The structural basis for the influence of p12 on both pol and exo functions is unknown, and at this point one can only speculate on how p12 might exert its effects on Pol δ. Comparison of structures of RB69 polymerase with yeast Pol δ ( 19 ) can provide some insights into the mechanisms by which a primer terminus is switched from the pol to the exo sites ( 2 , 16 , 20 - 24 , 40 ). These studies have shown that there are large DNA movements as well as protein conformational changes that take place upon switching between the editing and polymerization modes ( Fig. 6B ). In particular, movement of the tip of the thumb domain ( 21 ) and a β hairpin loop ( 23 , 40 ) must occur in order for DNA to migrate from the pol to the exo site for editing to take place. Notably, in contrast to analogous RB69 structures, the recent yeast Pol δ structure ( 19 ) reveals this β-hairpin (β16-β17) in a conformation where it directly interacts with the template strand, consistent with an involvement with primer switching between pol and exo sites. Thumb movement, however, might be even more critical as evidenced by the fact that some of the first antimutator alleles discovered map to this region of the related T4 DNA polymerase ( 41 ) and the mutations have now been shown to clearly affect primer switching in the T4 enzyme ( 37 , 42 ). Effects of p12 on the reduction of the rate of switching of the primer from the pol to the exo site ( k pol-exo ) could be exerted by an interaction with such regions of Pol δ. p12 could exert effects on conformation changes, cause steric interference of the movement of the primer terminus, or modify access to the exonuclease site ( 23 , 43 ). Alternatively, p12 might impede primer movement in a channel crossed by the primer terminus during primer shuttling between pol and exo sites ( 44 ).

Our findings also provide insights into how loss of p12 might alter the biological function of the human replisome. Agents that damage DNA cause p12 to rapidly disappear in cells ( 26 ), and the results above show that this change causes Pol δ to shift to a form that is capable of greater proofreading ability, and which has previously been shown to exhibit reduced capacity for lesion bypass synthesis ( 26 ). More proofreading would be needed when the genome is damaged, especially if such damage leads to base modifications that cause nucleotides to ambiguously base pair. As has been previously discussed, loss of the p12 subunit could affect a number of the DNA transactions in which Pol δ is engaged in vivo , e.g. , its ability to interact with other proteins involved in DNA damage, or its ability to participate in DNA repair processes ( 26 ). This study provides significant new mechanistic information that may assist in evaluating the role of Pol δ3 in cells undergoing DNA damage.
