---
pmid: '30358795'
title: The cellular economy of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae zinc proteome.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Weisenhorn E
- MacDiarmid CW
- Andreini C
- Bucci M
- Taggart J
- Banci L
- Russell J
- Coon JJ
- Eide DJ
journal: Metallomics
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6291366
doi: 10.1039/c8mt00269j
---

# The cellular economy of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae zinc proteome.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Weisenhorn E, MacDiarmid CW, Andreini C, Bucci M, Taggart J, Banci L, Russell J, Coon JJ, Eide DJ
**Journal:** Metallomics (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1039/c8mt00269j](https://doi.org/10.1039/c8mt00269j)
**PMC:** [PMC6291366](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6291366/)

## Abstract

1. Metallomics. 2018 Dec 12;10(12):1755-1776. doi: 10.1039/c8mt00269j.

The cellular economy of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae zinc proteome.

Wang Y(1), Weisenhorn E, MacDiarmid CW, Andreini C, Bucci M, Taggart J, Banci L, 
Russell J, Coon JJ, Eide DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI 53706, USA. deide@wisc.edu.

Zinc is an essential cofactor for many proteins. A key mechanism of zinc 
homeostasis during deficiency is "zinc sparing" in which specific zinc-binding 
proteins are repressed to reduce the cellular requirement. In this report, we 
evaluated zinc sparing across the zinc proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The 
yeast zinc proteome of 582 known or potential zinc-binding proteins was 
identified using a bioinformatics analysis that combined global domain searches 
with local motif searches. Protein abundance was determined by mass 
spectrometry. In zinc-replete cells, we detected over 2500 proteins among which 
229 were zinc proteins. Based on copy number estimates and binding 
stoichiometries, a replete cell contains ∼9 million zinc-binding sites on 
proteins. During zinc deficiency, many zinc proteins decreased in abundance and 
the zinc-binding requirement decreased to ∼5 million zinc atoms per cell. Many 
of these effects were due at least in part to changes in mRNA levels rather than 
simply protein degradation. Measurements of cellular zinc content showed that 
the level of zinc atoms per cell dropped from over 20 million in replete cells 
to only 1.7 million in deficient cells. These results confirmed the ability of 
replete cells to store excess zinc and suggested that the majority of 
zinc-binding sites on proteins in deficient cells are either unmetalated or 
mismetalated. Our analysis of two abundant zinc proteins, Fba1 aldolase and Met6 
methionine synthetase, supported that hypothesis. Thus, we have discovered 
widespread zinc sparing mechanisms and obtained evidence of a high accumulation 
of zinc proteins that lack their cofactor during deficiency.

DOI: 10.1039/c8mt00269j
PMCID: PMC6291366
PMID: 30358795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST There are no conflicts of 
interest to declare.
