---
pmid: '9732876'
title: Smad3 and Smad4 cooperate with c-Jun/c-Fos to mediate TGF-beta-induced transcription.
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Feng XH
- Derynck R
journal: Nature
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/29814
---

# Smad3 and Smad4 cooperate with c-Jun/c-Fos to mediate TGF-beta-induced transcription.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Feng XH, Derynck R
**Journal:** Nature (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/29814](https://doi.org/10.1038/29814)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1998 Aug 27;394(6696):909-13. doi: 10.1038/29814.

Smad3 and Smad4 cooperate with c-Jun/c-Fos to mediate TGF-beta-induced 
transcription.

Zhang Y(1), Feng XH, Derynck R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Growth and Development, Program in Cell Biology, University of 
California at San Francisco, 94143-0640, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1998 Dec 3;396(6710):491.

Smad proteins transduce signals for transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-beta)-related factors. Smad proteins activated by receptors for TGF-beta 
form complexes with Smad4. These complexes are translocated into the nucleus and 
regulate ligand-induced gene transcription. 12-O-tetradecanoyl-13-acetate 
(TPA)-responsive gene promoter elements (TREs) are involved in the 
transcriptional responses of several genes to TGF-beta (refs 5-8). AP-1 
transcription factors, composed of c-Jun and c-Fos, bind to and direct 
transcription from TREs, which are therefore known as AP1-binding sites. Here we 
show that Smad3 interacts directly with the TRE and that Smad3 and Smad4 can 
activate TGF-beta-inducible transcription from the TRE in the absence of c-Jun 
and c-Fos. Smad3 and Smad4 also act together with c-Jun and c-Fos to activate 
transcription in response to TGF-beta, through a TGF-beta-inducible association 
of c-Jun with Smad3 and an interaction of Smad3 and c-Fos. These interactions 
complement interactions between c-Jun and c-Fos, and between Smad3 and Smad4. 
This mechanism of transcriptional activation by TGF-beta, through functional and 
physical interactions between Smad3-Smad4 and c-Jun-c-Fos, shows that Smad 
signalling and MAPK/JNK signalling converge at AP1-binding promoter sites.

DOI: 10.1038/29814
PMID: 9732876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
