---
pmid: '12420222'
title: 'RAR agonists stimulate SOX9 gene expression in breast cancer cell lines: evidence
  for a role in retinoid-mediated growth inhibition.'
authors:
- Afonja O
- Raaka BM
- Huang A
- Das S
- Zhao X
- Helmer E
- Juste D
- Samuels HH
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205985
---

# RAR agonists stimulate SOX9 gene expression in breast cancer cell lines: evidence for a role in retinoid-mediated growth inhibition.
**Authors:** Afonja O, Raaka BM, Huang A, Das S, Zhao X, Helmer E, Juste D, Samuels HH
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205985](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205985)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 7;21(51):7850-60. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205985.

RAR agonists stimulate SOX9 gene expression in breast cancer cell lines: 
evidence for a role in retinoid-mediated growth inhibition.

Afonja O(1), Raaka BM, Huang A, Das S, Zhao X, Helmer E, Juste D, Samuels HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First 
Avenue, New York, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Retinoic acid receptors (RARs) are ligand-dependent transcription factors which 
are members of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor gene family. RAR-agonists 
inhibit the proliferation of many human breast cancer cell lines, particularly 
those whose growth is stimulated by estradiol (E2) or growth factors. 
PCR-amplified subtractive hybridization was used to identify candidate 
retinoid-regulated genes that may be involved in growth inhibition. One 
candidate gene identified was SOX9, a member of the high mobility group (HMG) 
box gene family of transcription factors. SOX9 gene expression is rapidly 
stimulated by RAR-agonists in T-47D cells and other retinoid-inhibited breast 
cancer cell lines. In support of this finding, a database search indicates that 
SOX9 is expressed as an EST in breast tumor cells. SOX9 is known to be expressed 
in chondrocytes where it regulates the transcription of type II collagen and in 
testes where it plays a role in male sexual differentiation. RAR pan-agonists 
and the RARalpha-selective agonist Am580, but not RXR agonists, stimulate the 
expression of SOX9 in a wide variety of retinoid-inhibited breast cancer cell 
lines. RAR-agonists did not stimulate SOX9 in breast cancer cell lines which 
were not growth inhibited by retinoids. Expression of SOX9 in T-47D cells leads 
to cycle changes similar to those found with RAR-agonists while expression of a 
dominant negative form of SOX9 blocks RA-mediated cell cycle changes, suggesting 
a role for SOX9 in retinoid-mediated growth inhibition.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205985
PMID: 12420222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
