---
pmid: '24994900'
title: Structure of a new DNA-binding domain which regulates pathogenesis in a wide
  variety of fungi.
authors:
- Lohse MB
- Rosenberg OS
- Cox JS
- Stroud RM
- Finer-Moore JS
- Johnson AD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4115540
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1410110111
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structure of a new DNA-binding domain which regulates pathogenesis in a wide variety of fungi.
**Authors:** Lohse MB, Rosenberg OS, Cox JS, Stroud RM, Finer-Moore JS, Johnson AD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1410110111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1410110111)
**PMC:** [PMC4115540](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4115540/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 22;111(29):10404-10. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1410110111. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Structure of a new DNA-binding domain which regulates pathogenesis in a wide 
variety of fungi.

Lohse MB(1), Rosenberg OS(2), Cox JS(1), Stroud RM(3), Finer-Moore JS(3), 
Johnson AD(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology and.
(2)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology andDivision of Infectious 
Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 
94158.
(3)Biochemistry and Biophysics and.
(4)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology andBiochemistry and Biophysics and 
ajohnson@cgl.ucsf.edu.

WOPR-domain proteins are found throughout the fungal kingdom where they function 
as master regulators of cell morphology and pathogenesis. Genetic and 
biochemical experiments previously demonstrated that these proteins bind to 
specific DNA sequences and thereby regulate transcription. However, their 
primary sequence showed no relationship to any known DNA-binding domain, and the 
basis for their ability to recognize DNA sequences remained unknown. Here, we 
describe the 2.6-Å crystal structure of a WOPR domain in complex with its 
preferred DNA sequence. The structure reveals that two highly conserved regions, 
separated by an unconserved linker, form an interdigitated β-sheet that is 
tilted into the major groove of DNA. Although the main interaction surface is in 
the major groove, the highest-affinity interactions occur in the minor groove, 
primarily through a deeply penetrating arginine residue. The structure reveals a 
new, unanticipated mechanism by which proteins can recognize specific sequences 
of DNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1410110111
PMCID: PMC4115540
PMID: 24994900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
