---
pmid: '24415755'
title: The chaperone protein SmgGDS interacts with small GTPases entering the prenylation
  pathway by recognizing the last amino acid in the CAAX motif.
authors:
- Schuld NJ
- Vervacke JS
- Lorimer EL
- Simon NC
- Hauser AD
- Barbieri JT
- Distefano MD
- Williams CL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3945348
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527192
---

# The chaperone protein SmgGDS interacts with small GTPases entering the prenylation pathway by recognizing the last amino acid in the CAAX motif.
**Authors:** Schuld NJ, Vervacke JS, Lorimer EL, Simon NC, Hauser AD, Barbieri JT, Distefano MD, Williams CL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.527192](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.527192)
**PMC:** [PMC3945348](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3945348/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 7;289(10):6862-6876. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527192. Epub 
2014 Jan 10.

The chaperone protein SmgGDS interacts with small GTPases entering the 
prenylation pathway by recognizing the last amino acid in the CAAX motif.

Schuld NJ(1), Vervacke JS(2), Lorimer EL(1), Simon NC(3), Hauser AD(4), Barbieri 
JT(3), Distefano MD(2), Williams CL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
55414.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Medical 
College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin 53226.
(5)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226. Electronic address: williams@mcw.edu.

Ras family small GTPases localize at the plasma membrane, where they can 
activate oncogenic signaling pathways. Understanding the mechanisms that promote 
membrane localization of GTPases will aid development of new therapies to 
inhibit oncogenic signaling. We previously reported that SmgGDS splice variants 
promote prenylation and trafficking of GTPases containing a C-terminal polybasic 
region and demonstrated that SmgGDS-607 interacts with nonprenylated GTPases, 
whereas SmgGDS-558 interacts with prenylated GTPases in cells. The mechanism 
that SmgGDS-607 and SmgGDS-558 use to differentiate between prenylated and 
nonprenylated GTPases has not been characterized. Here, we provide evidence that 
SmgGDS-607 associates with GTPases through recognition of the last amino acid in 
the CAAX motif. We show that SmgGDS-607 forms more stable complexes in cells 
with nonprenylated GTPases that will become geranylgeranylated than with 
nonprenylated GTPases that will become farnesylated. These binding relationships 
similarly occur with nonprenylated SAAX mutants. Intriguingly, 
farnesyltransferase inhibitors increase the binding of WT K-Ras to SmgGDS-607, 
indicating that the pharmacological shunting of K-Ras into the 
geranylgeranylation pathway promotes K-Ras association with SmgGDS-607. Using 
recombinant proteins and prenylated peptides corresponding to the C-terminal 
sequences of K-Ras and Rap1B, we found that both SmgGDS-607 and SmgGDS-558 
directly bind the GTPase C-terminal region, but the specificity of the SmgGDS 
splice variants for prenylated versus nonprenylated GTPases is diminished in 
vitro. Finally, we present structural homology models and data from functional 
prediction software to define both similar and unique features of SmgGDS-607 
when compared with SmgGDS-558.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.527192
PMCID: PMC3945348
PMID: 24415755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
