---
pmid: '16752394'
title: Mean age-of-onset of familial alzheimer disease caused by presenilin mutations
  correlates with both increased Abeta42 and decreased Abeta40.
authors:
- Kumar-Singh S
- Theuns J
- Van Broeck B
- Pirici D
- Vennekens K
- Corsmit E
- Cruts M
- Dermaut B
- Wang R
- Van Broeckhoven C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.20336
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mean age-of-onset of familial alzheimer disease caused by presenilin mutations correlates with both increased Abeta42 and decreased Abeta40.
**Authors:** Kumar-Singh S, Theuns J, Van Broeck B, Pirici D, Vennekens K, Corsmit E, Cruts M, Dermaut B, Wang R, Van Broeckhoven C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20336](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20336)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2006 Jul;27(7):686-95. doi: 10.1002/humu.20336.

Mean age-of-onset of familial alzheimer disease caused by presenilin mutations 
correlates with both increased Abeta42 and decreased Abeta40.

Kumar-Singh S(1), Theuns J, Van Broeck B, Pirici D, Vennekens K, Corsmit E, 
Cruts M, Dermaut B, Wang R, Van Broeckhoven C.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
Flanders Interuniversity Institute of Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, 
Antwerpen, Belgium. samir.kumarsingh@ua.ac.be

The varied ways in which mutations in presenilins (PSEN1 and PSEN2) affect 
amyloid b precursor protein (APP) processing in causing early-onset familial 
Alzheimer disease (FAD) are complex and not yet properly understood. 
Nonetheless, one useful diagnostic marker is an increased ratio of Ab42 to Ab40 
(Ab42/Ab40) in patients' brain and biological fluids as well as in transgenic 
mice and cells. We studied Ab and APP processing for a set of nine clinical PSEN 
mutations on a novel and highly reproducible enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA)-based in vitro method and also sought correlation with brain Ab analyzed 
by image densitometry and mass spectrometry. All mutations significantly 
increased Ab42/Ab40 in vitro by significantly decreasing Ab40 with accumulation 
of APP C-terminal fragments, a sign of decreased PSEN activity. A significant 
increase in absolute levels of Ab42 was observed for only half of the mutations 
tested. We also showed that age-of-onset of PSEN1-linked FAD correlated 
inversely with Ab42/Ab40 (r = -0.89; P = 0.001) and absolute levels of Ab42 (r = 
-0.83; P = 0.006), but directly with Ab40 levels (r = 0.69; P = 0.035). These 
changes also partly correlated with brain Ab42 and Ab40 levels. Together, our 
data suggested that Ab40 might be protective by perhaps sequestering the more 
toxic Ab42 and facilitating its clearance. Also, the in vitro method we describe 
here is a valid tool for assaying the pathogenic potential of clinical PSEN 
mutations in a molecular diagnostic setting.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20336
PMID: 16752394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
