---
pmid: '8112731'
title: Intracellular processing and maturation of mutant gene products in hereditary
  beta-galactosidase deficiency (beta-galactosidosis).
authors:
- Oshima A
- Yoshida K
- Itoh K
- Kase R
- Sakuraba H
- Suzuki Y
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF00210592
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Intracellular processing and maturation of mutant gene products in hereditary beta-galactosidase deficiency (beta-galactosidosis).
**Authors:** Oshima A, Yoshida K, Itoh K, Kase R, Sakuraba H, Suzuki Y
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00210592](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00210592)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 1994 Feb;93(2):109-14. doi: 10.1007/BF00210592.

Intracellular processing and maturation of mutant gene products in hereditary 
beta-galactosidase deficiency (beta-galactosidosis).

Oshima A(1), Yoshida K, Itoh K, Kase R, Sakuraba H, Suzuki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Japan.

Heterogeneous patterns of biosynthesis, posttranslational processing, and 
degradation were demonstrated for mutant enzymes in three clinical forms of 
beta-galactosidase deficiency (beta-galactosidosis): juvenile 
GM1-gangliosidosis, adult GM1-gangliosidosis, and Morquio B disease. The 
precursor of the mutant enzyme in adult GM1-gangliosidosis was not 
phosphorylated, and only a small portion of the gene product reached the 
lysosomes. The enzyme in Morquio B disease was normally processed and 
transported to lysosomes, but its catalytic activity was low. A common gene 
mutation in juvenile GM1-gangliosidosis (R201C) produced an enzyme protein that 
did not aggregate with protective protein in the lysosome, and was rapidly 
degraded by thiol proteases. This abnormal turnover was similar to that for the 
normal but dissociated beta-galactosidase in galactosialidosis. Protease 
inhibitors restored the enzyme activity in fibroblasts of this clinical form. A 
possible therapeutic approach is discussed for this specific type of enzyme 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00210592
PMID: 8112731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
