---
pmid: '8223435'
title: cAMP antagonizes p21ras-directed activation of extracellular signal-regulated
  kinase 2 and phosphorylation of mSos nucleotide exchange factor.
authors:
- Burgering BM
- Pronk GJ
- van Weeren PC
- Chardin P
- Bos JL
journal: EMBO J
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC413715
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06105.x
---

# cAMP antagonizes p21ras-directed activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 and phosphorylation of mSos nucleotide exchange factor.
**Authors:** Burgering BM, Pronk GJ, van Weeren PC, Chardin P, Bos JL
**Journal:** EMBO J (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06105.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06105.x)
**PMC:** [PMC413715](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC413715/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4211-20. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06105.x.

cAMP antagonizes p21ras-directed activation of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase 2 and phosphorylation of mSos nucleotide exchange factor.

Burgering BM(1), Pronk GJ, van Weeren PC, Chardin P, Bos JL.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

In fibroblasts, stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinases results in the 
activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2). The major 
signalling pathway employed by these receptors involves the activation of p21ras 
and raf-1 kinase. Here we show that in NIH3T3 and rat-1 fibroblasts, elevation 
of the intracellular cAMP level results in the inhibition of ERK2 activation 
induced by PDGF, EGF and insulin treatment. Analysis of various signalling 
intermediates shows that cAMP interferes at a site downstream of p21ras, but 
upstream of raf-1 kinase. Inhibition by cAMP depends on both the cAMP 
concentration and the absolute amount of p21ras molecules bound to GTP, 
suggesting a mechanism of competitive inhibition. Also TPA-induced, 
p21ras-independent, activation of raf-1 kinase and ERK2 is inhibited by cAMP. We 
have used the inhibitory effect of cAMP to investigate whether phosphorylation 
of mSos, a p21ras nucleotide exchange factor, is dependent on the activity of 
the raf-1 kinase/ERK2 pathway. We found that phosphorylation of mSos, as 
monitored by a mobility shift, is delayed with respect to p21ras and ERK2 
activation and is inhibited by cAMP in a similar cell type- and 
concentration-dependent manner as the inactivation of ERK2. These results 
provide evidence for a model of p21ras-directed signalling towards ERK2 that 
feeds back on mSos by regulating its phosphorylation status and that can be 
negatively modulated by protein kinase A and positively modulated by protein 
kinase C action.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb06105.x
PMCID: PMC413715
PMID: 8223435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
