---
pmid: '18499658'
title: Studies with the human cohesin establishment factor, ChlR1. Association of
  ChlR1 with Ctf18-RFC and Fen1.
authors:
- Farina A
- Shin JH
- Kim DH
- Bermudez VP
- Kelman Z
- Seo YS
- Hurwitz J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2475708
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802696200
---

# Studies with the human cohesin establishment factor, ChlR1. Association of ChlR1 with Ctf18-RFC and Fen1.
**Authors:** Farina A, Shin JH, Kim DH, Bermudez VP, Kelman Z, Seo YS, Hurwitz J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M802696200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M802696200)
**PMC:** [PMC2475708](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2475708/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 25;283(30):20925-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802696200. Epub 
2008 May 21.

Studies with the human cohesin establishment factor, ChlR1. Association of ChlR1 
with Ctf18-RFC and Fen1.

Farina A(1), Shin JH, Kim DH, Bermudez VP, Kelman Z, Seo YS, Hurwitz J.

Author information:
(1)Program of Molecular Biology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 
York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Human ChlR1 (hChlR1), a member of the DEAD/DEAH subfamily of helicases, was 
shown to interact with components of the cohesin complex and play a role in 
sister chromatid cohesion. In order to study the biochemical and biological 
properties of hChlR1, we purified the protein from 293 cells and demonstrated 
that hChlR1 possesses DNA-dependent ATPase and helicase activities. This 
helicase translocates on single-stranded DNA in the 5' to 3' direction in the 
presence of ATP and, to a lesser extent, dATP. Its unwinding activity requires a 
5'-singlestranded region for helicase loading, since flush-ended duplex 
structures do not support unwinding. The helicase activity of hChlR1 is capable 
of displacing duplex regions up to 100 bp, which can be extended to 500 bp by 
RPA or the cohesion establishment factor, the Ctf18-RFC (replication factor C) 
complex. We show that hChlR1 interacts with the hCtf18-RFC complex, human 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and hFen1. The interactions between Fen1 and 
hChlR1 stimulate the flap endonuclease activity of Fen1. Selective depletion of 
either hChlR1 or Fen1 by targeted small interfering RNA treatment results in the 
precocious separation of sister chromatids. These findings are consistent with a 
role of hChlR1 in the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion and suggest 
that its action may contribute to lagging strand processing events important in 
cohesion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M802696200
PMCID: PMC2475708
PMID: 18499658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
