---
pmid: '9829800'
title: Dopamine-stimulated sexual behavior is testosterone dependent in mice.
authors:
- Szczypka MS
- Zhou QY
- Palmiter RD
journal: Behav Neurosci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1037//0735-7044.112.5.1229
---

# Dopamine-stimulated sexual behavior is testosterone dependent in mice.
**Authors:** Szczypka MS, Zhou QY, Palmiter RD
**Journal:** Behav Neurosci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1037//0735-7044.112.5.1229](https://doi.org/10.1037//0735-7044.112.5.1229)

## Abstract

1. Behav Neurosci. 1998 Oct;112(5):1229-35. doi: 10.1037//0735-7044.112.5.1229.

Dopamine-stimulated sexual behavior is testosterone dependent in mice.

Szczypka MS(1), Zhou QY, Palmiter RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Washington, Seattle 98195-7370, USA.

Mice unable to synthesize dopamine (DA) in dopaminergic neurons were generated 
by gene-targeting techniques (Q.-Y. Zhou & R. D. Palmiter, 1995). These 
dopamine-deficient (DA-/-) mice required daily administration of 
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) for survival beyond 2 to 3 weeks of age. 
This treatment stimulated mounting and aggressive behavior of adult DA-/- males 
toward both male and female mice. Both a nonspecific DA agonist (apomorphine) 
and a specific D1 agonist (SKF81297) stimulated aggression and mounting 
behavior; however, a D2 agonist (quinpirole) was less effective. Castration of 
male DA-/- mice demonstrated that these L-DOPA-stimulated behaviors depend on 
testosterone. In addition, replacement of testosterone to castrated males showed 
that the testosterone-responsive pathways of DA-/- males were more sensitive to 
testosterone than wild-type mice.

DOI: 10.1037//0735-7044.112.5.1229
PMID: 9829800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
