---
pmid: '9092559'
title: Insulin-induced activation of NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation in human adipocyte
  plasma membranes is mediated by Galphai2.
authors:
- Krieger-Brauer HI
- Medda PK
- Kather H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.15.10135
---

# Insulin-induced activation of NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation in human adipocyte plasma membranes is mediated by Galphai2.
**Authors:** Krieger-Brauer HI, Medda PK, Kather H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.15.10135](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.15.10135)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 11;272(15):10135-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.15.10135.

Insulin-induced activation of NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation in human adipocyte 
plasma membranes is mediated by Galphai2.

Krieger-Brauer HI(1), Medda PK, Kather H.

Author information:
(1)Klinisches Institut für Herzinfarktforschung an der Medizinischen 
Universitätsklinik Heidelberg, Bergheimerstrasse 58, Heidelberg 69115, Germany.

Human fat cells possess a multireceptor-linked H2O2-generating system that is 
activated by insulin. Previous studies revealed that manganese was the sole 
cofactor required for a hormonal regulation of NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation 
in vitro. In this report it is shown that the synergistic activation of 
NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation by Mn2+ and insulin was blocked by GDPbetaS 
(guanosine 5'-O-(2-thiodiphosphate)), pertussis toxin and COOH-terminal 
anti-Galphai1-2 or the corresponding peptide. Consistently, manganese could be 
replaced by micromolar concentrations of GTPgammaS (guanosine 
5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate)), which increased NADPH-dependent H2O2 generation by 
20-40%. Insulin shifted the dose response curve for GTPgammaS to the left 
(>10-fold) and increased the maximal response. In the presence of 10 microM 
GTPgammaS, the hormone was active at picomolar concentrations, indicating that 
insulin acted via its cognate receptor. The insulin receptor and Gi were 
co-adsorbed on anti-Galphai and anti-insulin receptor beta-subunit (anti-IRbeta) 
affinity columns. Partially purified insulin receptor preparations contained 
Galphas, Galphai2, and Gbetagamma (but no Galphai1 or Galphai3). The functional 
nature of the insulin receptor-Gi2 complex was made evident by insulin's ability 
to modulate labeling of Gi by bacterial toxins. Insulin action was mimicked by 
activated Galphai, but not by Galphao or Gbetagamma, indicating that insulin's 
signal was transduced via Galphai2. Thus, NADPH oxidase is the first example of 
an effector system that is coupled to the insulin receptor via a heterotrimeric 
G protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.15.10135
PMID: 9092559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
