---
pmid: '12588843'
title: Polarization of the C. elegans zygote proceeds via distinct establishment and
  maintenance phases.
authors:
- Cuenca AA
- Schetter A
- Aceto D
- Kemphues K
- Seydoux G
journal: Development
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1761648
doi: 10.1242/dev.00284
---

# Polarization of the C. elegans zygote proceeds via distinct establishment and maintenance phases.
**Authors:** Cuenca AA, Schetter A, Aceto D, Kemphues K, Seydoux G
**Journal:** Development (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.00284](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00284)
**PMC:** [PMC1761648](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1761648/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1255-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.00284.

Polarization of the C. elegans zygote proceeds via distinct establishment and 
maintenance phases.

Cuenca AA(1), Schetter A, Aceto D, Kemphues K, Seydoux G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Polarization of the C. elegans zygote along the anterior-posterior axis depends 
on cortically enriched (PAR) and cytoplasmic (MEX-5/6) proteins, which function 
together to localize determinants (e.g. PIE-1) in response to a polarizing cue 
associated with the sperm asters. Using time-lapse microscopy and GFP fusions, 
we have analyzed the localization dynamics of PAR-2, PAR-6, MEX-5, MEX-6 and 
PIE-1 in wild-type and mutant embryos. These studies reveal that polarization 
involves two genetically and temporally distinct phases. During the first phase 
(establishment), the sperm asters at one end of the embryo exclude the 
PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC3 complex from the nearby cortex, allowing the ring finger 
protein PAR-2 to accumulate in an expanding 'posterior' domain. Onset of the 
establishment phase involves the non-muscle myosin NMY-2 and the 14-3-3 protein 
PAR-5. The kinase PAR-1 and the CCCH finger proteins MEX-5 and MEX-6 also 
function during the establishment phase in a feedback loop to regulate growth of 
the posterior domain. The second phase begins after pronuclear meeting, when the 
sperm asters begin to invade the anterior. During this phase (maintenance), 
PAR-2 maintains anterior-posterior polarity by excluding the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC3 
complex from the posterior. These findings provide a model for how PAR and MEX 
proteins convert a transient asymmetry into a stably polarized axis.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.00284
PMCID: PMC1761648
PMID: 12588843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
