---
pmid: '29290466'
title: Structural Insights into Yeast Telomerase Recruitment to Telomeres.
authors:
- Chen H
- Xue J
- Churikov D
- Hass EP
- Shi S
- Lemon LD
- Luciano P
- Bertuch AA
- Zappulla DC
- Géli V
- Wu J
- Lei M
journal: Cell
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5839504
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.008
---

# Structural Insights into Yeast Telomerase Recruitment to Telomeres.
**Authors:** Chen H, Xue J, Churikov D, Hass EP, Shi S, Lemon LD, Luciano P, Bertuch AA, Zappulla DC, Géli V, Wu J, Lei M
**Journal:** Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.008)
**PMC:** [PMC5839504](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5839504/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2018 Jan 11;172(1-2):331-343.e13. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.008. Epub 
2017 Dec 28.

Structural Insights into Yeast Telomerase Recruitment to Telomeres.

Chen H(1), Xue J(1), Churikov D(2), Hass EP(3), Shi S(1), Lemon LD(4), Luciano 
P(2), Bertuch AA(4), Zappulla DC(3), Géli V(2), Wu J(5), Lei M(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 201210 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Marseille Cancer Research Center (CRCM), U1068 INSERM, UMR7258 CNRS, Aix 
Marseille University, Institut Paoli-Calmettes (Equipe labellisée Ligue), 13009 
Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
BCM225, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 201210 
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: wujian@shsmu.edu.cn.
(6)Shanghai Institute of Precision Medicine, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200125, China; Key Laboratory 
of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 200025 Shanghai, China. Electronic 
address: leim@shsmu.edu.cn.

Telomerase maintains chromosome ends from humans to yeasts. Recruitment of yeast 
telomerase to telomeres occurs through its Ku and Est1 subunits via independent 
interactions with telomerase RNA (TLC1) and telomeric proteins Sir4 and 
Cdc13, respectively. However, the structures of the molecules comprising these 
telomerase-recruiting pathways remain unknown. Here, we report crystal 
structures of the Ku heterodimer and Est1 complexed with their key binding 
partners. Two major findings are as follows: (1) Ku specifically binds to 
telomerase RNA in a distinct, yet related, manner to how it binds DNA; and (2) 
Est1 employs two separate pockets to bind distinct motifs of Cdc13. The 
N-terminal Cdc13-binding site of Est1 cooperates with the TLC1-Ku-Sir4 pathway 
for telomerase recruitment, whereas the C-terminal interface is dispensable for 
binding Est1 in vitro yet is nevertheless essential for telomere maintenance 
in vivo. Overall, our results integrate previous models and provide 
fundamentally valuable structural information regarding telomere biology.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.008
PMCID: PMC5839504
PMID: 29290466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors of this manuscript has a 
financial interest related to this work.
