---
pmid: '20529863'
title: The Crc global regulator inhibits the Pseudomonas putida pWW0 toluene/xylene
  assimilation pathway by repressing the translation of regulatory and structural
  genes.
authors:
- Moreno R
- Fonseca P
- Rojo F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2915677
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126615
---

# The Crc global regulator inhibits the Pseudomonas putida pWW0 toluene/xylene assimilation pathway by repressing the translation of regulatory and structural genes.
**Authors:** Moreno R, Fonseca P, Rojo F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.126615](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.126615)
**PMC:** [PMC2915677](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2915677/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24412-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126615. Epub
2010  Jun 7.

The Crc global regulator inhibits the Pseudomonas putida pWW0 toluene/xylene 
assimilation pathway by repressing the translation of regulatory and structural 
genes.

Moreno R(1), Fonseca P, Rojo F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, Campus Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

In Pseudomonas putida, the expression of the pWW0 plasmid genes for the 
toluene/xylene assimilation pathway (the TOL pathway) is subject to complex 
regulation in response to environmental and physiological signals. This includes 
strong inhibition via catabolite repression, elicited by the carbon sources that 
the cells prefer to hydrocarbons. The Crc protein, a global regulator that 
controls carbon flow in pseudomonads, has an important role in this inhibition. 
Crc is a translational repressor that regulates the TOL genes, but how it does 
this has remained unknown. This study reports that Crc binds to sites located at 
the translation initiation regions of the mRNAs coding for XylR and XylS, two 
specific transcription activators of the TOL genes. Unexpectedly, eight 
additional Crc binding sites were found overlapping the translation initiation 
sites of genes coding for several enzymes of the pathway, all encoded within two 
polycistronic mRNAs. Evidence is provided supporting the idea that these sites 
are functional. This implies that Crc can differentially modulate the expression 
of particular genes within polycistronic mRNAs. It is proposed that Crc controls 
TOL genes in two ways. First, Crc inhibits the translation of the XylR and XylS 
regulators, thereby reducing the transcription of all TOL pathway genes. Second, 
Crc inhibits the translation of specific structural genes of the pathway, acting 
mainly on proteins involved in the first steps of toluene assimilation. This 
ensures a rapid inhibitory response that reduces the expression of the 
toluene/xylene degradation proteins when preferred carbon sources become 
available.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.126615
PMCID: PMC2915677
PMID: 20529863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
