---
pmid: '17441508'
title: SGT2 and MDY2 interact with molecular chaperone YDJ1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Liou ST
- Cheng MY
- Wang C
journal: Cell Stress Chaperones
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1852894
doi: 10.1379/csc-220r.1
---

# SGT2 and MDY2 interact with molecular chaperone YDJ1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Liou ST, Cheng MY, Wang C
**Journal:** Cell Stress Chaperones (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1379/csc-220r.1](https://doi.org/10.1379/csc-220r.1)
**PMC:** [PMC1852894](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1852894/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2007 Spring;12(1):59-70. doi: 10.1379/csc-220r.1.

SGT2 and MDY2 interact with molecular chaperone YDJ1 in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Liou ST(1), Cheng MY, Wang C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Sgt2 was thought to be the homologue of vertebrate 
SGT (small glutamine tetratricopeptide repeat-containing protein). SGT has been 
known to interact with both Hsp70 and Hsp90. However, it was not clear whether 
Sgt2 might have a similar capacity. Here, we showed that Ssa1/Ssa2 (yeast heat 
shock cognate [Hsc]70), Hsc82 (yeast Hsp90), and Hsp104 coprecipitated with Sgt2 
from yeast lysates. Another molecular chaperone, Ydj1, known to interact with 
Ssal and Hsc82, also coprecipitated with Sgt2. Synthetic lethality between SGT2 
and YDJ1 was observed after the cells were under stress, although Sgt2 might not 
interact physically with Ydj1. We also found that Mdy2 interacted with the 
N-terminal region of Sgt2 and that Mdy2 appeared to interact physically with 
Ydj1. Mdy2 therefore may mediate the association of Ydj1 and Sgt2. In addition, 
the mating efficiency of mdy2delta, sgt2delta, and mdy2deltasgt2delta strains 
was reduced to a similar extent. Compared with mdy2delta and ydj1delta cells, 
ydj1deltamdy2delta cells, however, showed a further suppression in mating 
efficiency. Moreover, MDY2 interacted genetically with YDJ1. These results 
suggest that protein complexes containing Sgt2 and Mdy2 bring molecular 
chaperones together to carry out certain chaperoning functions.

DOI: 10.1379/csc-220r.1
PMCID: PMC1852894
PMID: 17441508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
