---
pmid: '24828503'
title: SCF-FBXO31 E3 ligase targets DNA replication factor Cdt1 for proteolysis in
  the G2 phase of cell cycle to prevent re-replication.
authors:
- Johansson P
- Jeffery J
- Al-Ejeh F
- Schulz RB
- Callen DF
- Kumar R
- Khanna KK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4140253
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.559930
---

# SCF-FBXO31 E3 ligase targets DNA replication factor Cdt1 for proteolysis in the G2 phase of cell cycle to prevent re-replication.
**Authors:** Johansson P, Jeffery J, Al-Ejeh F, Schulz RB, Callen DF, Kumar R, Khanna KK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.559930](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.559930)
**PMC:** [PMC4140253](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4140253/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 27;289(26):18514-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.559930. Epub 
2014 May 14.

SCF-FBXO31 E3 ligase targets DNA replication factor Cdt1 for proteolysis in the 
G2 phase of cell cycle to prevent re-replication.

Johansson P(1), Jeffery J(2), Al-Ejeh F(2), Schulz RB(3), Callen DF(3), Kumar 
R(4), Khanna KK(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Bruna Stråket 16, 41345 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Signal Transduction Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Queensland 4006, Australia.
(3)Centre for Personalised Cancer Medicine and Discipline of Medicine, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5000, Australia.
(4)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health and Discipline of Medicine, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide and Women's and Children's Health Research 
Institute, North Adelaide, South Australia 5006, Australia, and 
raman.sharma@adelaide.edu.au.
(5)Signal Transduction Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Queensland 4006, Australia KumKum.Khanna@qimrberghofer.edu.au.

FBXO31 was originally identified as a putative tumor suppressor gene in breast, 
ovarian, hepatocellular, and prostate cancers. By screening a set of cell 
cycle-regulated proteins as potential FBXO31 interaction partners, we have now 
identified Cdt1 as a novel substrate. Cdt1 DNA replication licensing factor is 
part of the pre-replication complex and essential for the maintenance of genomic 
integrity. We show that FBXO31 specifically interacts with Cdt1 and regulates 
its abundance by ubiquitylation leading to subsequent degradation. We also show 
that Cdt1 regulation by FBXO31 is limited to the G2 phase of the cell cycle and 
is independent of the pathways previously described for Cdt1 proteolysis in S 
and G2 phase. FBXO31 targeting of Cdt1 is mediated through the N terminus of 
Cdt1, a region previously shown to be responsible for its cell cycle regulation. 
Finally, we show that Cdt1 stabilization due to FBXO31 depletion results in 
re-replication. Our data present an additional pathway that contributes to the 
FBXO31 function as a tumor suppressor.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.559930
PMCID: PMC4140253
PMID: 24828503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
