---
pmid: '11123804'
title: Various abiotic stresses rapidly activate Arabidopsis MAP kinases ATMPK4 and
  ATMPK6.
authors:
- Ichimura K
- Mizoguchi T
- Yoshida R
- Yuasa T
- Shinozaki K
journal: Plant J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00913.x
---

# Various abiotic stresses rapidly activate Arabidopsis MAP kinases ATMPK4 and ATMPK6.
**Authors:** Ichimura K, Mizoguchi T, Yoshida R, Yuasa T, Shinozaki K
**Journal:** Plant J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00913.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00913.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2000 Dec;24(5):655-65. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00913.x.

Various abiotic stresses rapidly activate Arabidopsis MAP kinases ATMPK4 and 
ATMPK6.

Ichimura K(1), Mizoguchi T, Yoshida R, Yuasa T, Shinozaki K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, 3-1-1 
Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase, MAPK) cascades play pivotal roles 
in signal transduction of extracellular stimuli, such as environmental stresses 
and growth regulators, in various organisms. Arabidopsis thaliana MAP kinases 
constitute a gene family, but stimulatory signals for each MAP kinase have not 
been elucidated. Here we show that environmental stresses such as low 
temperature, low humidity, hyper-osmolarity, touch and wounding induce rapid and 
transient activation of the Arabidopsis MAP kinases ATMPK4 and ATMPK6. 
Activation of ATMPK4 and ATMPK6 was associated with tyrosine phosphorylation but 
not with the amounts of mRNA or protein. Kinetics during activation differ 
between these two MAP kinases. These results suggest that ATMPK4 and ATMPK6 are 
involved in distinct signal transduction pathways responding to these 
environmental stresses.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00913.x
PMID: 11123804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
