---
pmid: '9799566'
title: Thermosensitive phenotype of yeast mutant lacking thioredoxin peroxidase.
authors:
- Lee SM
- Park JW
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/abbi.1998.0896
---

# Thermosensitive phenotype of yeast mutant lacking thioredoxin peroxidase.
**Authors:** Lee SM, Park JW
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/abbi.1998.0896](https://doi.org/10.1006/abbi.1998.0896)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1998 Nov 1;359(1):99-106. doi: 10.1006/abbi.1998.0896.

Thermosensitive phenotype of yeast mutant lacking thioredoxin peroxidase.

Lee SM(1), Park JW.

Author information:
(1)College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Taegu, 702-701, 
Korea.

A soluble protein from Saccharomyces cerevisiae specifically provides protection 
against a thiol-containing oxidation system but not against an oxidation system 
without thiol. This 25-kDa protein acts as a peroxidase but requires a 
NADPH-dependent thioredoxin system or a thiol-containing intermediate, and was 
thus named thioredoxin peroxidase (TPx). The protective role of TPx in the 
cellular defense against heat shock (42 or 48 degreesC), which may increase 
oxidative stress in cells sufficiently to form reactive oxygen species harmful 
to cellular function, was investigated in a wild-type and a mutant yeast strain 
in which the tsa gene that encodes TPx was disrupted by homologous 
recombination. Upon exposure under aerobic conditions to heat shock there was a 
distinct difference between these two strains in growth kinetics and viability. 
The wild-type strain was more resistant to killing by heat than the mutant 
strain. In addition, the expression of the tsa gene in Escherichia coli caused 
an increase in thermotolerance. The expression of the tsa gene increased under 
heat shock; however, modulation of activities of other antioxidant enzymes, such 
as catalase, superoxide dismutase, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and 
glutathione reductase as well as the total glutathione level, remained unaltered 
in both strains under heat shock. The induction of heat shock protein HSP104 was 
not significantly different in the two strains under heat shock. The results 
indicate that the lack of TPx expression may be solely responsible for the 
thermosensitive phenotype of tsa mutant cells. When the oxidation of 2', 
7'-dichlorofluorescin was used to examine hydroperoxide production in yeast 
cells, tsa mutant cells showed a 2.5- to 3.5-fold increase in fluorescence upon 
exposure to heat stress compared to wild-type cells. The antioxidant, 
N-acetylcysteine, prevented intracellular peroxide formation in response to heat 
shock. The carbonyl content of extract, the indicative marker of oxidative 
damage to protein, from tsa mutant cells was higher than that from wild-type 
cells. These results suggest that TPx may play a direct role in cellular defense 
against heat shock, presumably functioning as an antioxidant protein.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/abbi.1998.0896
PMID: 9799566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
