---
pmid: '19427217'
title: HAUS, the 8-subunit human Augmin complex, regulates centrosome and spindle
  integrity.
authors:
- Lawo S
- Bashkurov M
- Mullin M
- Ferreria MG
- Kittler R
- Habermann B
- Tagliaferro A
- Poser I
- Hutchins JR
- Hegemann B
- Pinchev D
- Buchholz F
- Peters JM
- Hyman AA
- Gingras AC
- Pelletier L
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.033
---

# HAUS, the 8-subunit human Augmin complex, regulates centrosome and spindle integrity.
**Authors:** Lawo S, Bashkurov M, Mullin M, Ferreria MG, Kittler R, Habermann B, Tagliaferro A, Poser I, Hutchins JR, Hegemann B, Pinchev D, Buchholz F, Peters JM, Hyman AA, Gingras AC, Pelletier L
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.033)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2009 May 26;19(10):816-26. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.033. Epub
2009  May 7.

HAUS, the 8-subunit human Augmin complex, regulates centrosome and spindle 
integrity.

Lawo S(1), Bashkurov M, Mullin M, Ferreria MG, Kittler R, Habermann B, 
Tagliaferro A, Poser I, Hutchins JR, Hegemann B, Pinchev D, Buchholz F, Peters 
JM, Hyman AA, Gingras AC, Pelletier L.

Author information:
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University 
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The assembly of a robust microtubule-based mitotic spindle is a 
prerequisite for the accurate segregation of chromosomes to progeny. Spindle 
assembly relies on the concerted action of centrosomes, spindle microtubules, 
molecular motors, and nonmotor spindle proteins.
RESULTS: Here we use an RNA-interference screen of the human centrosome proteome 
to identify novel regulators of spindle assembly. One such regulator is HAUS, an 
8-subunit protein complex that shares homology to Drosophila Augmin. HAUS 
localizes to interphase centrosomes and to mitotic spindle microtubules, and its 
disruption induces microtubule-dependent fragmentation of centrosomes along with 
an increase in centrosome size. HAUS disruption results in the destabilization 
of kinetochore microtubules and the eventual formation of multipolar spindles. 
These severe mitotic defects are alleviated by codepletion of NuMA, indicating 
that both factors regulate opposing activities. HAUS disruption alters NuMA 
localization, suggesting that mislocalized NuMA activity contributes to the 
spindle and centrosome defects observed.
CONCLUSION: The human Augmin complex (HAUS) is a critical and evolutionary 
conserved multisubunit protein complex that regulates centrosome and spindle 
integrity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2009.04.033
PMID: 19427217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
