---
pmid: '16917502'
title: PRA1 promotes the intracellular trafficking and NF-kappaB signaling of EBV
  latent membrane protein 1.
authors:
- Liu HP
- Wu CC
- Chang YS
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1560356
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601282
---

# PRA1 promotes the intracellular trafficking and NF-kappaB signaling of EBV latent membrane protein 1.
**Authors:** Liu HP, Wu CC, Chang YS
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601282](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601282)
**PMC:** [PMC1560356](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560356/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Sep 6;25(17):4120-30. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601282. Epub 2006
Aug  17.

PRA1 promotes the intracellular trafficking and NF-kappaB signaling of EBV 
latent membrane protein 1.

Liu HP(1), Wu CC, Chang YS.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang Ming University, 
Shih-Pai, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), which is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded 
oncoprotein, induces nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) signaling by mimicking 
the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR). LMP1 signals primarily from 
intracellular compartments in a ligand-independent manner. Here, we identify a 
new LMP1-interacting molecule, prenylated Rab acceptor 1 (PRA1), which interacts 
with LMP1 for the first time through LMP1's transmembrane domain, and show that 
PRA1 is involved in intracellular LMP1 trafficking and LMP1-induced NF-kappaB 
activity. Immunofluorescence and biochemical analyses revealed that LMP1 
physically interacted with PRA1 at the Golgi apparatus, and the colocalization 
of LMP1 and PRA1 to the Golgi was sensitive to nocodazole and brefeldin A. 
Coexpression of a PRA1 export mutant or knockdown of PRA1 led to redistribution 
of LMP1 and its associated signaling molecules to the endoplasmic reticulum and 
subsequent impairment of LMP1-induced NF-kappaB activation, but had no effect on 
CD40- and TNFR1-mediated signaling or the functional integrity of the Golgi 
apparatus. These novel findings provide important new insights into LMP1, and 
identify an unexpected new role for PRA1 in cellular signaling.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601282
PMCID: PMC1560356
PMID: 16917502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
