---
pmid: '28396416'
title: Proteolytic control of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter complex.
authors:
- Tsai CW
- Wu Y
- Pao PC
- Phillips CB
- Williams C
- Miller C
- Ranaghan M
- Tsai MF
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5410796
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1702938114
---

# Proteolytic control of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter complex.
**Authors:** Tsai CW, Wu Y, Pao PC, Phillips CB, Williams C, Miller C, Ranaghan M, Tsai MF
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1702938114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1702938114)
**PMC:** [PMC5410796](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5410796/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Apr 25;114(17):4388-4393. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1702938114. Epub 2017 Apr 10.

Proteolytic control of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter complex.

Tsai CW(1)(2), Wu Y(1)(2), Pao PC(3), Phillips CB(1)(2), Williams C(1)(2), 
Miller C(4)(2), Ranaghan M(1), Tsai MF(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454.
(3)Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Brandeis University, Waltham, MA 02454; 
cmiller@brandeis.edu mftsai@brandeis.edu.

The mitochondrial calcium uniporter is a Ca2+-activated Ca2+ channel complex 
mediating mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake, a process crucial for Ca2+ signaling, 
bioenergetics, and cell death. The uniporter is composed of the pore-forming MCU 
protein, the gatekeeping MICU1 and MICU2 subunits, and EMRE, a single-pass 
membrane protein that links MCU and MICU1 together. As a bridging subunit 
required for channel function, EMRE could paradoxically inhibit uniporter 
complex formation if expressed in excess. Here, we show that mitochondrial mAAA 
proteases AFG3L2 and SPG7 rapidly degrade unassembled EMRE using the energy of 
ATP hydrolysis. Once EMRE is incorporated into the complex, its turnover is 
inhibited >15-fold. Protease-resistant EMRE mutants produce uniporter 
subcomplexes that induce constitutive Ca2+ leakage into mitochondria, a 
condition linked to debilitating neuromuscular disorders in humans. The results 
highlight the dynamic nature of uniporter subunit assembly, which must be 
tightly regulated to ensure proper mitochondrial responses to intracellular Ca2+ 
signals.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1702938114
PMCID: PMC5410796
PMID: 28396416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The mitochondrial calcium uniporter is a Ca 2+ -activated Ca 2+ channel complex mediating mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake, a process crucial for Ca 2+ signaling, bioenergetics, and cell death. The uniporter is composed of the pore-forming MCU protein, the gatekeeping MICU1 and MICU2 subunits, and EMRE, a single-pass membrane protein that links MCU and MICU1 together. As a bridging subunit required for channel function, EMRE could paradoxically inhibit uniporter complex formation if expressed in excess. Here, we show that mitochondrial mAAA proteases AFG3L2 and SPG7 rapidly degrade unassembled EMRE using the energy of ATP hydrolysis. Once EMRE is incorporated into the complex, its turnover is inhibited >15-fold. Protease-resistant EMRE mutants produce uniporter subcomplexes that induce constitutive Ca 2+ leakage into mitochondria, a condition linked to debilitating neuromuscular disorders in humans. The results highlight the dynamic nature of uniporter subunit assembly, which must be tightly regulated to ensure proper mitochondrial responses to intracellular Ca 2+ signals.

Discussion

Many essential biological processes are mediated by multisubunit protein complexes. The gene-balance hypothesis posits that unbalanced subunit expression can perturb complex formation, thus lowering organismal fitness ( 21 ). Large-scale proteomic analysis demonstrates that cells rectify such imbalances mostly by posttranslational responses ( 22 , 23 ). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these responses are largely unknown. The key finding here is that mAAA-type proteases distinguish the uncomplexed and MCU-bound forms of EMRE, selectively degrading the former to promote the balanced MCU and EMRE expression required for correct assembly and function of the channel complex ( Fig. 6 ).

In digesting uncomplexed EMRE, the mAAA proteases use the energy of ATP hydrolysis to remove the protein’s TMH from the membrane ( 24 , 25 ). Once EMRE is assembled into the complex, its molecular interactions with MCU, which must be disrupted for successful membrane extraction, can in principle raise a kinetic barrier to proteolysis. Indeed, results here strongly suggest that the energetics of transmembrane helix partitioning in the bilayer govern the kinetics of proteolytic removal of EMRE. In particular, hydrophobic substitutions in EMRE’s TMH, which would favor membrane partitioning by 2–4 kcal/mol ( 19 , 20 , 26 ), greatly impede proteolysis of unassembled EMRE. Recent single-molecule analysis of the bacterial ClpX ( 27 – 31 ), another member of the AAA+ protein superfamily, provides clear examples of how energy-dependent processes can serve as rate-limiting steps of protein degradation; it was shown that hydrolysis of only one ATP can readily unfold an unstable protein, but hundreds of futile hydrolysis cycles may be required before a more stable substrate is successfully unfolded, leading to slower kinetics.

Identification of protease-resistant EMRE variants allowed an examination of the impact of excessive EMRE on uniporter function. We expected to observe accumulation of Ca 2+ -leaky MCU–EMRE subcomplexes upon overexpression of EMRE. However, HEK293 cells expressing higher than normal levels of EMRE exhibit no mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake at low Ca 2+ , suggesting that all channels are fully regulated in MCU–EMRE–MICU1 complexes. Loss of this regulation is observed if MICU1 expression is reduced threefold, a condition in which MCU–EMRE subcomplexes begin to form, as excess EMRE acts as a sponge for MICU1. This result suggests that tissues with low MICU1 abundance would be particularly susceptible to unbalanced EMRE levels, thereby disrupting physiological Ca 2+ regulation by the uniporter ( 32 ). Counteracting Ca 2+ leakage into mitochondria in such tissues would be costly, as Na + /Ca 2+ , Na + /H + , and H + /Ca 2+ antiporters consume more than half of the energy needed to synthesize an ATP molecule for each Ca 2+ expelled. Even a small amount of chronic Ca 2+ leakage could therefore reduce the fitness of an organism, and indeed in humans, MICU1 deletion causes neuromuscular disorders that intensify over a course of several years ( 12 ). Moreover, a recent study shows that mouse phenotypes induced by MICU1 KO can be suppressed by EMRE haploinsufficiency that reduces the population of deregulated uniporters ( 33 ). In this regard, a proteolytic mechanism that enforces a balance of EMRE and MCU levels might emerge in evolution to safeguard against such detrimental conditions.

Finally, we hasten to note that while this work was in review, Langer and colleagues ( 34 ) reported the same proteolytic pathway as found here. Our two studies are complementary. On one hand, the two approaches adopt distinct strategies to induce excessive EMRE expression (deletion of mAAA-protease genes vs. expressing protease-resistant EMRE mutants), but obtain essentially the same molecular outcome (accumulation of the MCU–EMRE subcomplex). On the other hand, our study explores the mechanism by which mAAA proteases preferentially digest unassembled EMRE, whereas Langer and colleagues extensively document the pathological consequences of EMRE overexpression in mouse models. Collectively, these results provide a comprehensive picture, from molecular to whole-organism levels, of how a proteolytic pathway supports mitochondrial Ca 2+ homeostasis by regulating the highly dynamic process of uniporter subunit assembly in animal multicellularity.
