---
pmid: '21051944'
title: Membrane distributions of two ligand-binding receptor complexes in the CLAVATA
  pathway.
authors:
- Guo Y
- Clark SE
journal: Plant Signal Behav
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3115250
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295
---

# Membrane distributions of two ligand-binding receptor complexes in the CLAVATA pathway.
**Authors:** Guo Y, Clark SE
**Journal:** Plant Signal Behav (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295)
**PMC:** [PMC3115250](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3115250/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Nov;5(11):1442-5. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295.  Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Membrane distributions of two ligand-binding receptor complexes in the CLAVATA 
pathway.

Guo Y(1), Clark SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Comment on
    Guo Y, Han L, Hymes M, Denver R, Clark SE. CLAVATA2 forms a distinct 
CLE-binding receptor complex regulating Arabidopsis stem cell specification. 
Plant J. 2010;63:889–900. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295.

Genetic studies have suggested that transmembrane proteins CLAVATA1 (CLV1), 
CLV2, CORYNE (CRN), BAM1 and BAM2 all play a role in relaying the CLV3 signal 
and thus regulating stem cell homeostasis at the shoot meristem (SM). The 
extracellular domain of CLV1 was previously shown to bind the CLE peptide 
derived from CLV3, providing direct evidence that CLV3-CLV1 function as a 
ligand-receptor pair. How the other putative receptors function in the CLV 
pathway, however, remained unclear. We demonstrated in a recent Plant Journal 
article that the receptor-like protein CLV2 and the receptor-kinases BAM1 and 
BAM2 also bind to the CLV3 CLE peptide ligand with an affinity similar to that 
of CLV1. Critically, these ligand binding receptors form two distinct complexes 
in both transient expression in tobacco and in Arabidopsis meristem cells: a 
CLV2/CRN multimer and a CLV1/BAM multimer. Here we examine in detail the 
subcellular membrane partitioning for the receptor proteins in transient 
expression by two-phase partitioning and co-expression with known subcellular 
markers. All tested proteins measurably accumulate at the plasma membrane. While 
CLV1 primarily co-localizes with a plasma membrane marker, CLV2 shows greater 
co-localization with an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) marker.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04295
PMCID: PMC3115250
PMID: 21051944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
