---
pmid: '1715688'
title: Evidence for a structural mutation (347Ala to Thr) in a German family with
  3-ketothiolase deficiency.
authors:
- Fukao T
- Yamaguchi S
- Tomatsu S
- Orii T
- Frauendienst-Egger G
- Schrod L
- Osumi T
- Hashimoto T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(91)91343-b
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Evidence for a structural mutation (347Ala to Thr) in a German family with 3-ketothiolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Fukao T, Yamaguchi S, Tomatsu S, Orii T, Frauendienst-Egger G, Schrod L, Osumi T, Hashimoto T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(91)91343-b](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(91)91343-b)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Aug 30;179(1):124-9. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(91)91343-b.

Evidence for a structural mutation (347Ala to Thr) in a German family with 
3-ketothiolase deficiency.

Fukao T(1), Yamaguchi S, Tomatsu S, Orii T, Frauendienst-Egger G, Schrod L, 
Osumi T, Hashimoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

The molecular basis of 3-ketothiolase deficiency (3KTD) was examined in a 3KTD 
family. Immunochemical analyses showed that mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA 
thiolase (T2) biosynthesized in the patient's fibroblasts (GK06) was unstable 
and that the parents and brother were obligatory carriers of 3KTD. When 
sequencing the PCR-amplified patient's T2 cDNA, we noted a G to A replacement 
which caused 347Ala to Thr substitution of the mature T2 subunit. Transfection 
analysis revealed that this substitution resulted in an instability of the T2 
protein. Analyses of the T2 cDNA and gene of the family indicated that the 
patient was a compound heterozygote; the allele that derived from the mother had 
a point mutation (347Ala to Thr) and the other allele from the father has a 
mutation which would abolish the T2 gene expression. This report is apparently 
the first definition of a mutant allele for 3KTD, at the gene level.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(91)91343-b
PMID: 1715688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
