---
pmid: '10202817'
title: Auxin polar transport and flower formation in Arabidopsis thaliana transformed
  with indoleacetamide hydrolase (iaaH) gene.
authors:
- Oka M
- Miyamoto K
- Okada K
- Ueda J
journal: Plant Cell Physiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029532
---

# Auxin polar transport and flower formation in Arabidopsis thaliana transformed with indoleacetamide hydrolase (iaaH) gene.
**Authors:** Oka M, Miyamoto K, Okada K, Ueda J
**Journal:** Plant Cell Physiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029532](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029532)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell Physiol. 1999 Feb;40(2):231-7. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029532.

Auxin polar transport and flower formation in Arabidopsis thaliana transformed 
with indoleacetamide hydrolase (iaaH) gene.

Oka M(1), Miyamoto K, Okada K, Ueda J.

Author information:
(1)College of Integrated Arts and Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, Japan.

Involvement of auxin polar transport in flower formation of Arabidopsis thaliana 
was studied using a pinformed (pin) mutant (Rpin) transformed with the 
indoleacetamide hydrolase (iaaH) gene and the phenocopy of the pin mutant, which 
was induced by 9-hydroxyfluorene-9-carboxylic acid (HFCA). The application of 
indoleacetamide (IAM) did not change aberrant structure of the aerial part of 
Rpin (pin/pin), but extremely inhibited its root growth. Treatment with IAM 
increased the endogenous concentrations of free and conjugated IAA in Rpin 
normal (pin/+ or +/+) due to the expression of the iaaH gene, to 140% and 428% 
of those in non-treated plants, respectively, and those in Rpin to 378% and 
120%, respectively. The activity of IAA polar transport in the inflorescence 
axis of Rpin remained low even in the presence of IAM, the activity being almost 
similar, to that in the pin mutant. The activity of IAA polar transport in the 
HFCA-induced phenocopy of the pin mutant was also extremely low, and it was not 
restored by the simultaneous application of IAA. Arabidopsis thaliana responded 
to HFCA applied from 7 to 11 d and from 25 to 29 d after germination in the 
wild-type plant (Enkheim ecotype) and the late flowering mutant (fb mutant), 
respectively. These results suggest that the construction of the system of auxin 
polar transport and its normal activities are essential for the differentiation 
and the formation of floral meristem in the early growth stage of Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.a029532
PMID: 10202817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
