---
pmid: '25552655'
title: Nephrocystin proteins NPHP5 and Cep290 regulate BBSome integrity, ciliary trafficking
  and cargo delivery.
authors:
- Barbelanne M
- Hossain D
- Chan DP
- Peränen J
- Tsang WY
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4380068
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu738
---

# Nephrocystin proteins NPHP5 and Cep290 regulate BBSome integrity, ciliary trafficking and cargo delivery.
**Authors:** Barbelanne M, Hossain D, Chan DP, Peränen J, Tsang WY
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu738](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu738)
**PMC:** [PMC4380068](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4380068/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Apr 15;24(8):2185-200. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu738. Epub 2014 
Dec 30.

Nephrocystin proteins NPHP5 and Cep290 regulate BBSome integrity, ciliary 
trafficking and cargo delivery.

Barbelanne M(1), Hossain D(2), Chan DP(3), Peränen J(4), Tsang WY(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.
(2)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill 
University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada and.
(3)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada.
(4)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(5)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, 
Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill 
University, Montréal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada and william.tsang@ircm.qc.ca.

Proper functioning of cilia, hair-like structures responsible for sensation and 
locomotion, requires nephrocystin-5 (NPHP5) and a multi-subunit complex called 
the Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS)ome, but their precise relationship is not 
understood. The BBSome is involved in the trafficking of membrane cargos to 
cilia. While it is known that a loss of any single subunit prevents ciliary 
trafficking of the BBSome and its cargos, the mechanisms underlying ciliary 
entry of this complex are not well characterized. Here, we report that a 
transition zone protein NPHP5 contains two separate BBS-binding sites and 
interacts with the BBSome to mediate its integrity. Depletion of NPHP5, or 
expression of NPHP5 mutant missing one binding site, specifically leads to 
dissociation of BBS2 and BBS5 from the BBSome and loss of ciliary BBS2 and BBS5 
without compromising the ability of the other subunits to traffic into cilia. 
Depletion of Cep290, another transition zone protein that directly binds to 
NPHP5, causes additional dissociation of BBS8 and loss of ciliary BBS8. 
Furthermore, delivery of BBSome cargos, smoothened, VPAC2 and Rab8a, to the 
ciliary compartment is completely disabled in the absence of single BBS 
subunits, but is selectively impaired in the absence of NPHP5 or Cep290. These 
findings define a new role of NPHP5 and Cep290 in controlling integrity and 
ciliary trafficking of the BBSome, which in turn impinge on the delivery of 
ciliary cargo.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu738
PMCID: PMC4380068
PMID: 25552655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
