---
pmid: '22742833'
title: Tandem protein interaction modules organize the ubiquitin-dependent response
  to DNA double-strand breaks.
authors:
- Panier S
- Ichijima Y
- Fradet-Turcotte A
- Leung CC
- Kaustov L
- Arrowsmith CH
- Durocher D
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.045
---

# Tandem protein interaction modules organize the ubiquitin-dependent response to DNA double-strand breaks.
**Authors:** Panier S, Ichijima Y, Fradet-Turcotte A, Leung CC, Kaustov L, Arrowsmith CH, Durocher D
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.045)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 10;47(3):383-95. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.045. Epub
2012  Jun 27.

Tandem protein interaction modules organize the ubiquitin-dependent response to 
DNA double-strand breaks.

Panier S(1), Ichijima Y, Fradet-Turcotte A, Leung CC, Kaustov L, Arrowsmith CH, 
Durocher D.

Author information:
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5G 
1X5, Canada.

The response to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) entails the hierarchical 
recruitment of proteins orchestrated by ATM-dependent phosphorylation and 
RNF8-mediated chromatin ubiquitylation. As in most ubiquitin-dependent 
processes, the ordered accumulation of DNA repair factors at the break site 
relies on ubiquitin-binding domains (UBDs). However, how UBDs select their 
ligands is poorly understood, and therefore we sought to uncover the basis for 
selectivity in the ubiquitin-dependent DSB response. We show that RNF168, its 
paralog RNF169, RAD18, and the BRCA1-interacting RAP80 protein accumulate at DSB 
sites through the use of bipartite modules composed of UBDs juxtaposed to 
peptide motifs that provide specificity. These sequences, named LR motifs 
(LRMs), are transferable, and we show that the RNF169 LRM2 binds to nucleosomes, 
the substrates of RNF168. The LRM-based selection of ligands is a parsimonious 
means to build a highly discrete ubiquitin-based signaling pathway such as the 
DNA damage response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.045
PMID: 22742833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
