---
pmid: '12563314'
title: Host defense against Pseudomonas aeruginosa requires ceramide-rich membrane
  rafts.
authors:
- Grassmé H
- Jendrossek V
- Riehle A
- von Kürthy G
- Berger J
- Schwarz H
- Weller M
- Kolesnick R
- Gulbins E
journal: Nat Med
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nm823
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Host defense against Pseudomonas aeruginosa requires ceramide-rich membrane rafts.
**Authors:** Grassmé H, Jendrossek V, Riehle A, von Kürthy G, Berger J, Schwarz H, Weller M, Kolesnick R, Gulbins E
**Journal:** Nat Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm823](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm823)

## Abstract

1. Nat Med. 2003 Mar;9(3):322-30. doi: 10.1038/nm823. Epub 2003 Feb 3.

Host defense against Pseudomonas aeruginosa requires ceramide-rich membrane 
rafts.

Grassmé H(1), Jendrossek V, Riehle A, von Kürthy G, Berger J, Schwarz H, Weller 
M, Kolesnick R, Gulbins E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Essen, Essen, Germany.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection is a serious complication in patients with 
cystic fibrosis and in immunocompromised individuals. Here we show that P. 
aeruginosa infection triggers activation of the acid sphingomyelinase and the 
release of ceramide in sphingolipid-rich rafts. Ceramide reorganizes these rafts 
into larger signaling platforms that are required to internalize P. aeruginosa, 
induce apoptosis and regulate the cytokine response in infected cells. Failure 
to generate ceramide-enriched membrane platforms in infected cells results in an 
unabated inflammatory response, massive release of interleukin (IL)-1 and septic 
death of mice. Our findings show that ceramide-enriched membrane platforms are 
central to the host defense against this potentially lethal pathogen.

DOI: 10.1038/nm823
PMID: 12563314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
