---
pmid: '20153847'
title: Response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to phenol at the level of membrane proteome.
authors:
- Roma-Rodrigues C
- Santos PM
- Benndorf D
- Rapp E
- Sá-Correia I
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.003
---

# Response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to phenol at the level of membrane proteome.
**Authors:** Roma-Rodrigues C, Santos PM, Benndorf D, Rapp E, Sá-Correia I
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.003)

## Abstract

1. J Proteomics. 2010 Jun 16;73(8):1461-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.003.
Epub  2010 Feb 12.

Response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to phenol at the level of membrane 
proteome.

Roma-Rodrigues C(1), Santos PM, Benndorf D, Rapp E, Sá-Correia I.

Author information:
(1)IBB-Institute for Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Centre for Biological and 
Chemical Engineering, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade Técnica de 
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

This study led to the extension and refinement of our current model for the 
global response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to phenol by getting insights into 
the adaptive response mechanisms involving the membrane proteome. A 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis based protocol was optimized to allow the 
quantitative comparison of membrane proteins, by combining inner and outer 
membrane fractionation with membrane protein solubilization using the detergent 
dodecylmaltoside. Following phenol exposure, a coordinate increased content of 
protein subunits of known or putative solvent efflux pump systems (e.g. TtgA, 
TtgC, Ttg2A, Ttg2C, and PP_1516-7) and a decreased content of porins OprB, OprF, 
OprG and OprQ was registered, consistent with an adaptive response to reduce 
phenol intracellular concentration. This adaptive response may in part be 
mediated by post-translational modifications, as suggested by the relative 
content of the multiple forms identified for a few porins and efflux pump 
subunits. Results also suggest the important role of protein chaperones, of cell 
envelope and cell surface and of a more active respiratory chain in the response 
to phenol. All these mechanistic insights may be extended to Pseudomonas 
adaptation to solvents, of possible impact in biodegradation, bioremediation and 
biocatalysis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.003
PMID: 20153847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
