---
pmid: '10980201'
title: Characterization of rat TOM40, a central component of the preprotein translocase
  of the mitochondrial outer membrane.
authors:
- Suzuki H
- Okazawa Y
- Komiya T
- Saeki K
- Mekada E
- Kitada S
- Ito A
- Mihara K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M006558200
---

# Characterization of rat TOM40, a central component of the preprotein translocase of the mitochondrial outer membrane.
**Authors:** Suzuki H, Okazawa Y, Komiya T, Saeki K, Mekada E, Kitada S, Ito A, Mihara K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M006558200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M006558200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 1;275(48):37930-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M006558200.

Characterization of rat TOM40, a central component of the preprotein translocase 
of the mitochondrial outer membrane.

Suzuki H(1), Okazawa Y, Komiya T, Saeki K, Mekada E, Kitada S, Ito A, Mihara K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka 812-0054, Japan.

We cloned a 38-kDa rat mitochondrial outer membrane protein (OM38) with 
structural homology to the central component of preprotein translocase of the 
fungal mitochondrial outer membrane, Tom40. Although it has no predictable 
alpha-helical transmembrane segments, OM38 is resistant to alkaline carbonate 
extraction and is inaccessible to proteases and polyclonal antibodies added from 
outside the mitochondria, suggesting that it is embedded in the membrane, 
probably in a beta-barrel structure, as has been similarly speculated for fungal 
Tom40. Immunoprecipitation demonstrated that OM38 is associated with the major 
import receptors rTOM20 and rTOM22, and several other unidentified components 
with molecular masses of 5-10 kDa in digitonin-solubilized membrane: OM10, 
OM7.5, and OM5. Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis revealed that 
OM38 is a component of a approximately 400-kDa complex, firmly associating with 
rTOM22 and loosely associating with rTOM20. The preprotein in transit to the 
matrix interacted with the TOM complex containing OM38, and immunodepletion of 
OM38 resulted in the loss of preprotein import activity of the 
detergent-solubilized and reconstituted outer membrane vesicles. Taken together, 
these results indicate that OM38 is a structural and functional homolog of 
fungal Tom40 and functions as a component of the preprotein import machinery of 
the rat mitochondrial outer membrane.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M006558200
PMID: 10980201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
