---
pmid: '28498977'
title: Consequences of MEGF10 deficiency on myoblast function and Notch1 interactions.
authors:
- Saha M
- Mitsuhashi S
- Jones MD
- Manko K
- Reddy HM
- Bruels CC
- Cho KA
- Pacak CA
- Draper I
- Kang PB
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6075367
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx189
---

# Consequences of MEGF10 deficiency on myoblast function and Notch1 interactions.
**Authors:** Saha M, Mitsuhashi S, Jones MD, Manko K, Reddy HM, Bruels CC, Cho KA, Pacak CA, Draper I, Kang PB
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx189](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx189)
**PMC:** [PMC6075367](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6075367/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2017 Aug 1;26(15):2984-3000. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx189.

Consequences of MEGF10 deficiency on myoblast function and Notch1 interactions.

Saha M(1), Mitsuhashi S(2), Jones MD(1), Manko K(1), Reddy HM(1), Bruels CC(1), 
Cho KA(1)(2), Pacak CA(3), Draper I(4), Kang PB(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Child Health Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(4)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Department of Medicine, Tufts 
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology and Department of Molecular Genetics and 
Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, 
USA.
(6)Genetics Institute and Myology Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL 32610, USA.

Mutations in MEGF10 cause early onset myopathy, areflexia, respiratory distress, 
and dysphagia (EMARDD), a rare congenital muscle disease, but the pathogenic 
mechanisms remain largely unknown. We demonstrate that short hairpin RNA 
(shRNA)-mediated knockdown of Megf10, as well as overexpression of the 
pathogenic human p.C774R mutation, leads to impaired proliferation and migration 
of C2C12 cells. Myoblasts from Megf10-/- mice and Megf10-/-/mdx double knockout 
(dko) mice also show impaired proliferation and migration compared to myoblasts 
from wild type and mdx mice, whereas the dko mice show histological 
abnormalities that are not observed in either single mutant mouse. Cell 
proliferation and migration are known to be regulated by the Notch receptor, 
which plays an essential role in myogenesis. Reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation 
studies show that Megf10 and Notch1 interact via their respective intracellular 
domains. These interactions are impaired by the pathogenic p.C774R mutation. 
Megf10 regulation of myoblast function appears to be mediated at least in part 
via interactions with key components of the Notch signaling pathway, and defects 
in these interactions may contribute to the pathogenesis of EMARDD.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx189
PMCID: PMC6075367
PMID: 28498977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
