---
pmid: '11826110'
title: 'Delphilin: a novel PDZ and formin homology domain-containing protein that
  synaptically colocalizes and interacts with glutamate receptor delta 2 subunit.'
authors:
- Miyagi Y
- Yamashita T
- Fukaya M
- Sonoda T
- Okuno T
- Yamada K
- Watanabe M
- Nagashima Y
- Aoki I
- Okuda K
- Mishina M
- Kawamoto S
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6758529
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00803.2002
---

# Delphilin: a novel PDZ and formin homology domain-containing protein that synaptically colocalizes and interacts with glutamate receptor delta 2 subunit.
**Authors:** Miyagi Y, Yamashita T, Fukaya M, Sonoda T, Okuno T, Yamada K, Watanabe M, Nagashima Y, Aoki I, Okuda K, Mishina M, Kawamoto S
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00803.2002](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00803.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC6758529](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6758529/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2002 Feb 1;22(3):803-14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00803.2002.

Delphilin: a novel PDZ and formin homology domain-containing protein that 
synaptically colocalizes and interacts with glutamate receptor delta 2 subunit.

Miyagi Y(1), Yamashita T, Fukaya M, Sonoda T, Okuno T, Yamada K, Watanabe M, 
Nagashima Y, Aoki I, Okuda K, Mishina M, Kawamoto S.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology and Bacteriology, Yokohama City University School of 
Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

The glutamate receptor delta2 (GluRdelta2) subunit is selectively expressed in 
cerebellar Purkinje cells and plays an important role in cerebellar long-term 
depression, motor learning, motor coordination, and synapse development. We 
identified a novel GluRdelta2-interacting protein, named Delphilin, that 
contains a single PDZ domain and formin homology (FH) domains FH1 and FH2 plus 
coiled-coil structure. As far as we know, this is the first reported protein 
that contains both PDZ and FH domains. Yeast two-hybrid and surface plasmon 
resonance (SPR) analyses indicated that Delphilin interacts with the GluRdelta2 
C terminus via its PDZ domain. This was also supported by coimmunoprecipitation 
experiments using a heterologous expression system in mammalian cells. Yeast 
cell and SPR analyses also demonstrated the possibility that the FH1 
proline-rich region of Delphilin interacts with profilin, an actin-binding 
protein, and with the Src homology 3 domain of neuronal Src protein tyrosine 
kinase. In situ hybridization demonstrated the highest expression of Delphilin 
mRNA in Purkinje cells. Delphilin polypeptide was highly enriched in the 
synaptosomal membrane fraction of the cerebellum and coimmunoprecipitated with 
the GluRdelta2 subunit. The post-embedding immunogold technique demonstrated 
that Delphilin is selectively localized at the postsynaptic junction site of the 
parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse and colocalized with GluRdelta2. Thus, 
Delphilin is a postsynaptic scaffolding protein at the parallel fiber-Purkinje 
cell synapse, where it may serve to link GluRdelta2 with actin cytoskeleton and 
various signaling molecules.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-03-00803.2002
PMCID: PMC6758529
PMID: 11826110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
