---
pmid: '15890360'
title: Molecular basis for the specificity of p27 toward cyclin-dependent kinases
  that regulate cell division.
authors:
- Lacy ER
- Wang Y
- Post J
- Nourse A
- Webb W
- Mapelli M
- Musacchio A
- Siuzdak G
- Kriwacki RW
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.019
---

# Molecular basis for the specificity of p27 toward cyclin-dependent kinases that regulate cell division.
**Authors:** Lacy ER, Wang Y, Post J, Nourse A, Webb W, Mapelli M, Musacchio A, Siuzdak G, Kriwacki RW
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.019)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2005 Jun 17;349(4):764-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.019. Epub
2005  Apr 26.

Molecular basis for the specificity of p27 toward cyclin-dependent kinases that 
regulate cell division.

Lacy ER(1), Wang Y, Post J, Nourse A, Webb W, Mapelli M, Musacchio A, Siuzdak G, 
Kriwacki RW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs) bind to and directly regulate the 
catalytic activity of cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)/cyclin complexes involved in 
cell cycle control and do not regulate other, closely related Cdks. We showed 
previously that the CKI, p27, binds to Cdk2/cyclin A though a sequential 
mechanism that involves folding-on-binding. The first step in the kinetic 
mechanism is interaction of a small, highly dynamic domain of p27 (domain 1) 
with the cyclin subunit of the Cdk2/cyclin A complex, followed by much slower 
binding of a more lengthy and less flexible domain (domain 2) to Cdk2. The 
second step requires folding of domain 2 into the kinase inhibitory 
conformation. Rapid binding of p27 domain 1 to cyclin A tethers the inhibitor to 
the binary Cdk2/cyclin A complex, which reduces the entropic barrier associated 
with slow binding of domain 2 to the catalytic subunit. We show here that 
p27/cyclin interactions are an important determinant of p27 specificity towards 
cell cycle Cdks. We used surface plasmon resonance, limited proteolysis, mass 
spectrometry, and NMR spectroscopy to study the interaction of p27 with 
Cdk2/cyclin A, and with another Cdk complex, Cdk5/p25, that is involved in 
neurodegeneration. Importantly, Cdk5/p35 (the parent complex of Cdk5/p25) is not 
regulated by p27 in neurons. Our results show that p27 binds to Cdk5 and Cdk2 
with similar, slow kinetics. However, p27 fails to interact with p25 within the 
Cdk5/p25 complex, which we believe prevents formation of a kinetically trapped, 
inhibited p27/Cdk5/p25 complex in vivo. The helical topology of p25 is very 
similar to that of cyclin A. However, p25 lacks the MRAIL sequence in one helix 
that, in the cell cycle cyclins, mediates specific interactions with domain 1 of 
p21 and p27. Our results strongly suggest that p21 and p27, related Cdk 
inhibitors, select their cell cycle regulatory Cdk targets by binding 
specifically to the cyclin subunit of these Cdk/cyclin complexes as a first step 
in a sequential, folding-on-binding mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.04.019
PMID: 15890360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
