---
pmid: '8494331'
title: Cloning and characterization of a Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome antigen.
authors:
- Rosenfeld MR
- Wong E
- Dalmau J
- Manley G
- Posner JB
- Sher E
- Furneaux HM
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ana.410330126
---

# Cloning and characterization of a Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome antigen.
**Authors:** Rosenfeld MR, Wong E, Dalmau J, Manley G, Posner JB, Sher E, Furneaux HM
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410330126](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410330126)

## Abstract

1. Ann Neurol. 1993 Jan;33(1):113-20. doi: 10.1002/ana.410330126.

Cloning and characterization of a Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome antigen.

Rosenfeld MR(1), Wong E, Dalmau J, Manley G, Posner JB, Sher E, Furneaux HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021.

Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome is a paraneoplastic neuromuscular disorder in 
which an immune response directed against a small-cell lung tumor crossreacts 
with antigens in the neuromuscular junction. To isolate and characterize the 
antigens, we screened a human fetal brain expression library with a high-titer 
serum from a patient with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome. This screening 
resulted in the isolation of a complementary DNA clone encoding an antigen we 
call myasthenic syndrome antigen B (MysB). Approximately 43% (3 of 7) of 
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome sera specifically recognized MysB fusion 
protein, whereas none of 34 control sera did. The predicted amino acid sequence 
of this clone shows a high degree of homology to the beta subunit of calcium 
channel complexes. The MysB pre-messenger RNA is alternatively spliced to yield 
3 forms of the protein differing in the domain between two highly conserved 
alpha-helical segments.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410330126
PMID: 8494331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
