---
pmid: '15964553'
title: TSSK5, a novel member of the testis-specific serine/threonine kinase family,
  phosphorylates CREB at Ser-133, and stimulates the CRE/CREB responsive pathway.
authors:
- Chen X
- Lin G
- Wei Y
- Hexige S
- Niu Y
- Liu L
- Yang C
- Yu L
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.05.157
---

# TSSK5, a novel member of the testis-specific serine/threonine kinase family, phosphorylates CREB at Ser-133, and stimulates the CRE/CREB responsive pathway.
**Authors:** Chen X, Lin G, Wei Y, Hexige S, Niu Y, Liu L, Yang C, Yu L
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.05.157](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.05.157)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 5;333(3):742-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.05.157.

TSSK5, a novel member of the testis-specific serine/threonine kinase family, 
phosphorylates CREB at Ser-133, and stimulates the CRE/CREB responsive pathway.

Chen X(1), Lin G, Wei Y, Hexige S, Niu Y, Liu L, Yang C, Yu L.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Several protein kinases have been shown to be involved in spermatogenesis. 
Recently, a novel subfamily of serine/threonine kinases has been isolated whose 
expression is limited to testis. Here, we report the fifth family member, named 
TSSK5, which encodes a 328 amino acid protein. RT-PCR analysis showed that TSSK5 
is exclusively expressed in human testis. We isolated cAMP responsive element 
binding protein (CREB), a TSSK5 interacting protein via yeast two-hybrid system. 
The in vitro kinase assay showed that TSSK5 phosphorylated CREB at Ser-133. 
Using a CRE reporter system, we found that TSSK5 could stimulate the CREB/CRE 
responsive pathway in Hek293 cells. These results suggest that this kinase may 
be involved in spermatogenesis through phosphorylating CREB and then stimulating 
the CREB/CRE responsive pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.05.157
PMID: 15964553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
