---
pmid: '10444594'
title: A cell-counting factor regulating structure size in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Brock DA
- Gomer RH
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1999'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC316923
doi: 10.1101/gad.13.15.1960
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A cell-counting factor regulating structure size in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Brock DA, Gomer RH
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.13.15.1960](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.13.15.1960)
**PMC:** [PMC316923](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC316923/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1999 Aug 1;13(15):1960-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.13.15.1960.

A cell-counting factor regulating structure size in Dictyostelium.

Brock DA(1), Gomer RH.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology 
MS-140, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005-1892, USA.

Developing Dictyostelium cells form large aggregation streams that break up into 
groups of 0.2 x 10(5) to 1 x 10(5) cells. Each group then becomes a fruiting 
body. smlA cells oversecrete an unknown factor that causes aggregation streams 
to break up into groups of approximately 5 x 10(3) cells and thus form very 
small fruiting bodies. We have purified the counting factor and find that it 
behaves as a complex of polypeptides with an effective molecular mass of 450 kD. 
One of the polypeptides is a 40-kD hydrophilic protein we have named counting. 
In transformants with a disrupted counting gene, there is no detectable 
secretion of counting factor, and the aggregation streams do not break up, 
resulting in huge (up to 2 x 10(5) cell) fruiting bodies.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.13.15.1960
PMCID: PMC316923
PMID: 10444594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Developing Dictyostelium cells form large aggregation streams that break up into groups of 0.2 × 10 5 to 1 × 10 5 cells. Each group then becomes a fruiting body. smlA cells oversecrete an unknown factor that causes aggregation streams to break up into groups of ∼5 × 10 3 cells and thus form very small fruiting bodies. We have purified the counting factor and find that it behaves as a complex of polypeptides with an effective molecular mass of 450 kD. One of the polypeptides is a 40-kD hydrophilic protein we have named countin. In transformants with a disrupted countin gene, there is no detectable secretion of counting factor, and the aggregation streams do not break up, resulting in huge (up to 2 × 10 5 cell) fruiting bodies.

Results

We showed previously that the smlA transformant forms small aggregates and fruiting bodies due to the oversecretion of an unknown factor that is retained in a 100-kD cutoff centrifugal microfilter ( Brock et al. 1996 ). This activity appeared to allow aggregation to begin normally, but then caused aggregation streams to break up ( Brock et al. 1996 ). To characterize the factor, we used conventional column chromatography to fractionate starvation buffer in which either smlA or wild-type Ax4 cells had been starved (CM). After ion exchange chromatography of concentrated CM from both cell types, a bioassay of the various fractions showed that in the fractionated smlA CM, a peak that eluted at ∼0.56 m NaCl, caused aggregation streams to break up. The fractions from the 0.56 m peak were pooled and further fractionated by hydroxyapatite chromatography. As a control, the same fractions from the Ax4 CM were also pooled and run on a hydroxyapatite column. In a bioassay, the Ax4 hydroxyapatite column fractions all formed approximately the same number of aggregates. In the smlA fractions, an activity eluting at 0.3 m phosphate allowed streams to form normally, but then caused them to break up into small subaggregates.

When the hydroxyapatite peak was fractionated by electrophoresis on a nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel (exposure to SDS destroyed the activity of counting factor), a 30-fold dilution of the material eluting out of two adjacent slices (2 and 3) of the smlA hydroxyapatite fractions gel showed a strong peak of bioassay activity that caused an increase in aggregate number. Similarly eluted and diluted material from the Ax-4 hydroxyapatite fractions gel slices had little effect on cell aggregation in the bioassay. We observed that this activity increased aggregate number by causing aggregation streams to break up (Fig. 1 A,B). At higher concentrations, the material eluting out of gel slices 2 and 3 from the Ax4 prep also caused aggregate streams to break up. As shown in Figure 1 C, there are several different proteins present in the nondenaturing gel peak. Comparing the material purified from the smlA cells and from the Ax4 cells, we observed the same proteins, with a roughly fourfold greater amount in the smlA material. This suggests that smlA cells oversecrete a factor normally secreted by Ax4 cells.

We tried a variety of columns to further fractionate the polypeptides from the nondenaturing gel purification, but were unsuccessful. When the partially purified counting factor from the hydroxyapatite chromatography was fractionated on a gel filtration column, a single peak of activity was found, with an approximate molecular mass of 450 kD (Fig. 1 D). An SDS–polyacrylamide gel of this peak showed essentially the same pattern of bands as seen in a gel of the material purified by elution from a nondenaturing gel. The observation that a factor with an effective molecular mass of 450 kD consists of polypeptides with molecular masses below 80 kD suggests that some of these polypeptides form a complex.

We attempted to sequence the amino termini of each of the proteins from the nondenaturing gel peak, and obtained sequences for the 50-, 43-, and 40-kD polypeptides (Fig. 1 C). The 60- and 36-kD proteins appeared to have blocked amino termini. Iijima et al. (1995) described a 450-kD complex of proteins secreted by Dictyostelium cells. Although the protein profiles of counting factor and the Iijima factor are mostly different, both factors contain a roughly 50-kD polypeptide. The sequence of the 50-kD protein had only 3 of 14 amino acids identical with a 49-kD protein present in the Iijima factor, suggesting that the two proteins are different, and the difference in protein profiles suggests that the two complexes are different.

To further characterize the polypeptides eluted from the nondenaturing gel, we made degenerate oligonucleotides to isolate cDNA clones. As of yet, we were unable to isolate clones for the 50- and 43-kD proteins. For the 40-kD protein, we isolated a 920-nucleotide cDNA with the first AUG being followed by a 738-nucleotide ORF (Fig. 2 ). The ORF encodes a protein with a predicted molecular mass of 26.7 kD. The amino acid sequence of the originally sequenced peptide was present in the predicted amino acid sequence. The predicted sequence shows no significant similarity to any known protein. The predicted protein, which we have named countin, is hydrophilic, has a potential signal sequence upstream of where we observe the amino terminus of the secreted protein, and has two potential glycosylation sites (Fig. 2 ). To examine when during development the countin gene is expressed, a Northern blot of RNA from cells at different stages of development was probed with the countin cDNA. The countin mRNA is ∼1.2 kb, and is expressed in vegetative cells and throughout development (Fig. 3 H and data not shown). To determine whether countin is present in all or just some cells, as well as its subcellular localization, cells were stained by immunofluorescence with anti-countin antibodies. As shown in Figure 3 A, staining of vegetative wild-type cells shows countin present in all cells, associated with what appear to be vesicles. smlA cells show a weaker staining with a distribution roughly equivalent to wild-type cells (Fig. 3 C).

Next, we wanted to see the effect of disrupting expression of countin . A gene disruption construct made with the cDNA failed to give homologous recombination as determined by PCR of DNA from transformant clones, so the cDNA was used to probe Southern blots to map the genomic DNA, and a 3-kb genomic fragment was then isolated. This was used to make a gene disruption construct to replace 0.5 kb of the countin coding region with a blasticidin resistance cassette. When transformed into Ax2 or Ax4 cells, this disrupted the countin gene as determined by PCR (data not shown). Northern blots of parental and transformed cells indicated that the countin cells lack the countin mRNA (Fig. 3 H). Immunofluorescence showed that countin cells do not show the staining observed in wild-type cells (Fig. 3 B), and Western blots indicated that a 40-kD band is stained with anti-countin antibodies in concentrated CM from wild-type but not countin cells (Fig. 3 G). The above results suggest that countin mRNA and protein are absent from the countin cells.

The countin cells grew in shaking culture and on bacterial lawns approximately as well as the parental cells. At low cell density, the differentiation of countin cells into CP2-positive and SP70-positive was indistinguishable from wild-type cells (data not shown). When the countin cells were starved on either agar or filter pads, their development was slightly delayed with respect to that of the parental cells. On both agar and filter pads, the countin and parental cells formed aggregation territories of approximately the same size. However, the aggregation streams of the parental cells broke up into subgroups, whereas the streams of the countin cells continued to flow in toward the aggregation center (Fig. 4 A,B). Occasionally, the large aggregates formed by the countin cells would then separate into several smaller groups. The countin cells were able to form fruiting bodies, but these were considerably larger than those of the parental cells (Fig. 4 C), and as a consequence often fell over (Fig. 4 D,E). Disruption of countin in Ax4 or smlA cells also resulted in larger aggregates (data not shown).

To determine whether the phenotype of the countin cells was due to the lack of a secreted factor, the CM from countin cells was assayed for counting factor activity. When countin cells were starved at low density in the presence of CM from countin cells starved at high cell density, they formed no more aggregates than when they were starved in buffer alone; but when they were starved in CM from wild-type or smlA cells, they formed more aggregates (Fig. 5 ). Similar results were obtained starving Ax4 cells in the various conditioned media. When CM from smlA cells was treated for 1 hr at room temperature with a 1:500 dilution of anti-countin antibodies, the number of aggregates decreased by ∼50%. No effect was seen using countin CM or preimmune sera. When countin cells were mixed with 10% Ax4 cells and starved on either agar or filter pads, they formed Ax4-size fruiting bodies, and when mixed with smlA cells, they formed small fruiting bodies. A similar effect was observed when countin cells were starved on filter pads soaked with Ax4 or smlA CM. These results suggest that countin cells do not secrete a factor that causes aggregate streams to break up, but can sense and respond to a such a factor secreted by Ax4 and smlA cells.

Discussion

Very little is known about how groups of cells are able to count themselves to regulate tissue size. An evenly spread culture of starved Dictyostelium cells breaks up into groups of ∼2 × 10 4 cells. Previously, we hypothesized that individual cells would be able to sense the number of cells in a group by secreting and sensing a diffusible factor. We found a transformant ( smlA ) that appears to oversecrete such a factor, and apparently as a result of the high levels of the cell-counting factor, gives cells a false sense of the nearby presence of a large number of cells. A prediction of this hypothesis is that in the absence of the cell-counting factor, cells will be unable to sense whether they have formed an excessively large group, and thus will tend to form large aggregates. To test this prediction, we made transformants with a defective factor by purifying the factor, isolating the gene encoding a putative component of the factor, and then using this to make a gene disruption construct. To our delight, transformants lacking this component formed large aggregates, verifying the hypothesis.

The nature of the counting factor is rather unusual, in that it appears to be a complex of polypeptides (Fig. 1 B,C). The counting factor would thus appear to be a multimer of countin, or a complex of countin and other proteins. If the counting factor is a multimer of different polypeptides, countin could either interact with a cell-surface receptor by itself, furnish part of the binding domain for a receptor, activate one receptor while another polypeptide in the counting factor complex activates a different receptor, or hold other proteins in a configuration necessary for them to interact with receptors. Like the cell-density signal CMF, countin has a polypeptide backbone that is smaller than the observed protein molecular mass, suggesting that like CMF and other secreted Dictyostelium proteins, countin has a considerable amount of glycosylation ( Yuen et al. 1991 ; Alexander 1997 ). The ability of the countin transformants, as well as the smlA cells, which oversecrete countin, to form fruiting bodies indicates that countin is not involved with the differentiation of cells.

We were surprised to see a secreted signal with such a large molecular mass. Diffusion calculations by a secreted signal with a molecular mass of 10 kD, or even 1 kD, indicated that signals of these sizes could be used to sense the number of cells in a group (Fig. 6 ). Using an effective diffusion distance of x = √4 Dt , in which D is the diffusion coefficient and t is the amount of time the material has been diffusing, we find that for a 450-kD signal diffusing through agar or moist dirt for 5 hr, the effective distance is ∼1 mm. For a 10-kD signal, the effective distance is roughly twice this. These distances are typical for the spacing between fruiting bodies, but much greater than the width of an aggregation stream or the diameter of the aggregated group of cells forming a fruiting body. Thus, one possible reason that the counting factor is so large is that this results in a relatively small propagation distance, allowing cells within a group to communicate with each other, but reducing the amount of signal a group of cells would see from neighboring groups.

Low-power microscopy of cells in the presence and absence of countin suggests that when Dictyostelium cells are starved at high density they form a converging aggregation stream pattern over a relatively very large area, and that countin is involved in the aggregation streams breaking up into chains of discrete groups of cells, each of which will go on to form a fruiting body. Disruption of the MAP kinase kinase, MEK1, causes a highly broken up stream phenotype very similar to that seen in smlA ( Ma et al. 1997 ), suggesting the possibility that MEK1 is involved in either counting factor secretion or signal transduction. Because cells lacking countin have streams that do not break up, but form aggregates that occasionally break up, one possibility is that there exists more than one size determination mechanisms in Dictyostelium .

There is ∼2 μg of protein in the active fractions eluted from the nondenaturing gel peak from the prep of smlA CM (Table 1 ). The 40-kD polypeptide is ∼10% of this protein (Fig. 1 B), so from 150 ml of 5 × 10 6 cells/ml secreting for 20 hr we purified ∼0.2 μg of the 40-kD protein. Assuming that there is no internalization or degradation of the 40-kD protein, that the secretion is uniform with time, and that the yield is 13% (Table 1 ), there are ∼250 molecules of the 40-kD protein secreted per smlA cell per minute.

Previously, we used calculations to show that a secreted factor that diffuses away from a group of cells can be used as part of a mechanism to sense the number of cells in a group ( Yuen and Gomer 1994 ; Clarke and Gomer 1995 ). We used 450 kD as the molecular mass of counting factor to calculate a diffusion coefficient of 3.4 × 10 −7 cm 2 /sec. Assuming that countin is secreted at an even rate by all starving cells, from the purification table we determined the approximate secretion rate of countin to be 3 × 10 −10 ng/sec. This allows us to calculate the concentration of countin as a function of the number of cells secreting it. With the cells closely spaced, and the cells in a flat disk on a surface with the bulk diffusion properties of moist dirt or agar, the theoretical concentration of countin increases with the number of cells in the group (Fig. 6 ). At the lower number of cells, the concentration approaches the concentration for a single cell; previously, we saw that this concentration quickly reaches and stays at a fixed value ( Yuen and Gomer 1994 ). We also calculated the concentration of a 10-kD signal, also being secreted at 3 × 10 −10 ng/sec (Fig. 6 , bottom curve). The concentration of this signal also increases with the number of cells, but is lower overall, due to the dissipation of this faster-diffusing signal. Similar results were obtained for different geometries of cells, such as an elongated stream. These calculations were done for groups of cells that had been secreting the factor continuously for 5 hr. Qualitatively similar results (signal concentration increasing with the number of cells in the group) were obtained for shorter and longer secretion times (results not shown).

From the purification (Table 1 ), 2 μg of counting factor was purified from 150 ml of smlA CM with a 13% purification efficiency, giving an estimated concentration of counting factor in smlA CM to be ∼100 ng/ml. The diffusion calculations indicate that this concentration is reached when there are ∼3 × 10 3 cells in a group (Fig. 6 ). If we assume that the secretion of counting factor from smlA cells is fourfold greater than the secretion from wild-type cells (Fig. 1 C), then the counting factor concentration would theoretically reach ∼100 ng/ml when there are ∼10 5 Ax4 cells in a group. Thus, there is a very crude agreement between the theoretical effect of countin and the observed number of cells in aggregates.

Our current working hypothesis is that to sense the number of cells in a group, the cells secrete a factor that diffuses into the surrounding environment. The environment thus becomes a concentration sink for the material. The cells measure at their plasma membranes the extracellular concentration of the factor, and this increases, although not linearly, with the number of cells in the group. Such a mechanism would work with the surrounding environment being either a tissue completely surrounding the group, or the surface of a permeable material that the cells sit on, such as moist dirt or agar. In addition to passive diffusion being a sink for the secreted factor, one can envision a surrounding layer of cells or material that absorbs, adsorbs, or enzymatically breaks down the signal, or removes it by a process such as endocytosis. In addition, the essential polarity of the mechanism could also be reversed, with the surrounding material or tissue supplying the signal, and the cells competing for the signal in any of the ways described above ( Raff et al. 1998 ). Then, in the vicinity of the cells, the concentration of the signal would decrease as the number of cells increase. In several ways, a secreted signal can thus form the basis of a simple and elegant cell-counting mechanism.
