---
pmid: '9020890'
title: Ras activation in platelets after stimulation of the thrombin receptor, thromboxane
  A2 receptor or protein kinase C.
authors:
- Shock DD
- He K
- Wencel-Drake JD
- Parise LV
journal: Biochem J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1218100
doi: 10.1042/bj3210525
---

# Ras activation in platelets after stimulation of the thrombin receptor, thromboxane A2 receptor or protein kinase C.
**Authors:** Shock DD, He K, Wencel-Drake JD, Parise LV
**Journal:** Biochem J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj3210525](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3210525)
**PMC:** [PMC1218100](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1218100/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1997 Jan 15;321 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):525-30. doi: 10.1042/bj3210525.

Ras activation in platelets after stimulation of the thrombin receptor, 
thromboxane A2 receptor or protein kinase C.

Shock DD(1), He K, Wencel-Drake JD, Parise LV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
27599-7365, USA.

Several reports have indicated that the small G-protein Ras is not present 
immunologically in platelets. However, here we report the identification of Ras 
in platelets by immunoprecipitation with the Ras-specific monoclonal antibodies 
Y13-259 or Y13-238, followed by Western blotting. The presence of Ras was not 
due to contamination of samples with erythrocytes or leucocytes. 
Immunofluorescence studies indicated that Ras was present in a peripheral rim 
pattern in fixed, permeabilized platelets, suggesting an intracellular, plasma 
membrane location. Activation of platelets with the thrombin receptor 
peptide42-50, the prostaglandin H2/thromboxane A2 mimetic U46619 or phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate induced a rapid increase in GTP-bound, activated Ras. In 
each case, this increase was inhibited by the protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor 
bisindolylmaleimide GF 109203X, suggesting that Ras is activated downstream of 
PKC in platelets. Thus the activation of Ras in platelets by agonists will now 
allow consideration of multiple potential Ras-dependent signal transduction 
pathways in platelet activation processes.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3210525
PMCID: PMC1218100
PMID: 9020890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
