---
pmid: '11418631'
title: The distinct roles of T cell-derived cytokines and a novel follicular dendritic
  cell-signaling molecule 8D6 in germinal center-B cell differentiation.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Li L
- Jung J
- Xiang S
- Hollmann C
- Choi YS
journal: J Immunol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.49
---

# The distinct roles of T cell-derived cytokines and a novel follicular dendritic cell-signaling molecule 8D6 in germinal center-B cell differentiation.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Li L, Jung J, Xiang S, Hollmann C, Choi YS
**Journal:** J Immunol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.49](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.49)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 1;167(1):49-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.49.

The distinct roles of T cell-derived cytokines and a novel follicular dendritic 
cell-signaling molecule 8D6 in germinal center-B cell differentiation.

Zhang X(1), Li L, Jung J, Xiang S, Hollmann C, Choi YS.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Immunology, Alton Ochsner Medical Foundation, New 
Orleans, LA 70121, USA.

Germinal center-B (GC-B) cells differentiate into memory B cells and plasma 
cells (PC) through interaction with T cells and follicular dendritic cells 
(FDC). Activated T cell and FDC play distinct roles in this process. The 
detailed kinetic experiments revealed that cytokines secreted by activated T 
cells determined the pathway of GC-B cell differentiation. IL-4 directs GC-B 
cells to differentiate into memory B cells, whereas IL-10 steers them into PC. 
FDC/HK cells do not direct either pathway, but provide signals for proliferation 
of GC-B cells. A novel FDC-signaling molecule 8D6 (FDC-SM-8D6) produced by FDC 
augments PC generation in the GC. FDC-SM-8D6-specific mAb blocked PC generation 
and IgG secretion but not memory B cell proliferation. COS cells expressing 
FDC-SM-8D6 enhanced GC-B cell proliferation and Ab secretion, which was blocked 
by mAb 8D6. In the cultures with B cell subsets, PC generation was inhibited by 
mAb 8D6 in the cultures with CD27(+) B cells but not in the culture with CD27(-) 
B cells, suggesting that CD27(+) PC precursor is the specific target of 
FDC-SM-8D6 stimulation.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.167.1.49
PMID: 11418631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
