---
reference_id: PMID:18156253
title: Glycerate 2-kinase of Thermotoga maritima and genomic reconstruction of related metabolic pathways.
authors:
- Yang C
- Rodionov DA
- Rodionova IA
- Li X
- Osterman AL
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1128/JB.01469-07
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycerate 2-kinase of Thermotoga maritima and genomic reconstruction of related metabolic pathways.
**Authors:** Yang C, Rodionov DA, Rodionova IA, Li X, Osterman AL
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.01469-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01469-07)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Mar;190(5):1773-82. doi: 10.1128/JB.01469-07. Epub 2007 Dec 
21.

Glycerate 2-kinase of Thermotoga maritima and genomic reconstruction of related 
metabolic pathways.

Yang C(1), Rodionov DA, Rodionova IA, Li X, Osterman AL.

Author information:
(1)Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Members of a novel glycerate-2-kinase (GK-II) family were tentatively identified 
in a broad range of species, including eukaryotes and archaea and many bacteria 
that lack a canonical enzyme of the GarK (GK-I) family. The recently reported 
three-dimensional structure of GK-II from Thermotoga maritima (TM1585; PDB code 
2b8n) revealed a new fold distinct from other known kinase families. Here, we 
verified the enzymatic activity of TM1585, assessed its kinetic characteristics, 
and used directed mutagenesis to confirm the essential role of the two 
active-site residues Lys-47 and Arg-325. The main objective of this study was to 
apply comparative genomics for the reconstruction of metabolic pathways 
associated with GK-II in all bacteria and, in particular, in T. maritima. 
Comparative analyses of approximately 400 bacterial genomes revealed a 
remarkable variety of pathways that lead to GK-II-driven utilization of 
glycerate via a glycolysis/gluconeogenesis route. In the case of T. maritima, a 
three-step serine degradation pathway was inferred based on the tentative 
identification of two additional enzymes, serine-pyruvate aminotransferase and 
hydroxypyruvate reductase (TM1400 and TM1401, respectively), that convert serine 
to glycerate via hydroxypyruvate. Both enzymatic activities were experimentally 
verified, and the entire pathway was validated by its in vitro reconstitution.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01469-07
PMCID: PMC2258669
PMID: 18156253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]