---
pmid: '25556234'
title: New host factors important for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) replication
  revealed by a novel microfluidics screen for interactors of matrix (M) protein.
authors:
- Kipper S
- Hamad S
- Caly L
- Avrahami D
- Bacharach E
- Jans DA
- Gerber D
- Bajorek M
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4349975
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044107
---

# New host factors important for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) replication revealed by a novel microfluidics screen for interactors of matrix (M) protein.
**Authors:** Kipper S, Hamad S, Caly L, Avrahami D, Bacharach E, Jans DA, Gerber D, Bajorek M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M114.044107](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M114.044107)
**PMC:** [PMC4349975](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4349975/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Mar;14(3):532-43. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044107. Epub
 2015 Jan 2.

New host factors important for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) replication 
revealed by a novel microfluidics screen for interactors of matrix (M) protein.

Kipper S(1), Hamad S(2), Caly L(3), Avrahami D(1), Bacharach E(4), Jans DA(3), 
Gerber D(5), Bajorek M(6).

Author information:
(1)From the ‡Nanotechnology Institute, Mina and Evrard Goodman Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel;
(2)§Section of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
UK;
(3)¶Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia;
(4)‖Department of Cell Research and Immunology, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(5)From the ‡Nanotechnology Institute, Mina and Evrard Goodman Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel; Doron.Gerber@biu.ac.il 
m.bajorek@imperial.ac.uk.
(6)§Section of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, 
UK; Doron.Gerber@biu.ac.il m.bajorek@imperial.ac.uk.

Although human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of 
bronchiolitis and pneumonia in infants and elderly worldwide, there is no 
licensed RSV vaccine or effective drug treatment available. The RSV Matrix 
protein plays key roles in virus life cycle, being found in the nucleus early in 
infection in a transcriptional inhibitory role, and later localizing in viral 
inclusion bodies before coordinating viral assembly and budding at the plasma 
membrane. In this study, we used a novel, high throughput microfluidics platform 
and custom human open reading frame library to identify novel host cell binding 
partners of RSV matrix. Novel interactors identified included proteins involved 
in host transcription regulation, the innate immunity response, cytoskeletal 
regulation, membrane remodeling, and cellular trafficking. A number of these 
interactions were confirmed by immunoprecipitation and cellular colocalization 
approaches. Importantly, the physiological significance of matrix interaction 
with the actin-binding protein cofilin 1, caveolae protein Caveolin 2, and the 
zinc finger protein ZNF502 was confirmed. siRNA knockdown of the host protein 
levels resulted in reduced RSV virus production in infected cells. These results 
have important implications for future antiviral strategies aimed at targets of 
RSV matrix in the host cell.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044107
PMCID: PMC4349975
PMID: 25556234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Although human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in infants and elderly worldwide, there is no licensed RSV vaccine or effective drug treatment available. The RSV Matrix protein plays key roles in virus life cycle, being found in the nucleus early in infection in a transcriptional inhibitory role, and later localizing in viral inclusion bodies before coordinating viral assembly and budding at the plasma membrane. In this study, we used a novel, high throughput microfluidics platform and custom human open reading frame library to identify novel host cell binding partners of RSV matrix. Novel interactors identified included proteins involved in host transcription regulation, the innate immunity response, cytoskeletal regulation, membrane remodeling, and cellular trafficking. A number of these interactions were confirmed by immunoprecipitation and cellular colocalization approaches. Importantly, the physiological significance of matrix interaction with the actin-binding protein cofilin 1, caveolae protein Caveolin 2, and the zinc finger protein ZNF502 was confirmed. siRNA knockdown of the host protein levels resulted in reduced RSV virus production in infected cells. These results have important implications for future antiviral strategies aimed at targets of RSV matrix in the host cell.

DISCUSSION

This study is the first to use microfluidics technology to perform a high-throughput screen to identify 24 novel host factors that can interact directly with the RSV M protein (see Table I ). Further, although previous proteomics-based studies have identified host cell factors important for RSV replication, this is the first to identify and validate host proteins directly interacting with RSV M. Here, we focused on three selected hits in particular, characterizing their colocalization with RSV proteins and their effect on RSV replication.

We showed that M can interact with all three members of the Caveolin family ( Fig. 2 and Table I ). Together with cellular colocalization of Cav1 and Cav2 with M at the viral filaments ( Figs. 3 B and 4 A ), this implies that interaction with Caveolin proteins occurs in lipid rafts at the plasma membrane where M oligomerizes and virion budding takes place, and presumably it is the mechanism by which Cav1 can be incorporated into mature virions. Lipid raft integrity has been shown to be essential for proper RSV assembly and release of infectious particles ( 35 – 38 ), with Cav1, an integral component of lipid rafts, shown to be incorporated into mature virions ( 34 , 37 ). Importantly, our results showed that depletion of Cav2 rather than Cav1 by siRNA has a significant effect on infectivity of both cell-associated and released virus ( Fig. 5 D ). Based on our results showing that RSV filaments were still formed in Cav1 and Cav2 depleted RSV infected cells ( supplemental Fig. S1 ), we speculate that lipid rafts and Caveolin proteins may be required for optimal infectivity of the released RSV viral particles, similar to what has been demonstrated for Newcastle disease virus (NDV) ( 39 ). One possibility is that lipid raft integrity, dependent on Cav1/2, is required for viral filament stability. Intriguingly, even though Cav1/2 form heterodimers and are both key components of lipid rafts, only depletion of Cav2 impacted significantly on RSV infectivity. An exciting possibility is that in RSV assembly Cav2 plays a role distinct to that of Cav1 out of the context of the Cav1/2 heterodimer, but this remains to be tested experimentally.

We also validated the actin-binding protein Cof1 as a host factor interacting with M both in vitro ( Table I and Fig. 2 A ), and in transfected cells ( Fig. 2 B ). We showed that Cof1 localizes into RSV IBs in transfected and in RSV-infected cells ( Fig. 3 B and Fig. 4 A ) (see ( 34 )). Cof1 has also been shown previously to be incorporated into mature virions ( 34 ), and our work suggests that the incorporation of Cof1 into the virions may be through direct association of M and Cof1. The fact that knocking down Cof1 results in a 50% reduction of infectious virus indicates that Cof1-M interaction plays an essential role in RSV replication. Actin integrity has been shown to be important during RSV infection, presumably through involvement in filament formation ( 40 ), where cytoskeletal proteins have been suggested to be involved in the transport of the viral RNP to the sites of budding, which is dependent on M ( 16 ). Interestingly, independently of its role as cytoskeleton protein, actin has been shown to be able to act as a transcriptional modulator through binding to the RSV template ( 41 ). Our colocalization experiments show that in RSV-infected cells, Cof1 relocalizes into viral IBs resulting in reduction in Cof1 levels in the cytoplasm ( Fig. 4 B ). We speculate that M may sequester Cof1 in IBs in order to impact on actin polymerization, resulting in an increase of F actin filaments, which could either facilitate trafficking of RSV proteins or viral transcription in IBs. Further work will be required to establish the precise role of RSV M-Cof1 interaction in RSV infection.

Significantly, our microfluidics screen identified a total of eight ZNF-containing proteins, mostly transcription factors, as interactors of RSV M ( Table II ). We focused on ZNF502, showing direct interaction with M both in vitro and in transfected cells ( Fig. 2 ). Importantly, partial knockdown of ZNF502 in 293T cells resulted in a 60% reduction of cell associated and 70% reduction of released infectious virus ( Fig. 5 B ). Strikingly, ectopic expression of ZNF502 appeared to increase M nuclear accumulation and decrease viral filament formation ( Fig. 3 C ). Further work is required to determine the precise contribution of ZNFs such as ZNF502 in RSV infection, and the extent to which this may impact on M transcriptional inhibition, or other activities of M.

Additional to the three host factors above, direct interactors with M included Rab11a, Rab11b, and Sec15, all of which are involved in vesicular trafficking, with Rab11a previously having been shown to be critical for RSV filament formation and infectivity ( 24 ). Although Rab11a and Rab11b interacted with M in the microfluidics system, the M-Rab11b interaction could not be verified by coimmunoprecipitation ( Fig. 2 B ). Although this implies that the interactions may not occur in the intact cell, the lack of validation may be attributable to the fact that our microfluidics platform measures interactions at equilibrium. Consequently, the platform is sensitive to weak interactions and to strong interactions with fast off rates. Apart from Rab11a/11b, our hits also included two catalytic subunits (PI3KCB and PI3KCG) of phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K), previously shown to be involved in the innate immune response in RSV infection ( 42 , 43 ). PI3K levels are known to increase in RSV infected cells, which may impact on RSV filament formation ( 44 ); whether interaction with M may serve to localize PI3K kinase activity at the site of viral assembly is unclear, but we are currently using specific PI3K inhibitors to test their effect on RSV replication. Further hits included Tom22 (validated in co-IP) and VDAC1, mitochondrial proteins involved in the innate immune response, whose levels and cellular localization change during RSV infection ( 45 ). Further work will be required to delineate the exact molecular mechanism of each of these interactions and their effect on RSV replication.

In summary, our novel screening approach has identified a number of new potential host targets for RSV M, shedding light on the cellular mechanisms utilized by RSV for its replication. The host interactors are from a variety of cellular pathways involved in transcription, translation, trafficking, innate immunity signaling and assembly, reflecting the multi functionality and the ability of viral proteins, and RSV M in particular, to target multiple host proteins. Future work is focused on detailed analysis of the mechanism for the binding interactions, with important potential as targets for antiviral therapy.
