---
pmid: '28292932'
title: Crystal structure of the human alkaline sphingomyelinase provides insights
  into substrate recognition.
authors:
- Gorelik A
- Liu F
- Illes K
- Nagar B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5409475
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.769273
---

# Crystal structure of the human alkaline sphingomyelinase provides insights into substrate recognition.
**Authors:** Gorelik A, Liu F, Illes K, Nagar B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.769273](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.769273)
**PMC:** [PMC5409475](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5409475/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Apr 28;292(17):7087-7094. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.769273. Epub
 2017 Mar 14.

Crystal structure of the human alkaline sphingomyelinase provides insights into 
substrate recognition.

Gorelik A(1), Liu F(1), Illes K(1), Nagar B(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Groupe de Recherche Axé sur la 
Structure des Protéines, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 0B1, Canada.
(2)From the Department of Biochemistry and Groupe de Recherche Axé sur la 
Structure des Protéines, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 0B1, Canada 
bhushan.nagar@mcgill.ca.

Absorption of dietary sphingomyelin (SM) requires its initial degradation into 
ceramide, a process catalyzed by the intestinal enzyme alkaline sphingomyelinase 
(alk-SMase, NPP7, ENPP7). alk-SMase belongs to the nucleotide 
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase (NPP) family, the members of which hydrolyze 
nucleoside phosphates, phospholipids, and other related molecules. NPP7 is the 
only paralog that can cleave SM, and its activity requires the presence of bile 
salts, a class of physiological anionic detergents. To elucidate the mechanism 
of substrate recognition, we determined the crystal structure of human alk-SMase 
in complex with phosphocholine, a reaction product. Although the overall fold 
and catalytic center are conserved relative to other NPPs, alk-SMase recognizes 
the choline moiety of its substrates via an NPP7-specific aromatic box composed 
of tyrosine residues. Mutational analysis and enzymatic activity assays 
identified features on the surface of the protein-a cationic patch and a unique 
hydrophobic loop-that are essential for accessing SM in bile salt micelles. 
These results shed new light on substrate specificity determinants within the 
NPP enzyme family.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.769273
PMCID: PMC5409475
PMID: 28292932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

Absorption of dietary sphingomyelin (SM) requires its initial degradation into ceramide, a process catalyzed by the intestinal enzyme alkaline sphingomyelinase (alk-SMase, NPP7, ENPP7 ). alk-SMase belongs to the nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase (NPP) family, the members of which hydrolyze nucleoside phosphates, phospholipids, and other related molecules. NPP7 is the only paralog that can cleave SM, and its activity requires the presence of bile salts, a class of physiological anionic detergents. To elucidate the mechanism of substrate recognition, we determined the crystal structure of human alk-SMase in complex with phosphocholine, a reaction product. Although the overall fold and catalytic center are conserved relative to other NPPs, alk-SMase recognizes the choline moiety of its substrates via an NPP7-specific aromatic box composed of tyrosine residues. Mutational analysis and enzymatic activity assays identified features on the surface of the protein—a cationic patch and a unique hydrophobic loop—that are essential for accessing SM in bile salt micelles. These results shed new light on substrate specificity determinants within the NPP enzyme family.

Introduction

Sphingomyelin (SM) 3 is a major dietary sphingolipid found in dairy products, eggs, meat, and fish ( 1 ). Digestion of SM involves its initial degradation to ceramide and phosphocholine (PC) by the enzyme alkaline sphingomyelinase (alk-SMase, NPP7, ENPP7 ), followed by hydrolysis of ceramide by the neutral ceramidase and subsequent absorption of sphingosine and fatty acids ( 2 ). alk-SMase is present in the small intestine on the outer surface of microvilli ( 3 ) and in the liver of humans where it is secreted in the bile ( 4 ). Intestinal alk-SMase can be dissociated from the brush border by trypsin or bile and act in the lumen ( 5 ). In addition to its main substrate SM, the enzyme is also able to cleave lysophosphatidylcholine to monoacylglycerol ( 6 ) and inactivate the signaling lipid platelet-activating factor ( 7 ). Coupled to the production of ceramide, these functions confer an anti-inflammatory and antiproliferative role to the protein in the intestines and colon ( 2 ). Indeed, alk-SMase knock-out mice display increased colonic tumorigenesis ( 8 ), and the activity of the enzyme is decreased in human colorectal carcinomas and in familial adenomatous polyposis ( 9 , 10 ). Providing recombinant alk-SMase has been suggested as potentially beneficial in patients with high risk of colon cancer ( 8 ).

alk-SMase is a member of the (ecto)nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase protein family (NPP), a group of seven extracellular enzymes that act on diverse substrates to carry out various functions ( 11 ). NPP1 generates pyrophosphate from ATP to inhibit bone mineralization and ectopic calcification. NPP3 (CD203c) is highly expressed on basophils and hydrolyzes ATP with a negative regulatory role in inflammation and allergy ( 12 ). NPP4 participates in the activation of platelet aggregation via cleavage of diadenosine triphosphate ( 13 ). In contrast to these enzymes acting on extracellular nucleotides involved in purinergic signaling, other NPP members degrade phospholipid substrates. NPP2 (autotaxin) converts lysophosphatidylcholine to lysophosphatidic acid, a signal mediator that stimulates cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, and migration ( 14 , 15 ). NPP6 participates in choline metabolism, with glycerophosphocholine as the proposed substrate ( 16 ). The specificity and functions of NPP5 are unknown. NPP7 (alk-SMase) is the only NPP that hydrolyzes SM and is thus one of the mammalian SMases, along with the acid SMase and the four neutral SMases, classified by their optimum activity pH. Acid SMase is found in lysosomes, on the outer face of the cell membrane, and in the circulation ( 17 ), whereas its neutral counterparts are located on the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, Golgi, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, or mitochondria ( 18 ).

Digestion of dietary fats is assisted by their solubilization with bile in the small intestine. Bile contains lipids and bile salts, a class of physiological detergents. Bile salts are cholesterol derivatives with up to three hydroxyl groups on one face of their roughly planar ring system and often bear a conjugated glycine or taurine residue on their tail, conferring to them a negative charge. Their physiological concentration can reach 20 m m ( 19 ). Intestinal alk-SMase acts on its substrate solubilized by bile salts, a characteristic distinguishing it from the other mammalian SMases and NPPs but common to other digestive lipases. In vitro , taurocholate (TC) and taurochenodeoxycholate are the most stimulatory bile salts, whereas other detergents commonly used for acid and neutral SMase assays, such as CHAPS and Triton X-100, are not conducive to alk-SMase activity ( 3 ). The molecular basis for this bile salt dependence and for the specificity of NPP7 for SM among the NPPs is unknown. First isolated 20 years ago ( 20 ), this protein has not yet been structurally characterized, although it has been the subject of molecular modeling studies ( 21 , 22 ). Here we report the crystal structure of human alk-SMase. The enzyme recognizes PC, the head group of SM, via an NPP7-specific aromatic box composed of tyrosine residues. Structural and functional analysis identified features on the surface of the protein essential for accessing SM in bile salt micelles.

Discussion

The overall structure of alk-SMase is similar to that of the other NPPs, as is the arrangement of its catalytic residues. In the PC-bound alk-SMase structure, the phosphate group position and orientation slightly differ from the other NPP-product complexes ( Fig. 2 ). One explanation could be the relatively poor ligand electron density preventing accurate orientation ( Fig. 2 A ). Alternatively, the hydrogen bond between the phosphate oxygen and the NPP7-specific Tyr-280 could be responsible for this orientation ( Fig. 2 B ). In any case, SM is expected to be positioned closer to the catalytic threonine with respect to its phosphate moiety; the distance between the phosphorus and threonine oxygen atoms is 3.4 Å in the PC complex. Tyr-280 could be involved in interactions with the ceramide portion of the substrate.

Certain digestive lipases, including the gastric lipase ( 29 ) and the neutral ceramidase ( 30 ), accommodate their substrates inside a deep hydrophobic pocket. In contrast, the PC head group binds in a comparatively shallow cavity on alk-SMase ( Fig. 3 B ); presumably the acyl chains of SM remain mostly buried in the bile salt micelle during activity. To reach their substrate, lipases must first attach to a micelle. In pancreatic triacylglycerol lipase, a hydrophobic loop (β5′) and other parts of the protein, including a “lid” segment, are predicted to contact the lipid-water interface ( 31 ). Upon interaction, the conformation of the lid is altered, exposing the active site ( 31 ). Loop 342–351 of alk-SMase contains three hydrophobic surface residues necessary for accessing SM in bile salt micelles ( Fig. 3 C ). This loop could either become inserted into the micelle or interact with the acyl chains of an SM molecule.

Bile salts are anionic detergents, and the positively charged surface surrounding the substrate binding site of alk-SMase ( Fig. 3 B ) is likely important for interactions with micelles, including one specific cationic patch ( Fig. 3 C ). Mutation of Arg-271 + Arg-343 disrupted activity on SM in mixed TC-phosphatidylcholine micelles. The importance of electrostatic attraction could explain the in vitro effects of different surfactants on alk-SMase ( 3 ). CHAPS is similar in structure to TC, but it is zwitterionic, and Triton X-100 is nonionic; unlike the anionic bile salts, these detergents do not enable SM hydrolysis. Additionally, in the absence of bile salts, the negatively charged lipids phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylinositol, but not the neutral choline or ethanolamine counterparts, stimulate SM hydrolysis to an extent ( 1 ).

The bile salt-activated lipase is another intestinal enzyme that requires these detergents for activity. Its unique activation mechanism implicates a specific bile salt-binding site close to a hairpin loop near the active site ( 32 ). Upon TC binding, this loop changes conformation and permits access to the active site ( 32 ). However, such a mechanism does not seem to be at play in alk-SMase, because its activity on non-lipid substrates is unaffected by the addition of TC ( Fig. 3 A ). Furthermore, we did not find any clear electron density that would indicate a bound bile salt molecule in a 3.2 Å resolution structure of the protein crystallized in presence of 0.33 m m TC (data not shown). Although NPP2 (autotaxin) contains a specific sterol-binding site ( 33 ), it serves a different purpose in that paralog.

In conclusion, several features of alk-SMase confer this NPP family member with the ability to hydrolyze SM in the intestinal environment: an aromatic box for PC head group recognition, a hydrophobic loop, and positively charged surfaces for contacting bile salt micelles. Further biophysical characterization of the interactions between the protein and micelles will lead to a better understanding of the activity of this enzyme.
