---
pmid: '16243292'
title: Fibrocystin interacts with CAML, a protein involved in Ca2+ signaling.
authors:
- Nagano J
- Kitamura K
- Hujer KM
- Ward CJ
- Bram RJ
- Hopfer U
- Tomita K
- Huang C
- Miller RT
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.022
---

# Fibrocystin interacts with CAML, a protein involved in Ca2+ signaling.
**Authors:** Nagano J, Kitamura K, Hujer KM, Ward CJ, Bram RJ, Hopfer U, Tomita K, Huang C, Miller RT
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.022)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 16;338(2):880-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.022. Epub 2005 Oct 14.

Fibrocystin interacts with CAML, a protein involved in Ca2+ signaling.

Nagano J(1), Kitamura K, Hujer KM, Ward CJ, Bram RJ, Hopfer U, Tomita K, Huang 
C, Miller RT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve 
University, Lois Stokes Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.

The predicted structure of the autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease 
protein, fibrocystin, suggests that it may function as a receptor, but its 
function remains unknown. To understand its function, we searched for proteins 
that interact with the intracellular C-terminus of fibrocystin using the yeast 
two-hybrid system. From the screening, we found calcium modulating cyclophilin 
ligand (CAML), a protein involved in Ca(2+) signaling. Immunofluorescent 
analysis showed that both proteins are co-localized in the apical membrane, 
primary cilia, and the basal body of cells derived from the distal nephron 
Epitope-tagged expression constructs of both proteins were co-immunoprecipitated 
from COS7 cells. The intracellular C-terminus of fibrocystin interacts with 
CAML, a protein with an intracellular distribution that is similar to that of 
PKD2. Fibrocystin may participate in regulation of intracellular Ca(2+) in the 
distal nephron in a manner similar to PKD1 and PKD2 that are involved in 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.10.022
PMID: 16243292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
