---
pmid: '15872011'
title: Polyamine depletion induces nucleophosmin modulating stability and transcriptional
  activity of p53 in intestinal epithelial cells.
authors:
- Zou T
- Rao JN
- Liu L
- Marasa BS
- Keledjian KM
- Zhang AH
- Xiao L
- Bass BL
- Wang JY
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00085.2005
---

# Polyamine depletion induces nucleophosmin modulating stability and transcriptional activity of p53 in intestinal epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Zou T, Rao JN, Liu L, Marasa BS, Keledjian KM, Zhang AH, Xiao L, Bass BL, Wang JY
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00085.2005](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00085.2005)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005 Sep;289(3):C686-96. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00085.2005. Epub 2005 May 4.

Polyamine depletion induces nucleophosmin modulating stability and 
transcriptional activity of p53 in intestinal epithelial cells.

Zou T(1), Rao JN, Liu L, Marasa BS, Keledjian KM, Zhang AH, Xiao L, Bass BL, 
Wang JY.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

Our previous studies have shown that polyamines are required for normal 
intestinal mucosal growth and that decreased levels of polyamines inhibit 
intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) proliferation by stabilizing p53 and other 
growth-inhibiting proteins. Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a multifunctional protein 
that recently has been shown to regulate p53 activity. In the present study, we 
sought to determine whether polyamine depletion increases NPM modulating the 
stability and transcriptional activity of p53 in a normal IEC-6 intestinal 
epithelial cell line. Depletion of cellular polyamines by 
alpha-difluoromethylornithine, the specific inhibitor of polyamine biosynthesis, 
stimulated expression of the NPM gene and induced nuclear translocation of NPM 
protein. Polyamine depletion stimulated NPM expression primarily by increasing 
NPM gene transcription and its mRNA stability, and it induced NPM nuclear 
translocation through activation of phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase kinase. Increased NPM interacted with p53 and formed a NPM/p53 complex in 
polyamine-deficient cells. Inhibition of NPM expression by small interfering RNA 
targeting NPM (siNPM) not only destabilized p53 as indicated by a decrease in 
its protein half-life but also prevented the increased p53-dependent 
transactivation as shown by suppression of the p21 promoter activity. Decreased 
expression of NPM by siNPM also promoted cell growth in polyamine-deficient 
cells. These results indicate that 1) polyamine depletion increases expression 
of the NPM gene and enhances NPM nuclear translocation and 2) increased NPM 
interacts with and stabilizes p53, leading to inhibition of IEC-6 cell 
proliferation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00085.2005
PMID: 15872011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
