---
pmid: '9356492'
title: The affected gene underlying the class K glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)
  surface protein defect codes for the GPI transamidase.
authors:
- Yu J
- Nagarajan S
- Knez JJ
- Udenfriend S
- Chen R
- Medof ME
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC25045
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.23.12580
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The affected gene underlying the class K glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) surface protein defect codes for the GPI transamidase.
**Authors:** Yu J, Nagarajan S, Knez JJ, Udenfriend S, Chen R, Medof ME
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.23.12580](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.23.12580)
**PMC:** [PMC25045](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC25045/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Nov 11;94(23):12580-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.23.12580.

The affected gene underlying the class K glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) 
surface protein defect codes for the GPI transamidase.

Yu J(1), Nagarajan S, Knez JJ, Udenfriend S, Chen R, Medof ME.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, 
USA.

The final step in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchoring of cell surface 
proteins consists of a transamidation reaction in which preassembled GPI donors 
are substituted for C-terminal signal sequences in nascent polypeptides. In 
previous studies we described a human K562 cell mutant, termed class K, that 
accumulates fully assembled GPI units but is unable to transfer them to 
N-terminally processed proproteins. In further work we showed that, unlike 
wild-type microsomes, microsomes from these cells are unable to support 
C-terminal interaction of proproteins with the small nucleophiles hydrazine or 
hydroxylamine, and that the cells thus are defective in transamidation. In this 
study, using a modified recombinant vaccinia transient transfection system in 
conjunction with a composite cDNA prepared by 5' extension of an existing 
GenBank sequence, we found that the genetic element affected in these cells 
corresponds to the human homolog of yGPI8, a gene affected in a yeast mutant 
strain exhibiting similar accumulation of GPI donors without transfer. hGPI8 
gives rise to mRNAs of 1.6 and 1.9 kb, both encoding a protein of 395 amino 
acids that varies in cells with their ability to couple GPIs to proteins. The 
gene spans approximately 25 kb of DNA on chromosome 1. Reconstitution of class K 
cells with hGPI8 abolishes their accumulation of GPI precursors and restores 
C-terminal processing of GPI-anchored proteins. Also, hGPI8 restores the ability 
of microsomes from the mutant cells to yield an active carbonyl in the presence 
of a proprotein which is considered to be an intermediate in catalysis by a 
transamidase.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.23.12580
PMCID: PMC25045
PMID: 9356492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
