---
pmid: '30188326'
title: Deletion of Tmtc4 activates the unfolded protein response and causes postnatal
  hearing loss.
authors:
- Li J
- Akil O
- Rouse SL
- McLaughlin CW
- Matthews IR
- Lustig LR
- Chan DK
- Sherr EH
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6205388
doi: 10.1172/JCI97498
---

# Deletion of Tmtc4 activates the unfolded protein response and causes postnatal hearing loss.
**Authors:** Li J, Akil O, Rouse SL, McLaughlin CW, Matthews IR, Lustig LR, Chan DK, Sherr EH
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI97498](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI97498)
**PMC:** [PMC6205388](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6205388/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2018 Nov 1;128(11):5150-5162. doi: 10.1172/JCI97498. Epub 2018 
Oct 15.

Deletion of Tmtc4 activates the unfolded protein response and causes postnatal 
hearing loss.

Li J(1), Akil O(2), Rouse SL(2), McLaughlin CW(2), Matthews IR(2), Lustig LR(3), 
Chan DK(2), Sherr EH(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
California San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, 
New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Human Genetics, Weill Institute for 
Neurosciences, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Hearing loss is a significant public health concern, affecting over 250 million 
people worldwide. Both genetic and environmental etiologies are linked to 
hearing loss, but in many cases the underlying cellular pathophysiology is not 
well understood, highlighting the importance of further discovery. We found that 
inactivation of the gene Tmtc4 (transmembrane and tetratricopeptide repeat 4), 
which was broadly expressed in the mouse cochlea, caused acquired hearing loss 
in mice. Our data showed Tmtc4 enriched in the endoplasmic reticulum, and that 
it functioned by regulating Ca2+ dynamics and the unfolded protein response 
(UPR). Given this genetic linkage of the UPR to hearing loss, we demonstrated a 
direct link between the more common noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) and the 
UPR. These experiments suggested a novel approach to treatment. We demonstrated 
that the small-molecule UPR and stress response modulator ISRIB (integrated 
stress response inhibitor), which activates eIF2B, prevented NIHL in a mouse 
model. Moreover, in an inverse genetic complementation approach, we demonstrated 
that mice with homozygous inactivation of both Tmtc4 and Chop had less hearing 
loss than knockout of Tmtc4 alone. This study implicated a novel mechanism for 
hearing impairment, highlighting a potential treatment approach for a broad 
range of human hearing loss disorders.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI97498
PMCID: PMC6205388
PMID: 30188326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: EHS and DKC are founders 
and shareholders in Jacaranda Biosciences. EHS is listed as an inventor on the 
published patent application, novel methods of treating hearing loss (patent 
cooperation treaty/US2016/058348).

## Full Text

Abstract

Hearing loss is a significant public health concern, affecting over 250 million people worldwide. Both genetic and environmental etiologies are linked to hearing loss, but in many cases the underlying cellular pathophysiology is not well understood, highlighting the importance of further discovery. We found that inactivation of the gene Tmtc4 (transmembrane and tetratricopeptide repeat 4), which was broadly expressed in the mouse cochlea, caused acquired hearing loss in mice. Our data showed Tmtc4 enriched in the endoplasmic reticulum, and that it functioned by regulating Ca 2+ dynamics and the unfolded protein response (UPR). Given this genetic linkage of the UPR to hearing loss, we demonstrated a direct link between the more common noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) and the UPR. These experiments suggested a novel approach to treatment. We demonstrated that the small-molecule UPR and stress response modulator ISRIB (integrated stress response inhibitor), which activates eIF2B, prevented NIHL in a mouse model. Moreover, in an inverse genetic complementation approach, we demonstrated that mice with homozygous inactivation of both Tmtc4 and Chop had less hearing loss than knockout of Tmtc4 alone. This study implicated a novel mechanism for hearing impairment, highlighting a potential treatment approach for a broad range of human hearing loss disorders.

Introduction

Sensorineural hearing loss, the most common cause of hearing impairment, can result from genetic mutations, noise exposure, aging, or other environmental exposures, including ototoxic drugs such as aminoglycosides and cisplatin. These ototoxic injuries typically share, as their end result, damage and reduction in synapses between sensory hair cells and afferent nerves, apoptotic death of hair cells themselves, and subsequent regression and degeneration of auditory neurons and cochlear supporting cells ( 1 , 2 ). A number of organ- and cellular-level mechanisms have been implicated in noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) ( 3 ). These include mitochondrial oxidative stress, in which reactive oxygen species are released in the cochlea upon noise exposure; Ca 2+ overload in hair cells due to excessive entry through ion channels ( 4 ); and mitochondrial dysfunction and ischemia leading to ATP depletion ( 5 ).

There is currently no effective medical treatment for acquired or genetic sensorineural hearing loss. Small-molecule antioxidants such as N -acetyl cysteine ( 6 ) and ebselen ( 7 ), a peptide inhibitor of the Jun kinase ( 8 ), and L-type Ca 2+ -channel blockers ( 9 , 10 ), have been shown to prevent hearing loss in animal models; however, efficacy in human trials has thus far been limited ( 11 , 12 ). Many of these therapeutics have targets far downstream in the terminal pathways of oxidative stress and apoptosis, which may explain this lack of efficacy. Identification and modulation of additional pathways involved in genetic and acquired hearing loss, particularly those more upstream and proximal to the mechanism of initial cochlear trauma, would be invaluable to reveal new targets for pharmacologic and biologic therapy. Indeed, work by our group and others on genetic animal models of congenital and noise-induced deafness owing to deficiency in VGLUT3 ( 13 ) and pejvakin ( 14 ), respectively, has led to demonstration of the potential utility of gene therapy in hearing restoration in mice.

In this study, we report characterization of the gene Tmtc4 (transmembrane and tetratricopeptide repeat 4), which when genetically inactivated in mice, causes rapid and early postnatal outer and inner cochlear hair cell death, leading to hearing loss. We demonstrate that the protein encoded by Tmtc4 can be found in the same molecular complex with the main endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca 2+ pump, SERCA2b, and through this may alter ER Ca 2+ dynamics, leading to downstream overactivation of the ER unfolded protein response (UPR) and cell death. We confirm the functional linkage between Tmtc4 and the UPR by conducting a genetic “inverse complementation” experiment, in which combined genetic inactivation of both Tmtc4 and the ER stress constituent Chop leads to reduced hearing loss when compared with inactivation of Tmtc4 alone. We then demonstrate that these mechanisms are also altered early in the cochlea’s response to acoustic overstimulation and that pharmacological inhibition of this ER stress response rescues a mouse model of NIHL, pointing to both novel mechanisms of and novel treatments for hearing loss.

Discussion

We have shown that the gene Tmtc4 , when inactivated, leads to rapid onset postnatal hearing loss with subsequent hair cell death and cochlear degeneration. We demonstrated that inactivation of Tmtc4 in the mouse cochlea leads to aberrant Ca 2+ signaling, consistent with delayed reuptake into the ER, and to overactivation of the UPR, as observed by an increase in mRNA and protein levels for key UPR proteins Chop, XBP1, and BiP, and apoptotic proteins DR5 and caspase 8. Our data show that Tmtc4 is present in cochlear supporting and hair cells, is enriched in the ER, and coimmunoprecipitates with SERCA2b, which strengthens the linkage between the observed aberrant regulation of ER Ca 2+ and Tmtc4. By use of an inverse genetic complementation approach, we confirmed the importance of the UPR in mediating hearing loss in this genetic model, showing that simultaneous homozygous inactivation of both Tmtc4 and Chop leads to less impaired hearing than with Tmtc4 -KO alone. We extended these important advances underlying the genetics and biology of hearing loss by demonstrating for what we believe is the first time that NIHL is associated with activation of the UPR, which points to new avenues for treatment for this common disabling condition. We tested this therapeutic hypothesis directly by showing that pharmacological suppression of the UPR with a single dose of the eIF2B-activating (and indirectly ATF4-inhibiting) drug ISRIB considerably lessens hearing loss caused by noise exposure. These compelling findings, through both pharmacological and genetic approaches to treat hearing loss, provide new insights into the mechanisms of hearing impairment and suggest a highly promising target for treatment of one of the most common causes of hearing loss.

Tmtc4 is a gene encoding a predicted 741 amino acid 83 kDa protein. Tmtc4 has been found by both proteomic and transcriptomic analyses to be expressed in the developing and young postnatal murine cochlea along with the other 3 isoforms, which is consistent with our data ( 17 , 18 , 34 ). Moreover, our finding that Tmtc1 , Tmtc2 , and Tmtc3 all increase substantially in transcript abundance in cochleae from Tmtc4 -KO mice appears to underscore the likely interrelatedness of these genes. This connection may extend to hearing loss in patients as well. In parallel with our work recently, a missense mutation (rs35725509; Val136Ile) in the human ortholog TMTC2 was linked to nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss both in a 6-generation family and in a cohort of unrelated individuals with SNHL (179 affected vs. 186 matched controls) ( 19 , 35 ). This mutation was also recently identified in another family dyad with hearing loss ( 35 ). Inactivation of Tmtc4 in a recently published large-scale genomics manuscript concurrent with our work was confirmed by a separate group to result in hearing loss, linking this class of proteins more strongly to hearing impairment ( 36 ). TMTC4 encodes 10 putative transmembrane domains and 8 tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains ( Supplemental Figure 1D ). TPR domains have been implicated in the generation and regulation of many multiprotein complexes in cellular processes such as transcription and protein degradation. The UPR chaperone protein P58(IPK) also has 9 TPR repeat motifs, and these repeat domains are necessary for the protein’s chaperone activity ( 37 ). Thus, by comparison, it is possible that the TPR repeats in TMTC4 may sense unfolded proteins and regulate Ca 2+ signaling through this mechanism. TMTC4 also contains an ER retention signal, which may help locate the protein to the ER, and hence to regulate Ca 2+ flux and the unfolded protein response. The TMTC4 protein is highly conserved from mammals to fish and invertebrates, but is not present in plants, fungi, or bacteria. TMTC4 is 1 of 4 genes in this family, diverging evolutionarily from the paralogs TMTC1–3 approximately 1.2 billion years ago. Despite this more distant divergence, there is still evidence of potential shared functions. Like TMTC4, both TMTC1 and TMTC2 are enriched in the ER and coimmunoprecipitate with SERCA2B ( 38 ). There is preliminary large-scale evidence from genome-wide association study linking TMTC1, TMTC2, and TMTC4 to type 2 diabetes, a disease whose pathogenesis has been linked strongly to ER stress and the UPR ( 39 , 40 ). Separately, a recent study suggested that the Tmtc class of proteins may also function as components of an O-mannosylation pathway that selectively glycosylates cadherins and protocadherins, many of which, especially Cdh23, play critical roles in hair cell function and have also been tied to ER stress and the UPR ( 41 , 42 ). Further study into the precise role of TMTC family members, and particularly TMTC4, in O-mannosylation, ER Ca 2+ flux, and the UPR in the cochlea would yield valuable insight into this important pathway.

The UPR is an essential component of cell homeostasis. In response to such stressors as excessive protein synthesis, this UPR pathway can be activated in a manner that slows protein synthesis and promotes cell survival ( 43 , 44 ). However, if the UPR is overactivated, this aberrant signaling can lead to cell death. There is precedence for involvement of the UPR in genetically defined disorders associated with hearing loss. One disorder, Wolfram syndrome, presents clinically with diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness (also referred to as DIDMOAD syndrome). One of the genes for this disorder, WFS1, has been implicated in ER stress through multiple mechanisms, including binding to and regulating the ER Ca 2+ pump SERCA2B ( 45 ). Thus, this disorder links diabetes, deafness, and neuronal cell loss to ER stress. A related disorder, Darier-White disease (DWD), is caused by autosomal dominant mutations in the gene ATP2A2, which encodes the same SERCA2B ER Ca 2+ pump ( 46 , 47 ). In the general population, this protein is highly intolerant of loss-of-function mutations as assessed by data from the exome aggregation consortium (EXAC.broadinstitute.org), and there are no reports of patients with homozygous mutations. DWD presents typically with painful mucosal and skin lesions ( 46 ) and sometimes deafness, further strengthening the linkage that we observe with TMTC4 ( 47 ). While these associations show more direct linkage of the UPR to hearing loss, there are also examples where indirect activation of ER stress occurs in deafness syndromes. For example, in Usher syndrome, which can be caused by mutations in proteins encoding Cdh23, harmonin, and Myo7a, mutated isoforms of these genes prevent the preassembly of this plasma membrane protein complex in the ER, leading to activation of ER stress and subsequent apoptosis ( 42 ). Thus, these examples provide both indirect and direct evidence linking ER stress and the UPR to hearing loss. Moreover, there is also data linking age-related hearing loss to the UPR ( 17 , 48 ).

Our work with TMTC4 further strengthens the connection between the UPR and hearing loss, but also implicates the even more upstream pathway of Ca 2+ regulation, which may be a potentially more advantageous point for therapeutic intervention. Activation of intercellular Ca 2+ signaling (ICS) waves in cochlear supporting cells, which are dependent upon Ca 2+ flux into and out of the ER, have been implicated as an early mechanism in cochlear trauma, analogous to their well-studied role in neurodegeneration. In both neonatal cochlear cultures and, more recently, mature-hearing cochlear explants, ICS waves are triggered within minutes of mechanical and acoustic trauma ( 22 , 24 ). In this study, we have found that properties of these ICS waves are altered in Tmtc4-deficient mice in ways consistent with impaired Ca 2+ reuptake: cytosolic Ca 2+ clearance is delayed and ICS waves are more frequent. Modulation of ER Ca 2+ dynamics, therefore, may be a promising avenue for hearing loss therapeutics, as has been shown recently in other UPR-dependent disease models; for example, an allosteric activator of SERCA2b, CDN1163, attenuates the development of insulin resistance (type 2 diabetes) in the Ob/Ob mouse ( 26 ). Current efforts to treat NIHL focus on relatively distal aspects of eventual cell death, such as apoptosis; however, these biological processes may be too late to be effectively controlled. In contrast, the early stages of the UPR, including regulation of ER Ca 2+ , may be a more viable site for intervention; we demonstrate in this study that upregulation of UPR genes occurs within 2 hours of noise exposure. TMTC4, as a key player in the early stages of cochlear trauma, may be a promising and specific target for drug development for hearing loss.
