---
pmid: '15291819'
title: How calcium inhibits the magnesium-dependent enzyme human phosphoserine phosphatase.
authors:
- Peeraer Y
- Rabijns A
- Collet JF
- Van Schaftingen E
- De Ranter C
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.0014-2956.2004.04277.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# How calcium inhibits the magnesium-dependent enzyme human phosphoserine phosphatase.
**Authors:** Peeraer Y, Rabijns A, Collet JF, Van Schaftingen E, De Ranter C
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.0014-2956.2004.04277.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0014-2956.2004.04277.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Aug;271(16):3421-7. doi: 10.1111/j.0014-2956.2004.04277.x.

How calcium inhibits the magnesium-dependent enzyme human phosphoserine 
phosphatase.

Peeraer Y(1), Rabijns A, Collet JF, Van Schaftingen E, De Ranter C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Analytical Chemistry and Medicinal Physicochemistry, Faculty 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The structure of the Mg(2+)-dependent enzyme human phosphoserine phosphatase 
(HPSP) was exploited to examine the structural and functional role of the 
divalent cation in the active site of phosphatases. Most interesting is the 
biochemical observation that a Ca(2+) ion inhibits the activity of HPSP, even in 
the presence of added Mg(2+). The sixfold coordinated Mg(2+) ion present in the 
active site of HPSP under normal physiological conditions, was replaced by a 
Ca(2+) ion by using a crystallization condition with high concentration of 
CaCl(2) (0.7 m). The resulting HPSP structure now shows a sevenfold coordinated 
Ca(2+) ion in the active site that might explain the inhibitory effect of Ca(2+) 
on the enzyme. Indeed, the Ca(2+) ion in the active site captures both 
side-chain oxygen atoms of the catalytic Asp20 as a ligand, while a Mg(2+) ion 
ligates only one oxygen atom of this Asp residue. The bidentate character of 
Asp20 towards Ca(2+) hampers the nucleophilic attack of one of the Asp20 side 
chain oxygen atoms on the phosphorus atom of the substrate phosphoserine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-2956.2004.04277.x
PMID: 15291819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
