---
pmid: '8681956'
title: Phosphorylated T cell receptor zeta-chain and ZAP70 tandem SH2 domains form
  a 1:3 complex in vitro.
authors:
- Weissenhorn W
- Eck MJ
- Harrison SC
- Wiley DC
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0440z.x
---

# Phosphorylated T cell receptor zeta-chain and ZAP70 tandem SH2 domains form a 1:3 complex in vitro.
**Authors:** Weissenhorn W, Eck MJ, Harrison SC, Wiley DC
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0440z.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0440z.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 1;238(2):440-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0440z.x.

Phosphorylated T cell receptor zeta-chain and ZAP70 tandem SH2 domains form a 
1:3 complex in vitro.

Weissenhorn W(1), Eck MJ, Harrison SC, Wiley DC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02212, USA.

The zeta polypeptide is part of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR). The 
zeta-chain contributes to efficient cell-surface expression of the TCR and 
accounts for part of its signal transduction capability. TCR recognition 
triggers a complex set of events that result in cellular activation. The protein 
tyrosine kinase (PTK) Lck phosphorylates the zeta-chain, which in turn 
associates with another PTK, ZAP70, and stimulates its phosphorylation activity. 
Here we report the expression of the intracellular part of the zeta-chain and 
its biochemical characterization. The recombinant protein does not dimerize by 
itself in solution. Circular-dichroic analysis reveals a random coil 
conformation. zeta, phosphorylated using recombinant Lck, associates with 
recombinant ZAP70 tandem-SH2 domains. All three T cell activation motifs in zeta 
bind ZAP70 tandem-SH2 domains in vitro, forming a 1:3 complex. This result 
extends the picture, derived from earlier studies, of a mechanism for signal 
amplification.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.0440z.x
PMID: 8681956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
