---
pmid: '16120614'
title: Serinc, an activity-regulated protein family, incorporates serine into membrane
  lipid synthesis.
authors:
- Inuzuka M
- Hayakawa M
- Ingi T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505712200
---

# Serinc, an activity-regulated protein family, incorporates serine into membrane lipid synthesis.
**Authors:** Inuzuka M, Hayakawa M, Ingi T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M505712200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M505712200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35776-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505712200. Epub 
2005 Aug 24.

Serinc, an activity-regulated protein family, incorporates serine into membrane 
lipid synthesis.

Inuzuka M(1), Hayakawa M, Ingi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 
1 Asahi-machi, Niigata, 951-8585, Japan.

Cell membranes contain various transporter proteins, some of which are 
responsible for transferring amino acids across membrane. In this study, we 
report another class of carrier proteins, termed Serinc1-5, that incorporates a 
polar amino acid serine into membranes and facilitates the synthesis of two 
serine-derived lipids, phosphatidylserine and sphingolipids. Serinc is a unique 
protein family that shows no amino acid homology to other proteins but is highly 
conserved among eukaryotes. The members contain 11 transmembrane domains, and 
rat Serinc1 protein co-localizes with lipid biosynthetic enzymes in endoplasmic 
reticulum membranes. A Serinc protein forms an intracellular complex with key 
enzymes involved in serine and sphingolipid biosyntheses, and both functions, 
serine synthesis and membrane incorporation, are linked to each other. In the 
rat brain, expression of Serinc1 and Serinc2 mRNA was rapidly up-regulated by 
kainate-induced seizures in neuronal cell layers of the hippocampus. In 
contrast, myelin throughout the brain is enriched with Serinc5, which was 
down-regulated in the hippocampus by seizures. These results indicate a novel 
mechanism linking neural activity and lipid biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505712200
PMID: 16120614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
