---
pmid: '21062743'
title: Mannose trimming is required for delivery of a glycoprotein from EDEM1 to XTP3-B
  and to late endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation steps.
authors:
- Groisman B
- Shenkman M
- Ron E
- Lederkremer GZ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3020737
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.154849
---

# Mannose trimming is required for delivery of a glycoprotein from EDEM1 to XTP3-B and to late endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation steps.
**Authors:** Groisman B, Shenkman M, Ron E, Lederkremer GZ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.154849](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.154849)
**PMC:** [PMC3020737](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3020737/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1292-300. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.154849. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Mannose trimming is required for delivery of a glycoprotein from EDEM1 to XTP3-B 
and to late endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation steps.

Groisman B(1), Shenkman M, Ron E, Lederkremer GZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, George Wise Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Although the trimming of α1,2-mannose residues from precursor N-linked 
oligosaccharides is an essential step in the delivery of misfolded glycoproteins 
to endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD), the exact role of 
this trimming is unclear. EDEM1 was initially suggested to bind N-glycans after 
mannose trimming, a role presently ascribed to the lectins OS9 and XTP3-B, 
because of their in vitro affinities for trimmed oligosaccharides. We have shown 
before that ER mannosidase I (ERManI) is required for the trimming and 
concentrates together with the ERAD substrate and ERAD machinery in the 
pericentriolar ER-derived quality control compartment (ERQC). Inhibition of 
mannose trimming prevents substrate accumulation in the ERQC. Here, we show that 
the mannosidase inhibitor kifunensine or ERManI knockdown do not affect binding 
of an ERAD substrate glycoprotein to EDEM1. In contrast, substrate association 
with XTP3-B and with the E3 ubiquitin ligases HRD1 and SCF(Fbs2) was inhibited. 
Consistently, whereas the ERAD substrate partially colocalized upon proteasomal 
inhibition with EDEM1, HRD1, and Fbs2 at the ERQC, colocalization was repressed 
by mannosidase inhibition in the case of the E3 ligases but not for EDEM1. 
Interestingly, association and colocalization of the substrate with Derlin-1 was 
independent of mannose trimming. The HRD1 adaptor protein SEL1L had been 
suggested to play a role in N-glycan-dependent substrate delivery to OS9 and 
XTP3-B. However, substrate association with XTP3-B was still dependent on 
mannose trimming upon SEL1L knockdown. Our results suggest that mannose trimming 
enables delivery of a substrate glycoprotein from EDEM1 to late ERAD steps 
through association with XTP3-B.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.154849
PMCID: PMC3020737
PMID: 21062743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
