---
pmid: '10878006'
title: TOK-1, a novel p21Cip1-binding protein that cooperatively enhances p21-dependent
  inhibitory activity toward CDK2 kinase.
authors:
- Ono T
- Kitaura H
- Ugai H
- Murata T
- Yokoyama KK
- Iguchi-Ariga SM
- Ariga H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003031200
---

# TOK-1, a novel p21Cip1-binding protein that cooperatively enhances p21-dependent inhibitory activity toward CDK2 kinase.
**Authors:** Ono T, Kitaura H, Ugai H, Murata T, Yokoyama KK, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003031200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003031200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):31145-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003031200.

TOK-1, a novel p21Cip1-binding protein that cooperatively enhances p21-dependent 
inhibitory activity toward CDK2 kinase.

Ono T(1), Kitaura H, Ugai H, Murata T, Yokoyama KK, Iguchi-Ariga SM, Ariga H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Medical Technology, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060, Japan.

A p21(Cip1/Waf1/Sdi1) is known to act as a negative cell-cycle regulator by 
inhibiting kinase activity of a variety of cyclin-dependent kinases. In addition 
to binding of the cyclin-dependent kinase to the N-terminal region of p21, p21 
is also bound at its C-terminal region by proliferating cell nuclear antigen 
(PCNA), SET/TAF1, and calmodulin, indicating the versatile function of p21. In 
this study, we cloned cDNA encoding a novel protein named TOK-1 as a p21 
C-terminal-binding protein by a two-hybrid system. Two splicing isoforms of 
TOK-1, TOK-1alpha and TOK-1beta, comprising 322 and 314 amino acids, 
respectively, were co-localized with p21 in nuclei and showed a similar 
expression profile to that of p21 in human tissues. TOK-1alpha, but not 
TOK-1beta, directly bound to the C-terminal proximal region of p21, and both 
were expressed at the G(1)/S boundary of the cell cycle. TOK-1alpha also 
preferentially bound to an active form of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) via 
p21, and these made a ternary complex in human cells. Furthermore, the results 
of three different types of experiments showed that TOK-1alpha enhanced the 
inhibitory activity of p21 toward histone H1 kinase activity of CDK2. TOK-1alpha 
is thus thought to be a new type of CDK2 modulator.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003031200
PMID: 10878006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
