---
pmid: '11919189'
title: Integrin cytoplasmic domain-associated protein 1alpha (ICAP-1alpha ) interacts
  directly with the metastasis suppressor nm23-H2, and both proteins are targeted
  to newly formed cell adhesion sites upon integrin engagement.
authors:
- Fournier HN
- Dupé-Manet S
- Bouvard D
- Lacombe ML
- Marie C
- Block MR
- Albiges-Rizo C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200200200
---

# Integrin cytoplasmic domain-associated protein 1alpha (ICAP-1alpha ) interacts directly with the metastasis suppressor nm23-H2, and both proteins are targeted to newly formed cell adhesion sites upon integrin engagement.
**Authors:** Fournier HN, Dupé-Manet S, Bouvard D, Lacombe ML, Marie C, Block MR, Albiges-Rizo C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M200200200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M200200200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):20895-902. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200200200. Epub 
2002 Mar 27.

Integrin cytoplasmic domain-associated protein 1alpha (ICAP-1alpha ) interacts 
directly with the metastasis suppressor nm23-H2, and both proteins are targeted 
to newly formed cell adhesion sites upon integrin engagement.

Fournier HN(1), Dupé-Manet S, Bouvard D, Lacombe ML, Marie C, Block MR, 
Albiges-Rizo C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Etude de la Différenciation et de l'Adhérence Cellulaires, UMR 
UJF/CNRS 5538, Institut Albert Bonniot, Faculté de Médecine de Grenoble, Domaine 
de la Merci, 38706 La Tronche Cedex, France.

Cell adhesion-dependent signaling implicates cytoplasmic proteins interacting 
with the intracellular tails of integrins. Among those, the integrin cytoplasmic 
domain-associated protein 1alpha (ICAP-1alpha) has been shown to interact 
specifically with the beta(1) integrin cytoplasmic domain. Although it is likely 
that this protein plays an important role in controlling cell adhesion and 
migration, little is known about its actual function. To search for potential 
ICAP-1alpha-binding proteins, we used a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified 
the human metastatic suppressor protein nm23-H2 as a new partner of ICAP-1alpha. 
This direct interaction was confirmed in vitro, using purified recombinant 
ICAP-1alpha and nm23-H2, and by co-immunoprecipitation from CHO cell lysates 
over-expressing ICAP-1alpha. The physiological relevance of this interaction is 
provided by confocal fluorescence microscopy, which shows that ICAP-1alpha and 
nm23-H2 are co-localized in lamellipodia during the early stages of cell 
spreading. These adhesion sites are enriched in occupied beta(1) integrins and 
precede the formation of focal adhesions devoid of ICAP-1alpha and nm23-H2, 
indicating the dynamic segregation of components of matrix adhesions. This 
peripheral staining of ICAP-1alpha and nm23-H2 is only observed in cells 
spreading on fibronectin and collagen and is absent in cells spreading on 
poly-l-lysine, vitronectin, or laminin. This is consistent with the fact that 
targeting of both ICAP-1alpha and nm23-H2 to the cell periphery is dependent on 
beta(1) integrin engagement rather than being a consequence of cell adhesion. 
This finding represents the first evidence that the tumor suppressor nm23-H2 
could act on beta(1) integrin-mediated cell adhesion by interacting with one of 
the integrin partners, ICAP-1alpha.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200200200
PMID: 11919189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
