---
pmid: '15534230'
title: 'Selenophosphate synthetase genes from lung adenocarcinoma cells: Sps1 for
  recycling L-selenocysteine and Sps2 for selenite assimilation.'
authors:
- Tamura T
- Yamamoto S
- Takahata M
- Sakaguchi H
- Tanaka H
- Stadtman TC
- Inagaki K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC528966
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0406313101
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Selenophosphate synthetase genes from lung adenocarcinoma cells: Sps1 for recycling L-selenocysteine and Sps2 for selenite assimilation.
**Authors:** Tamura T, Yamamoto S, Takahata M, Sakaguchi H, Tanaka H, Stadtman TC, Inagaki K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0406313101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0406313101)
**PMC:** [PMC528966](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC528966/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Nov 16;101(46):16162-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0406313101. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

Selenophosphate synthetase genes from lung adenocarcinoma cells: Sps1 for 
recycling L-selenocysteine and Sps2 for selenite assimilation.

Tamura T(1), Yamamoto S, Takahata M, Sakaguchi H, Tanaka H, Stadtman TC, Inagaki 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biofunctional Chemistry, Graduate School of Natural Science and 
Technology, Okayama University, Okayama 700-8530, Japan. 
tktamura@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

A labile selenium donor compound monoselenophosphate is synthesized from 
selenide and ATP by selenophosphate synthetase (SPS). In the present study, Sps1 
and Sps2 were cloned from a cDNA library prepared from human lung adenocarcinoma 
cells (NCIH441). The human lung Sps1 has been cloned as an ORF of 1,179 bp, 
identical in sequence to that of the recently revised human liver Sps1. The 
in-frame TGA codon of the lung Sps2 was genetically altered to TGT (Cys) to 
obtain the Sps2Cys gene. Expression of the recombinant plasmids containing Sps1 
or Sps2Cys was highly toxic to Escherichia coli host cells grown aerobically. 
Accordingly, the human lung Sps homologs were characterized by an in vivo 
complementation assay using a selD mutant strain. An added selenium source and a 
low salt concentration (0.1-0.25% NaCl) in the medium were required for 
reproducible and sensitive in vivo complementation. Sps2Cys effectively 
complemented the selD mutant, and the resulting formate dehydrogenase H activity 
was as high as that of WT E. coli MC4100. In contrast, only a weak 
complementation of the selD mutant by the Sps1 gene was observed when cells were 
grown in selenite media. Better complementation with added l-selenocysteine 
suggested involvement of a selenocysteine lyase for mobilization of selenium. 
Based on this apparent substrate specificity of the Sps1 and Sps2 gene products 
we suggest that the Sps1-encoded enzyme depends on a selenium salvage system 
that recycles l-selenocysteine, whereas the Sps2 enzyme can function with a 
selenite assimilation system.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0406313101
PMCID: PMC528966
PMID: 15534230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
