---
pmid: '16227264'
title: Simian virus 5 V protein acts as an adaptor, linking DDB1 to STAT2, to facilitate
  the ubiquitination of STAT1.
authors:
- Precious B
- Childs K
- Fitzpatrick-Swallow V
- Goodbourn S
- Randall RE
journal: J Virol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1262611
doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.21.13434-13441.2005
---

# Simian virus 5 V protein acts as an adaptor, linking DDB1 to STAT2, to facilitate the ubiquitination of STAT1.
**Authors:** Precious B, Childs K, Fitzpatrick-Swallow V, Goodbourn S, Randall RE
**Journal:** J Virol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.79.21.13434-13441.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.79.21.13434-13441.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1262611](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1262611/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2005 Nov;79(21):13434-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.79.21.13434-13441.2005.

Simian virus 5 V protein acts as an adaptor, linking DDB1 to STAT2, to 
facilitate the ubiquitination of STAT1.

Precious B(1), Childs K, Fitzpatrick-Swallow V, Goodbourn S, Randall RE.

Author information:
(1)School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Fife KY16 9TS, United Kingdom.

The V protein of simian virus 5 (SV5) facilitates the ubiquitination and 
subsequent proteasome-mediated degradation of STAT1. Here we show, by 
visualizing direct protein-protein interactions and by using the yeast 
two-hybrid system, that while the SV5 V protein fails to bind to STAT1 directly, 
it binds directly and independently to both DDB1 and STAT2, two cellular 
proteins known to be essential for SV5-mediated degradation of STAT1. We also 
demonstrate that STAT1 and STAT2 interact independently of SV5 V and show that 
SV5 V protein acts as an adaptor molecule linking DDB1 to STAT2/STAT1 
heterodimers, which in the presence of additional accessory cellular proteins, 
including Cullin 4a, can ubiquitinate STAT1. Additionally, we show that the 
avidity of STAT2 for V is relatively weak but is significantly enhanced by the 
presence of both STAT1 and DDB1, i.e., the complex of STAT1, STAT2, DDB1, and 
SV5 V is more stable than a complex of STAT2 and V. From these studies we 
propose a dynamic model in which SV5 V acts as a bridge, bringing together a 
DDB1/Cullin 4a-containing ubiquitin ligase complex and STAT1/STAT2 heterodimers, 
which leads to the degradation of STAT1. The loss of STAT1 results in a decrease 
in affinity of binding of STAT2 for V such that STAT2 either dissociates from V 
or is displaced from V by STAT1/STAT2 complexes, thereby ensuring the cycling of 
the DDB1 and SV5 V containing E3 complex for continued rounds of STAT1 
ubiquitination and degradation.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.79.21.13434-13441.2005
PMCID: PMC1262611
PMID: 16227264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
