---
pmid: '31076723'
title: E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF170 inhibits innate immune responses by targeting and
  degrading TLR3 in murine cells.
authors:
- Song X
- Liu S
- Wang W
- Ma Z
- Cao X
- Jiang M
journal: Cell Mol Immunol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC7395739
doi: 10.1038/s41423-019-0236-y
---

# E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF170 inhibits innate immune responses by targeting and degrading TLR3 in murine cells.
**Authors:** Song X, Liu S, Wang W, Ma Z, Cao X, Jiang M
**Journal:** Cell Mol Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41423-019-0236-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41423-019-0236-y)
**PMC:** [PMC7395739](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7395739/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Immunol. 2020 Aug;17(8):865-874. doi: 10.1038/s41423-019-0236-y. Epub
 2019 May 10.

E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF170 inhibits innate immune responses by targeting and 
degrading TLR3 in murine cells.

Song X(1), Liu S(1), Wang W(1), Ma Z(1), Cao X(1)(2)(3), Jiang M(4).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of 
Immunology & Center for Immunotherapy, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union 
Medical College, 100005, Beijing, China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, 200433, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Medicine, Nankai University, 300071, Tianjin, China.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of 
Immunology & Center for Immunotherapy, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union 
Medical College, 100005, Beijing, China. jiangminghong@163.com.

Upon recognition of dsRNA, toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recruits the adaptor 
protein TRIF to activate IRF3 and NF-κB signaling, initiating innate immune 
responses. The ubiquitination of TLR3 downstream signaling molecules and their 
roles in the innate response have been discovered; however, whether TLR3 itself 
is ubiquitinated and then functionally involved remains to be elucidated. By 
immunoprecipitating TLR3-binding proteins in macrophages, we identified ring 
finger protein 170 (RNF170) as a TLR3-binding E3 ligase. RNF170 mediated the 
K48-linked polyubiquitination of K766 in the TIR domain of TLR3 and promoted the 
degradation of TLR3 through the proteasome pathway. The genetic ablation of 
RNF170 selectively augmented TLR3-triggered innate immune responses both in 
vitro and in vivo. Our results reveal a novel role for RNF170 in selectively 
inhibiting TLR3-triggered innate immune responses by promoting TLR3 degradation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41423-019-0236-y
PMCID: PMC7395739
PMID: 31076723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Upon recognition of dsRNA, toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recruits the adaptor protein TRIF to activate IRF3 and NF-κB signaling, initiating innate immune responses. The ubiquitination of TLR3 downstream signaling molecules and their roles in the innate response have been discovered; however, whether TLR3 itself is ubiquitinated and then functionally involved remains to be elucidated. By immunoprecipitating TLR3-binding proteins in macrophages, we identified ring finger protein 170 (RNF170) as a TLR3-binding E3 ligase. RNF170 mediated the K48-linked polyubiquitination of K766 in the TIR domain of TLR3 and promoted the degradation of TLR3 through the proteasome pathway. The genetic ablation of RNF170 selectively augmented TLR3-triggered innate immune responses both in vitro and in vivo. Our results reveal a novel role for RNF170 in selectively inhibiting TLR3-triggered innate immune responses by promoting TLR3 degradation.

Introduction

As a toll-like receptor (TLR), TLR3 recognizes double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and plays a critical role in innate immune responses. 1 TLR3 consists of a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain, a transmembrane domain, and a toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain. 2 Inactive TLR3 is located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and maintains a closed conformation that keeps its TIR domain inaccessible to cytoplasmic proteins. Upon the recognition of dsRNA, TLR3 undergoes a translocation from the ER to the endolysosome. 3 Then, dsRNA binds to the LRR domain in the endolysosome, causing conformational changes in TLR3 and dimerization. 4 , 5 Then, the TIR domain in the cytoplasm recruits the adaptor protein TRIF, initiating downstream IRF3 and NF-κB signaling, and consequently leads to the transcription of type I interferons (IFNs) and inflammatory cytokines. 1 , 6 It has been found that TLR3 has a protective role in controlling virus infection 7 – 9 and that TLR3 deficiency is related to severe infectious diseases, such as herpesvirus encephalitis. 10 However, the overexpression of TLR3 can also cause some autoimmune disorders due to TLR3-mediated inflammatory responses; 11 , 12 thus, the precise regulation of TLR3 expression and function is pivotal to maintaining immune homeostasis and preventing related diseases. However, the detailed mechanism regulating TLR3 expression and function is not well understood.

Ubiquitination is an important way to alter protein expression or function at the post-translational level and has been found to participate in the regulation of innate immune responses at many stages. 13 , 14 The attachment of ubiquitin to specific protein substrates is achieved through the action of E3 ligases. In addition, ubiquitin attached to substrates can also form different polylinkages and affect the expression or function of the substrates via different mechanisms. K48-linked polyubiquitination mediates the degradation of substrates through the proteasome pathway, while K63-linked polyubiquitination promotes the activation of substrates. 15 , 16 Many E3 ligases have been reported to be involved in the regulation of signaling molecules downstream of TLR3, 17 – 19 but the potential regulatory effects of ubiquitination on TLR3 expression or function and the related TLR3-bound E3 ligases remain largely unknown.

In the present study, by immunoprecipitating TLR3-interacting proteins in macrophages, we identified ring finger protein 170 (RNF170) as a TLR3-binding E3 ligase. RNF170 was previously identified as an ER membrane-located E3 ligase that mediates the ubiquitination and degradation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors. 20 However, the substrates and function of RNF170 in innate immune responses have not yet been identified. Here, we demonstrated that RNF170 promoted the K48-linked polyubiquitination of K766 in TLR3, which led to TLR3 degradation through the proteasome pathway. Consequently, RNF170 inhibited TLR3 signaling and suppressed TLR3-triggered innate immune responses.

Discussion

The ubiquitination-mediated degradation of TLRs is an important mechanism of the host that negatively regulates TLR-triggered innate immune responses. 23 – 25 In addition to degradation through the proteasome pathway, TLRs are also degraded in the lysosome. 26 However, the degradation mechanism of TLR3 is largely unknown. TLR3 is considered to be an important pattern recognition receptor (PRR) in antiviral innate immune responses that recognizes dsRNAs that are mainly generated during the life cycles of different kinds of viruses. 27 In addition to inducing type I IFNs and inflammatory cytokines, TLR3 participates in antiviral responses in many other ways, such as regulating the maturation of DCs and promoting the cross-priming of cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) by infected cells. 28 , 29 Therefore, it is necessary to elucidate the mechanisms regulating TLR3 to control TLR3-related diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease and pulmonary inflammation. 8 , 30 Here, we demonstrated that the E3 ligase RNF170 promotes TLR3 degradation by directly associating with TLR3 in both resting and poly(I:C)-stimulated cells, indicating that RNF170 may be a new target to control TLR3 expression or function under both physiological and pathological conditions. Moreover, according to the available data in the Gene Expression Omnibus database, RNF170 expression is increased dramatically in monocytes during HIV infection (accession no. GSE5220 ), 31 and it is first increased and then decreased in fibroblasts during cytomegalovirus infection (accession no. GSE3194 ), 32 further supporting the potential role of RNF170 in antiviral innate immune responses. Thus, we demonstrated that the inhibitory effects of RNF170 on TLR3 and the TLR3-induced signaling pathway provide a potential target for controlling TLR3-related inflammatory diseases. Thus, it will be of great value to investigate the function of RNF170 in TLR3 deregulation-related diseases.

We also demonstrated that RNF170 promotes the K48-linked polyubiquitination of K766 in the TLR3 TIR domain. The TIR domain of TLR3 contributes to triggering downstream signaling by interacting with the adaptor TRIF. Although we did not detect an interaction between RNF170 and TRIF, there might be some other mechanism by which RNF170 inhibits TLR3-induced innate immune responses. Ubiquitination of the TIR domain might change the structure of the TLR3 protein, leading to a failure in translocation, dsRNA recognition or even TLR3 dimerization. Certain experiments remain to be performed to clarify whether RNF170 functions through these possible mechanisms. Furthermore, patients with genetic mutations that lead to a deficiency in the TLR3-TRIF pathway have been found to develop recurrent herpes simplex encephalitis. 33 Since the K766 residue in TLR3 is conserved between mice and humans, it will be worthwhile to further examine whether this mutation is related to aberrant RNF170-mediated TLR3 ubiquitination in different diseases.

Translocation from the ER to the endolysosome has been shown to be essential for the signaling of nucleotide-sensing TLRs, such as TLR3, TLR7, and TLR9. 34 An ER-located transmembrane protein, UNC93B1, has been reported to interact with the transmembrane domains of these receptors in the ER and deliver the receptors to the endolysosome. 35 , 36 Here, we showed that RNF170, which is another integral ER membrane protein, 20 interacts with TLR3 in both the ER membrane and the endolysosome. However, unlike UNC93B1, RNF170 interacts with the TIR domain of TLR3 and negatively regulates TLR3 signaling by promoting the degradation of TLR3. Furthermore, RNF170 selectively targets TLR3, as RNF170 cannot regulate signaling triggered by other PRRs.

The RNF170-mediated inhibition of TLR3 signaling is dependent on the E3 ligase activity of RNF170 within the RING domain. Consistent with a previous report, 20 the mutation of two residues (C101 and H103) in the RING domain of RNF170 prevents the ubiquitination of TLR3 and thus promotes TLR3 signaling. However, although both the RING and TM domains of RNF170 could associate with TLR3, a single RING domain of RNF170 could not mediate TLR3 ubiquitination or inhibit TLR3 signaling, indicating that the TM domain of RNF170 is also necessary for ubiquitination. Clarifying how the TM domain assists in mediating ubiquitination might contribute to understanding how RNF170 translocates from the ER to the early endosome, which is an important process for the RNF170-mediated degradation of TLR3 and the negative regulation of TLR3 downstream signaling. In addition, RNF170 is predicted to contain three transmembrane regions, 20 and a point mutation in the third transmembrane region of RNF170 has been found to be associated with autosomal-dominant sensory ataxia (ADSA) characterized by an age-dependent increase in walking abnormalities, 22 , 37 , 38 supporting the important role of the TM domain in RNF170 function. Thus, the function and mechanism of the TM domain of RNF170 need to be further investigated.
