---
pmid: '16162815'
title: The initial enzyme for glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis requires PIG-Y,
  a seventh component.
authors:
- Murakami Y
- Siripanyaphinyo U
- Hong Y
- Tashima Y
- Maeda Y
- Kinoshita T
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1266422
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-08-0743
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The initial enzyme for glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis requires PIG-Y, a seventh component.
**Authors:** Murakami Y, Siripanyaphinyo U, Hong Y, Tashima Y, Maeda Y, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e05-08-0743](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e05-08-0743)
**PMC:** [PMC1266422](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1266422/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Nov;16(11):5236-46. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e05-08-0743. Epub
2005  Sep 14.

The initial enzyme for glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis requires PIG-Y, 
a seventh component.

Murakami Y(1), Siripanyaphinyo U, Hong Y, Tashima Y, Maeda Y, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is initiated by an unusually 
complex GPI-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT) consisting of at least six 
proteins. Here, we report that human GPI-GnT requires another component, termed 
PIG-Y, a 71 amino acid protein with two transmembrane domains. The Burkitt 
lymphoma cell line Daudi, severely defective in the surface expression of 
GPI-anchored proteins, was a null mutant of PIG-Y. A complex of six components 
was formed without PIG-Y. PIG-Y appeared to be directly associated with PIG-A, 
implying that PIG-Y is the key molecule that regulates GPI-GnT activity by 
binding directly to the catalytic subunit PIG-A. PIG-Y is probably homologous to 
yeast Eri1p, a component of GPI-GnT. We did not obtain evidence for a functional 
linkage between GPI-GnT and ras GTPases in mammalian cells as has been reported 
for yeast cells. A single transcript encoded PIG-Y and, to its 5' side, another 
protein PreY that has homologues in a wide range of organisms and is 
characterized by a conserved domain termed DUF343. These two proteins are 
translated from one mRNA by leaky scanning of the PreY initiation site.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e05-08-0743
PMCID: PMC1266422
PMID: 16162815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
