---
pmid: '21962903'
title: The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and -dependent endosomal sorting
  during melanogenesis.
authors:
- van Niel G
- Charrin S
- Simoes S
- Romao M
- Rochin L
- Saftig P
- Marks MS
- Rubinstein E
- Raposo G
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3199340
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.019
---

# The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and -dependent endosomal sorting during melanogenesis.
**Authors:** van Niel G, Charrin S, Simoes S, Romao M, Rochin L, Saftig P, Marks MS, Rubinstein E, Raposo G
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.019)
**PMC:** [PMC3199340](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3199340/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2011 Oct 18;21(4):708-21. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.019. Epub
2011  Sep 29.

The tetraspanin CD63 regulates ESCRT-independent and -dependent endosomal 
sorting during melanogenesis.

van Niel G(1), Charrin S, Simoes S, Romao M, Rochin L, Saftig P, Marks MS, 
Rubinstein E, Raposo G.

Author information:
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, F-75248 Paris, France. 
guillaume.van-niel@curie.fr

Cargo sorting to intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) of multivesicular endosomes is 
required for lysosome-related organelle (LRO) biogenesis. PMEL-a component of 
melanocyte LROs (melanosomes)-is sorted to ILVs in an ESCRT-independent manner, 
where it is proteolytically processed and assembled into functional amyloid 
fibrils during melanosome maturation. Here we show that the tetraspanin CD63 
directly participates in ESCRT-independent sorting of the PMEL luminal domain, 
but not of traditional ESCRT-dependent cargoes, to ILVs. Inactivating CD63 in 
cell culture or in mice impairs amyloidogenesis and downstream melanosome 
morphogenesis. Whereas CD63 is required for normal PMEL luminal domain sorting, 
the disposal of the remaining PMEL transmembrane fragment requires functional 
ESCRTs but not CD63. In the absence of CD63, the PMEL luminal domain follows 
this fragment and is targeted for ESCRT-dependent degradation. Our data thus 
reveal a tight interplay regulated by CD63 between two distinct endosomal ILV 
sorting processes for a single cargo during LRO biogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.019
PMCID: PMC3199340
PMID: 21962903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing financial interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
