---
pmid: '9660753'
title: Specific binding of tetratricopeptide repeat proteins to the C-terminal 12-kDa
  domain of hsp90.
authors:
- Young JC
- Obermann WM
- Hartl FU
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18007
---

# Specific binding of tetratricopeptide repeat proteins to the C-terminal 12-kDa domain of hsp90.
**Authors:** Young JC, Obermann WM, Hartl FU
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.29.18007](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.29.18007)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18007-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18007.

Specific binding of tetratricopeptide repeat proteins to the C-terminal 12-kDa 
domain of hsp90.

Young JC(1), Obermann WM, Hartl FU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Am 
Klopferspitz 18A, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany.

The molecular chaperone hsp90 in the eukaryotic cytosol interacts with a variety 
of protein cofactors. Several of these cofactors have protein domains containing 
tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs, which mediate binding to hsp90. Using a 
yeast two-hybrid screen, the 12-kDa C-terminal domain of human hsp90alpha (C90) 
was found to mediate the interaction of hsp90 with TPR-containing sequences from 
the hsp90 cofactors FKBP51/54 and FKBP52. In addition, the mitochondrial outer 
membrane protein hTOM34p was identified as a TPR-containing putative partner 
protein of hsp90. In experiments with purified proteins, the TPR-containing 
cofactor p60 (Hop) was shown to form stable complexes with hsp90. A deletion 
mutant of hsp90 lacking the C90 domain was unable to bind p60, whereas deletion 
of the approximately 25-kDa N-terminal domain of hsp90 did not affect complex 
formation. Both p60 and FKBP52 bound specifically to the C90 domain fused to 
glutathione S-transferase and competed with each other for binding. In 
reticulocyte lysate, the C90 fusion protein recognized the TPR proteins p60, 
FKBP52, and Cyp40. Thus, our results identify the C90 domain as the specific 
binding site for a set of hsp90 cofactors having TPR domains.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18007
PMID: 9660753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
