---
pmid: '11812785'
title: The mechanism of growth-inhibitory effect of DOC-2/DAB2 in prostate cancer.
  Characterization of a novel GTPase-activating protein associated with N-terminal
  domain of DOC-2/DAB2.
authors:
- Wang Z
- Tseng CP
- Pong RC
- Chen H
- McConnell JD
- Navone N
- Hsieh JT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110568200
---

# The mechanism of growth-inhibitory effect of DOC-2/DAB2 in prostate cancer. Characterization of a novel GTPase-activating protein associated with N-terminal domain of DOC-2/DAB2.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Tseng CP, Pong RC, Chen H, McConnell JD, Navone N, Hsieh JT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110568200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110568200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 12;277(15):12622-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110568200. Epub 
2002 Jan 25.

The mechanism of growth-inhibitory effect of DOC-2/DAB2 in prostate cancer. 
Characterization of a novel GTPase-activating protein associated with N-terminal 
domain of DOC-2/DAB2.

Wang Z(1), Tseng CP, Pong RC, Chen H, McConnell JD, Navone N, Hsieh JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9110, USA.

DOC-2/DAB2 is a member of the disable gene family with tumor-inhibitory 
activity. Its down-regulation is associated with several neoplasms, and serine 
phosphorylation of its N terminus modulates DOC-2/DAB2's inhibitory effect on 
AP-1 transcriptional activity. We describe the cloning of DIP1/2, a novel gene 
that interacts with the N-terminal domain of DOC-2/DAB2. DIP1/2 is a novel 
GTPase-activating protein containing a Ras GTPase-activating protein homology 
domain (N terminus) and two other unique domains (i.e. 10 proline repeats and 
leucine zipper). Interaction between DOC-2/DAB2 and DIP1/2 is detected in normal 
tissues such as the brain and prostate. Altered expression of these two proteins 
is often detected in prostate cancer cells. Indeed, the presence of DIP1/2 
effectively blocks mitogen-induced gene expression and inhibits the growth of 
prostate cancer. Thus, DOC-2/DAB2 and DIP1/2 appear to represent a unique 
negative regulatory complex that maintains cell homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110568200
PMID: 11812785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
