---
pmid: '34407394'
title: Tribbles pseudokinase NIPI-3 regulates intestinal immunity in Caenorhabditis
  elegans by controlling SKN-1/Nrf activity.
authors:
- Wu C
- Karakuzu O
- Garsin DA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8393239
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109529
---

# Tribbles pseudokinase NIPI-3 regulates intestinal immunity in Caenorhabditis elegans by controlling SKN-1/Nrf activity.
**Authors:** Wu C, Karakuzu O, Garsin DA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109529](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109529)
**PMC:** [PMC8393239](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8393239/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2021 Aug 17;36(7):109529. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109529.

Tribbles pseudokinase NIPI-3 regulates intestinal immunity in Caenorhabditis 
elegans by controlling SKN-1/Nrf activity.

Wu C(1), Karakuzu O(1), Garsin DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: 
danielle.a.garsin@uth.tmc.edu.

In Caenorhabditis elegans, ROS generated in response to intestinal infection 
induces SKN-1, a protective transcription factor homologous to nuclear factor 
erythroid 2-related factor 1 or 2 (NRF1/2) in mammals. Many factors regulate 
SKN-1, including the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade that 
activates SKN-1 by phosphorylation. In this work, another positive regulator of 
SKN-1 is identified: NIPI-3, a Tribbles pseudokinase. NIPI-3 has been reported 
to protect against intestinal infection by negatively regulating the CCAT 
enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) bZIP transcription factor CEBP-1. Here we 
demonstrate that CEBP-1 positively regulates the vhp-1 transcript, which encodes 
a phosphatase that dephosphorylates the p38 MAPK called PMK-1. The increased 
levels of VHP-1 caused by CEBP-1 transcriptional enhancement result in less 
PMK-1 phosphorylation, affecting SKN-1 activity and intestinal resistance to the 
pathogen. The data support a model in which NIPI-3's negative regulation of 
CEBP-1 decreases VHP-1 phosphatase activity, allowing increased stimulation of 
SKN-1 activity by the p38 MAPK phosphorylation cascade in the intestine.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109529
PMCID: PMC8393239
PMID: 34407394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
