---
pmid: '18331822'
title: Identification of Tom5 and Tom6 in the preprotein translocase complex of human
  mitochondrial outer membrane.
authors:
- Kato H
- Mihara K
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.150
---

# Identification of Tom5 and Tom6 in the preprotein translocase complex of human mitochondrial outer membrane.
**Authors:** Kato H, Mihara K
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.150](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.150)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 9;369(3):958-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.150. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Identification of Tom5 and Tom6 in the preprotein translocase complex of human 
mitochondrial outer membrane.

Kato H(1), Mihara K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The fungal preprotein translocase of the mitochondrial outer membrane (TOM 
complex) comprises import receptors Tom70, Tom20, and Tom22, import channel 
Tom40, and small Tom proteins Tom5, Tom6, and Tom7, which regulate TOM complex 
assembly. These components are conserved in mammals; unlike the other 
components, however, Tom5 and Tom6 remain unidentified in mammals. We 
immuno-isolated the TOM complex from HeLa cells expressing hTom22-FLAG and 
identified the human counterparts of Tom5 and Tom6, together with the other 
components including Tom7. These small Tom proteins are associated with Tom40 in 
the TOM complex. Knockdown of Tom7, but not Tom5 and Tom6, strongly compromised 
stability of the TOM complex. Conversely, knockdown of hTom40 decreased the 
level of all small Tom proteins. Matrix import of preprotein was affected by 
double knockdown of any combination of small Tom proteins. These results 
indicate that human small Tom proteins maintain the structural integrity of the 
TOM complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.150
PMID: 18331822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
