---
pmid: '15734903'
title: Differential regulation of FLOWERING LOCUS C expression by vernalization in
  cabbage and Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Lin SI
- Wang JG
- Poon SY
- Su CL
- Wang SS
- Chiou TJ
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1065404
doi: 10.1104/pp.104.058974
---

# Differential regulation of FLOWERING LOCUS C expression by vernalization in cabbage and Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Lin SI, Wang JG, Poon SY, Su CL, Wang SS, Chiou TJ
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.104.058974](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.104.058974)
**PMC:** [PMC1065404](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1065404/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2005 Mar;137(3):1037-48. doi: 10.1104/pp.104.058974. Epub 2005 
Feb 25.

Differential regulation of FLOWERING LOCUS C expression by vernalization in 
cabbage and Arabidopsis.

Lin SI(1), Wang JG, Poon SY, Su CL, Wang SS, Chiou TJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of BioAgricultural Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan 
R.O.C.

Vernalization is required to induce flowering in cabbage (Brassica oleracea var 
Capitata L.). Since FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) was identified as a major repressor 
of flowering in the vernalization pathway in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), 
two homologs of AtFLC, BoFLC3-2 and BoFLC4-1, were isolated from cabbage to 
investigate the molecular mechanism of vernalization in cabbage flowering. In 
addition to the sequence homology, the genomic organization of cabbage FLC is 
similar to that of AtFLC, except that BoFLC has a relatively smaller intron 1 
compared to that of AtFLC. A vernalization-mediated decrease in FLC transcript 
level was correlated with an increase in FT transcript level in the apex of 
cabbage. This observation is in agreement with the down-regulation of FT by FLC 
in Arabidopsis. Yet, unlike that in Arabidopsis, the accumulation of cabbage FLC 
transcript decreased after cold treatment of leafy plants but not imbibed seeds, 
which is consistent with the promotion of cabbage flowering by vernalizing adult 
plants rather than seeds. To further dissect the different regulation of FLC 
expression between seed-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. Arabidopsis) and 
plant-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. cabbage), the pBoFLC4-1BoFLC4-1GUS 
construct was introduced into Arabidopsis to examine its vernalization response. 
Down-regulation of the BoFLC4-1GUS construct by seed vernalization was unstable 
and incomplete; in addition, the expression of BoFLC4-1GUS was not suppressed by 
vernalization of transgenic rosette-stage Arabidopsis plants. We propose a 
hypothesis to illustrate the distinct mechanism by which vernalization regulates 
the expression of FLC in cabbage and Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.104.058974
PMCID: PMC1065404
PMID: 15734903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Vernalization is required to induce flowering in cabbage ( Brassica oleracea var Capitata L.). Since FLOWERING LOCUS C ( FLC ) was identified as a major repressor of flowering in the vernalization pathway in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ), two homologs of AtFLC , BoFLC3-2 and BoFLC4-1 , were isolated from cabbage to investigate the molecular mechanism of vernalization in cabbage flowering. In addition to the sequence homology, the genomic organization of cabbage FLC is similar to that of AtFLC , except that BoFLC has a relatively smaller intron 1 compared to that of AtFLC . A vernalization-mediated decrease in FLC transcript level was correlated with an increase in FT transcript level in the apex of cabbage. This observation is in agreement with the down-regulation of FT by FLC in Arabidopsis. Yet, unlike that in Arabidopsis, the accumulation of cabbage FLC transcript decreased after cold treatment of leafy plants but not imbibed seeds, which is consistent with the promotion of cabbage flowering by vernalizing adult plants rather than seeds. To further dissect the different regulation of FLC expression between seed-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. Arabidopsis) and plant-vernalization-responsive species (e.g. cabbage), the p BoFLC4-1 ∷ BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS construct was introduced into Arabidopsis to examine its vernalization response. Down-regulation of the BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS construct by seed vernalization was unstable and incomplete; in addition, the expression of BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS was not suppressed by vernalization of transgenic rosette-stage Arabidopsis plants. We propose a hypothesis to illustrate the distinct mechanism by which vernalization regulates the expression of FLC in cabbage and Arabidopsis.

DISCUSSION

In this study, two FLC homologs, BoFLC4-1 and BoFLC3-2 , were isolated from cabbage ( Fig. 1 ). The expression of BoFLC4-1 and its regulation by vernalization were analyzed. The FLC transcripts were highest in the apex, as was observed in Arabidopsis ( Michaels and Amasino, 1999 ). Steady-state levels of the BoFLC transcript decreased during vernalization of cabbage plants, mainly in the apex and leaf ( Fig. 2, A–C ). It is of interest to note that the three cabbage varieties (TNSS42-12, Yehsen, and YSL-0) with different vernalization requirements showed similar transcript levels of FLC before vernalization ( Fig. 2D ) but a different degree of reduction of FLC expression after vernalization ( Fig. 2, A–C ). Suppression of FLC in YSL-0, a short-vernalization requirement variety, occurred much more rapidly than that of the other two varieties, which require longer exposure to cold.

FT and SOC1 are recognized as key integrators of multiple floral pathways in Arabidopsis ( Simpson and Dean, 2002 ). FT and SOC1 expression is repressed by FLC ( Lee et al., 2000 ; Onouchi et al., 2000 ; Samach et al., 2000 ). When Arabidopsis FT and SOC1 cDNAs were used as probes to search for homologous genes in cabbage, the SOC1 homolog was not detected in cabbage tissues tested, but an FT homolog was detected. The reduction of BoFLC expression by vernalization corresponded to the increased level of BoFT in the apex ( Fig. 2A ). Moreover, BoFT also showed an expression pattern opposite to that of FLC in the apex from different developmental stages of nonvernalized cabbage ( Fig. 3 ). This observation implies that Arabidopsis and cabbage may regulate flowering similarly in terms of the correlation between FT and FLC . Nevertheless, BoFT was strongly expressed in both nonvernalized young and mature leaves, and the expression of BoFT was not up-regulated in leaves after vernalization, even though the expression of FLC was already down-regulated ( Fig. 2A ). This observation suggests that the expression of BoFT in the leaf is not sufficient to promote flowering, and the increase in BoFT expression in the apex during vernalization is a prerequisite for the induction of flowering in cabbage. This observation is in conflict with the recent study that misexpression of FT in a wide range of tissues activates flowering in Arabidopsis ( An et al., 2004 ). Decreased FLC expression accompanies increased expression of FT in the apex, which suggests that the apex is the main location mediating flowering by vernalization in cabbage. This suggestion is in agreement with early observations that the apex is sensitive to low temperatures and must be exposed to cold for vernalization to occur ( Chourad, 1960 ; Ito et al., 1966 ).

MADS-box proteins are thought to form dimers through the interaction of the K domain at the center and bind to DNA through the MADS-box domain at the N terminus ( Schwarz-Sommer et al., 1992 ; Mizukami et al., 1996 ; Riechmann et al., 1996 ). Recent evidence indicates that certain MADS-box proteins may associate as tetramers ( Favaro et al., 2003 ). ag and ap3 mutant phenotypes were generated by transforming the wild-type Arabidopsis with mutant forms of AG or AP3 lacking the C- and N-terminal regions, respectively ( Mizukami et al., 1996 ; Krizek et al., 1999 ). Moreover, a dominant-negative mutation was successfully created using heterologous AP3 genes from two plant species ( Tzeng and Yang, 2001 ). Here, we demonstrate another example of generating a dominant-negative mutation by use of genes from different plant species. Both DN1 (lack of MADS box) and DN2 (lack of C domain) constructs ( Fig. 4 ) retain the K domain presumably involved in protein-protein interaction. Transgenic Arabidopsis overexpressing either N-terminal truncated (DN1) or C-terminal truncated (DN2) Bo FLC4-1 flowered earlier than wild-type plants ( Fig. 4 ). The early flowering phenotype could result from the formation of a nonfunctional multimer between the truncated Bo FLC4-1 and endogenous At FLC proteins. Overexpression of the truncated FLC protein through a dominant-negative effect may provide an alternative approach to regulating flowering time in vernalization-dependent plant species.

Comparison of promoter sequences upstream of BoFLC4-1 , BoFLC3-2 , and AtFLC revealed three conserved regions (P1, P2, and P3; Fig. 5A ). The alignment of these conserved regions suggests that a large sequence deletion between the P2 and P3 regions occurred in the promoter of BoFLC3-2 . The truncated promoter of BoFLC3-2 may explain its low level of transcripts in cabbage. Positive and negative regulatory elements between the P2 and P3 regions were identified in the promoter of AtFLC ( Sheldon et al., 2002 ). Whether there are any cis-acting elements located between the P2 and P3 regions that are responsible for the expression of BoFLC3-2 remains to be studied. The P2 conserved region (51 bp) is located within the 75-bp promoter sequence of AtFLC that was reported to be essential for AtFLC expression in nonvernalized plants ( Sheldon et al., 2002 ). About 500 bp upstream to the P3 region of BoFLC3-2 , a gene encoding 3-keto-acyl-ACP dehydratase was identified ( Fig. 5A ). Coincidently, this gene can be aligned with a similar gene (At5g10160.1) that is one locus away from the AtFLC (At5g10140.1) in the Arabidopsis genome. This suggests that this genomic organization had been preserved between cabbage and Arabidopsis during evolution.

Cabbage flowering can be promoted by vernalizing adult plants but not seeds ( Friend, 1985 ). Cabbage must pass through the juvenile phase to be able to sense cold and induce flowering. We showed that vernalization of 8-week-old cabbage plants was effective in repressing the expression of BoFLC4-1 ( Fig. 2 ); however, cold treatment of cabbage seeds did not alter the expression level of BoFLC4-1 ( Fig. 3 ). The regulation of BoFLC4-1 expression by vernalization of adult cabbage plants but not seeds is correlated with the effectiveness of vernalization. This situation is different from that in Arabidopsis in which FLC is down-regulated and flowering is promoted by seed vernalization, which suggests that the regulatory mechanism of FLC expression in plant-vernalization-responsive species is different from that in seed-vernalization-responsive species. To further characterize the differences in vernalization responses between the 2 species types, the whole genomic sequence of BoFLC4-1 containing the 2-kb promoter and 7 exons was fused to the GUS reporter gene (p BoFLC4-1 ∷ BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS ) to examine its localization and vernalization response in Arabidopsis. It is of interest to note that GUS staining was strongly detected in pollen grains and germinating pollen of the transgenic plants ( Fig. 6, C and D ). Indeed, the BoFLC4-1 transcript also was detected in cabbage flowers, and transgenic cabbage overexpressing a double-stranded RNAi construct of BoFLC4-1 produced very few seeds (J.-G. Wang, S.-Y. Poon, S.-S. Wang, and T.-J. Chiou, unpublished data). Moreover, transgenic Arabidopsis expressing an AtFLC antisense construct showed reduced fertility ( Sheldon et al., 1999 ), and overexpressed AtFLC was defective in floral morphology and produced less than normal quantities of pollen or no pollen ( Hepworth et al., 2002 ). These results indicate that FLC may participate in pollen development or pollination in addition to controlling flowering time. However, the observation of normal seed setting in flc null mutants ( Michaels and Amasino, 2001 ) disagrees this hypothesis. Whether the difference between transgenic manipulation and mutation in endogenous gene gives rise to this contradiction remains to be resolved.

When transgenic Arabidopsis seeds were subjected to vernalization, the BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS transcript did not show significant changes in some of the transgenic lines (e.g. line 1 in Fig. 7A ), but its transcript was undetectable at one or two time points of the treatment in other lines (e.g. lines 2 and 3 in Fig. 7A ). However, the down-regulation of the BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS transcript was not sustained after prolonged cold treatment, which indicated that down-regulation was not stable. This observation is inconsistent with the quantitative relationship between the duration of cold treatment and the extent of down-regulation of AtFLC , as observed in Figure 7 and in a previous report ( Sheldon et al., 2000 ). Because a 2-kb promoter region and complete exon and intron sequences were included in the transgene construct, it is not likely that critical sequences for vernalization responses were left out of this construct. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that the BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS construct would not be properly regulated in cabbage.

The mechanism involved in inactivation of AtFLC during vernalization recently was demonstrated to be associated with chromatin modification, such as histone deacetylation and methylation ( Bastow et al., 2004 ; Sung and Amasino, 2004 ). Because chromatin immunoprecipitation with a specific antibody recognized the acetylated or methylated histone H3, several regions in the AtFLC gene associated with the modified histone H3 were identified. Those sequences were highlighted and designated as the four regions, a, b, c, and d, in Figure 5, A and B . Regions a and b are located in the promoter, while regions c and d are located in intron 1. The sequence of region a was previously identified to consist of a negative regulatory element of AtFLC ( Sheldon et al., 2002 ). Region b is across the conserved segments of P1 and P2. Region c overlaps with the conserved segments I1 and I2 in intron 1, and region d is located within the 2.6-kb region that is missing in the BoFLC intron 1. In BoFLC4-1 , similar b and c sequences were identified, but no homologous sequences of a and d were found ( Fig. 5 ). We suspect that lack of counterpart sequences to these regions a and d in BoFLC4-1 may cause the unstable repression of BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS after seed vernalization in transgenic Arabidopsis; however, we do not exclude the possibility that other unidentified cis-regulatory elements in AtFLC , which may not be present in BoFLC4-1 , are also important for responding to seed vernalization in Arabidopsis.

The expression of BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS was not inactivated when transgenic rosette plants were subjected to vernalization treatment. We postulate that certain cabbage-specific trans-regulatory factors required for the suppression of BoFLC4-1 during cabbage vernalization do not exist in Arabidopsis. The different responses in terms of seed or plant vernalization are likely due to the distinct interactions between specific cis- and trans-regulatory elements in these two different vernalization-responsive types. Nevertheless, it is also possible that the homologs of upstream regulators of AtFLC such as VIN3 ( Sung and Amasino, 2004 ) may be involved in the differential responses of seed versus plant vernalization in cabbage. For example, a cabbage VIN3 homolog may only be induced during vernalization of mature cabbage plants but not in vernalized seedlings to down-regulate the expression of FLC . However, the interaction between FLC and its upstream regulators in Arabidopsis and cabbage may not be identical since the expression of BoFLC4-1 in transgenic Arabidopsis was not suppressed when endogenous AtFLC was completely inactivated ( Fig. 7A ). It was surprising to find that the BoFLC4-1 ∷ GUS transcript was increased after plant vernalization treatment in most of the transgenic lines ( Fig. 7B ), but we have no explanation for this observation.

In Figure 8 , a working hypothesis is proposed for the different mechanisms in controlling cabbage and Arabidopsis flowering by vernalization. The BoFLC transcript gradually accumulates along with a decreased level of BoFT in the apex during cabbage growth. Vernalization of cabbage seeds does not alter the expression of FLC and FT . The presence of vernalization repressors or the absence of vernalization activators could be responsible for the ineffectiveness of seed vernalization in cabbage. The expression of repressors or activators may depend on age and be regulated coordinately in an opposite manner. During development, the loss of repressors or accumulation of activators may be associated with increased competence to sense cold temperature. The accumulated vernalization activators, together with cold temperature, in mature cabbage plants can efficiently down-regulate the expression of FLC ( Fig. 8A ). Without vernalization, cabbage remains in vegetative growth. The expression of FT shows an opposite pattern to that of FLC , and increased FT expression in the apex after plant vernalization may be critical to induce cabbage flowering ( Fig. 2A ). However, seed vernalization is more effective than plant vernalization in down-regulating FLC expression in Arabidopsis ( Fig. 7 ). This observation is consistent with a previous report that cold treatment at the rosette stage is less effective in promoting flowering than seed cold treatment in Arabidopsis ( Nordborg and Bergelson, 1999 ). We hypothesized that fewer vernalization activators or the presence of vernalization repressors in the rosette stage may reduce the competence of the vernalization response and result in later flowering ( Fig. 8B ). Nevertheless, vernalized Arabidopsis rosette plants show accelerated flowering compared to nonvernalized plants.

In summary, we show that cabbage BoFLC4-1 plays a similar role to Arabidopsis FLC in controlling flowering. However, AtFLC responds to seed vernalization but BoFLC4-1 does not. Comparison of promoter and intragenic sequences between BoFLC4-1 and AtFLC revealed differences that may be specifically involved in either the seed or plant vernalization response. Further characterization of these sequences may provide an opportunity to dissect different regulatory mechanisms of the vernalization response in seed- versus plant-responsive species.
