---
pmid: '17725549'
title: Phloem-based resistance to green peach aphid is controlled by Arabidopsis PHYTOALEXIN
  DEFICIENT4 without its signaling partner ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1.
authors:
- Pegadaraju V
- Louis J
- Singh V
- Reese JC
- Bautor J
- Feys BJ
- Cook G
- Parker JE
- Shah J
journal: Plant J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03241.x
---

# Phloem-based resistance to green peach aphid is controlled by Arabidopsis PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 without its signaling partner ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1.
**Authors:** Pegadaraju V, Louis J, Singh V, Reese JC, Bautor J, Feys BJ, Cook G, Parker JE, Shah J
**Journal:** Plant J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03241.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03241.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2007 Oct;52(2):332-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03241.x. Epub
2007  Aug 24.

Phloem-based resistance to green peach aphid is controlled by Arabidopsis 
PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 without its signaling partner ENHANCED DISEASE 
SUSCEPTIBILITY1.

Pegadaraju V(1), Louis J, Singh V, Reese JC, Bautor J, Feys BJ, Cook G, Parker 
JE, Shah J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology Program, 
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.

Green peach aphid (GPA) Myzus persicae (Sülzer) is a phloem-feeding insect with 
an exceptionally wide host range. Previously, it has been shown that Arabidopsis 
thaliana PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4), which is expressed at elevated levels in 
response to GPA infestation, is required for resistance to GPA in the 
Arabidopsis accession Columbia. We demonstrate here that the role of PAD4 in the 
response to GPA is conserved in Arabidopsis accessions Wassilewskija and 
Landsberg erecta. Electrical monitoring of aphid feeding behavior revealed that 
PAD4 modulates a phloem-based defense mechanism against GPA. GPA spends more 
time actively feeding from the sieve elements of pad4 mutants than from 
wild-type plants, and less time feeding on transgenic plants in which PAD4 is 
ectopically expressed. The activity of PAD4 in limiting phloem sap uptake serves 
as a deterrent in host-plant choice, and restricts aphid population size. In 
Arabidopsis defense against pathogens, all known PAD4 functions require its 
signaling and stabilizing partner EDS1 (ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1). 
Bioassays with eds1 mutants alone or in combination with pad4 and with plants 
conditionally expressing PAD4 under the control of a dexamethasone-inducible 
promoter reveal that PAD4-modulated defense against GPA does not involve EDS1. 
Thus, a PAD4 mode of action that is uncoupled from EDS1 determines the extent of 
aphid feeding in the phloem.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03241.x
PMID: 17725549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
