---
pmid: '32494006'
title: Molecular architecture of the human 17S U2 snRNP.
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Will CL
- Bertram K
- Dybkov O
- Hartmuth K
- Agafonov DE
- Hofele R
- Urlaub H
- Kastner B
- Lührmann R
- Stark H
journal: Nature
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2344-3
---

# Molecular architecture of the human 17S U2 snRNP.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Will CL, Bertram K, Dybkov O, Hartmuth K, Agafonov DE, Hofele R, Urlaub H, Kastner B, Lührmann R, Stark H
**Journal:** Nature (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-020-2344-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2344-3)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2020 Jul;583(7815):310-313. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2344-3. Epub 2020 
Jun 3.

Molecular architecture of the human 17S U2 snRNP.

Zhang Z(#)(1), Will CL(#)(2), Bertram K(1), Dybkov O(2), Hartmuth K(2), Agafonov 
DE(2), Hofele R(3)(4), Urlaub H(3)(5), Kastner B(2), Lührmann R(6), Stark H(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Dynamics, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(2)Cellular Biochemistry, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(4)AstraZeneca, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
(5)Bioanalytics Group, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Cellular Biochemistry, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany. 
reinhard.luehrmann@mpi-bpc.mpg.de.
(7)Department of Structural Dynamics, MPI for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, 
Germany. hstark1@gwdg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

The U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) has an essential role in the 
selection of the precursor mRNA branch-site adenosine, the nucleophile for the 
first step of splicing1. Stable addition of U2 during early spliceosome 
formation requires the DEAD-box ATPase PRP52-7. Yeast U2 small nuclear RNA 
(snRNA) nucleotides that form base pairs with the branch site are initially 
sequestered in a branchpoint-interacting stem-loop (BSL)8, but whether the human 
U2 snRNA folds in a similar manner is unknown. The U2 SF3B1 protein, a common 
mutational target in haematopoietic cancers9, contains a HEAT domain (SF3B1HEAT) 
with an open conformation in isolated SF3b10, but a closed conformation in 
spliceosomes11, which is required for stable interaction between U2 and the 
branch site. Here we report a 3D cryo-electron microscopy structure of the human 
17S U2 snRNP at a core resolution of 4.1 Å and combine it with protein 
crosslinking data to determine the molecular architecture of this snRNP. Our 
structure reveals that SF3B1HEAT interacts with PRP5 and TAT-SF1, and maintains 
its open conformation in U2 snRNP, and that U2 snRNA forms a BSL that is 
sandwiched between PRP5, TAT-SF1 and SF3B1HEAT. Thus, substantial remodelling of 
the BSL and displacement of BSL-interacting proteins must occur to allow 
formation of the U2-branch-site helix. Our studies provide a structural 
explanation of why TAT-SF1 must be displaced before the stable addition of U2 to 
the spliceosome, and identify RNP rearrangements facilitated by PRP5 that are 
required for stable interaction between U2 and the branch site.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2344-3
PMID: 32494006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
