---
pmid: '29405545'
title: The chaperone Chs7 forms a stable complex with Chs3 and promotes its activity
  at the cell surface.
authors:
- Dharwada ST
- Dalton LE
- Bean BDM
- Padmanabhan N
- Choi C
- Schluter C
- Davey M
- Conibear E
journal: Traffic
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tra.12553
---

# The chaperone Chs7 forms a stable complex with Chs3 and promotes its activity at the cell surface.
**Authors:** Dharwada ST, Dalton LE, Bean BDM, Padmanabhan N, Choi C, Schluter C, Davey M, Conibear E
**Journal:** Traffic (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tra.12553](https://doi.org/10.1111/tra.12553)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2018 Apr;19(4):285-295. doi: 10.1111/tra.12553. Epub 2018 Mar 4.

The chaperone Chs7 forms a stable complex with Chs3 and promotes its activity at 
the cell surface.

Dharwada ST(1), Dalton LE(1), Bean BDM(1), Padmanabhan N(1), Choi C(1), Schluter 
C(1), Davey M(1), Conibear E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and 
Therapeutics, BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The polytopic yeast protein Chs3 (chitin synthase III) relies on a dedicated 
membrane-localized chaperone, Chs7, for its folding and expression at the cell 
surface. In the absence of Chs7, Chs3 forms high molecular weight aggregates and 
is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Chs7 was reported to be an ER 
resident protein, but its role in Chs3 folding and transport was not well 
characterized. Here, we show that Chs7 itself exits the ER and localizes with 
Chs3 at the bud neck and intracellular compartments. We identified mutations in 
the Chs7 C-terminal cytosolic domain that do not affect its chaperone function, 
but cause it to dissociate from Chs3 at a post-ER transport step. Mutations that 
prevent the continued association of Chs7 with Chs3 do not block delivery of 
Chs3 to the cell surface, but dramatically reduce its catalytic activity. This 
suggests that Chs7 engages in functionally distinct interactions with Chs3 to 
first promote its folding and ER exit, and subsequently to regulate its activity 
at the plasma membrane.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tra.12553
PMID: 29405545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
