---
pmid: '18029035'
title: Involvement of Ymer in suppression of NF-kappaB activation by regulated interaction
  with lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chain.
authors:
- Bohgaki M
- Tsukiyama T
- Nakajima A
- Maruyama S
- Watanabe M
- Koike T
- Hatakeyama S
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.09.006
---

# Involvement of Ymer in suppression of NF-kappaB activation by regulated interaction with lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chain.
**Authors:** Bohgaki M, Tsukiyama T, Nakajima A, Maruyama S, Watanabe M, Koike T, Hatakeyama S
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.09.006)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 May;1783(5):826-37. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.09.006. Epub 2007 Oct 4.

Involvement of Ymer in suppression of NF-kappaB activation by regulated 
interaction with lysine-63-linked polyubiquitin chain.

Bohgaki M(1), Tsukiyama T, Nakajima A, Maruyama S, Watanabe M, Koike T, 
Hatakeyama S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.

It is known that the cytoplasmic zinc finger protein A20 functionally dampens 
inflammatory signals and apoptosis via inhibition of NF-kappaB activation and 
biochemically acts as a unique ubiquitin-modifying protein with deubiquitinating 
activity and ubiquitin ligase activity. However, the molecular mechanisms of 
A20-modulated signal transduction that influence normal immune responses or 
tumor immunity have not been fully elucidated. Using a yeast two-hybrid system 
to search for proteins interacting with A20, we identified one novel binding 
protein, Ymer. Ymer, which has been reported to be highly phosphorylated on 
tyrosine residues via EGF stimulation, bound to lysine (K)-63-linked 
polyubiquitin chain on receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 
(RIP1), which is essential for NF-kappaB signaling in collaboration with A20. A 
luciferase assay showed that NF-kappaB signaling was down-regulated by 
overexpression of Ymer, whereas knock-down of Ymer up-regulated NF-kappaB 
signaling even without stimulation. These findings demonstrate that Ymer is 
likely to be a negative regulator for the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.09.006
PMID: 18029035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
