---
pmid: '31132310'
title: Bacillus subtilis FolE is sustained by the ZagA zinc metallochaperone and the
  alarmone ZTP under conditions of zinc deficiency.
authors:
- Chandrangsu P
- Huang X
- Gaballa A
- Helmann JD
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6736736
doi: 10.1111/mmi.14314
---

# Bacillus subtilis FolE is sustained by the ZagA zinc metallochaperone and the alarmone ZTP under conditions of zinc deficiency.
**Authors:** Chandrangsu P, Huang X, Gaballa A, Helmann JD
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/mmi.14314](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.14314)
**PMC:** [PMC6736736](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6736736/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Sep;112(3):751-765. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14314. Epub 2019 Jun 
11.

Bacillus subtilis FolE is sustained by the ZagA zinc metallochaperone and the 
alarmone ZTP under conditions of zinc deficiency.

Chandrangsu P(1)(2), Huang X(1), Gaballa A(1), Helmann JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA.
(2)W.M. Keck Science Department, Claremont McKenna, Pitzer and Scripps College, 
Claremont, CA, 91711, USA.

Bacteria tightly regulate intracellular zinc levels to ensure sufficient zinc to 
support essential functions, while preventing toxicity. The bacterial response 
to zinc limitation includes the expression of putative zinc metallochaperones 
belonging to subfamily 1 of the COG0523 family of G3E GTPases. However, the 
client proteins and the metabolic processes served by these chaperones are 
unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the Bacillus subtilis YciC zinc 
metallochaperone (here renamed ZagA for ZTP activated GTPase A) supports de novo 
folate biosynthesis under conditions of zinc limitation, and interacts directly 
with the zinc-dependent GTP cyclohydrolase IA, FolE (GCYH-IA). Furthermore, we 
identify a role for the alarmone ZTP, a modified purine biosynthesis 
intermediate, in the response to zinc limitation. ZTP, a signal of 
10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (10f-THF) deficiency in bacteria, transiently 
accumulates as FolE begins to fail, stimulates the interaction between ZagA and 
FolE, and thereby helps to sustain folate synthesis despite declining zinc 
availability.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14314
PMCID: PMC6736736
PMID: 31132310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTEREST. The authors declare no 
competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Bacteria tightly regulate intracellular zinc levels to ensure sufficient zinc to support essential functions, while preventing toxicity. The bacterial response to zinc limitation includes the expression of putative zinc metallochaperones belonging to subfamily 1 of the COG0523 family of G3E GTPases. However, the client proteins and the metabolic processes served by these chaperones are unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the Bacillus subtilis YciC zinc metallochaperone (here renamed ZagA for Z TP a ctivated G TPase A ) supports de novo folate biosynthesis under conditions of zinc limitation, and interacts directly with the zinc dependent GTP cyclohydrolase IA, FolE (GCYH-IA). Furthermore, we identify a role for the alarmone ZTP, a modified purine biosynthesis intermediate, in the response to zinc limitation. ZTP, a signal of 10-formyl-tetrahydrofolate (10f-THF) deficiency in bacteria, transiently accumulates as FolE begins to fail, stimulates the interaction between ZagA and FolE, and thereby helps to sustain folate synthesis despite declining zinc availability.

Graphical abstract

The Bacillus subtilis metallochaperone ZagA (formerly YciC) senses intracellular ZTP (a signal of folate deficiency) and functions to sustain the activity of the Zn-dependent folate synthesis enzyme, FolE, under conditions of zinc deficiency.

Introduction

Transition metals are required for life and participate as cofactors in a wide range of essential biological functions. Of these, zinc is often considered a “first among equals” as it serves as cofactor for ~4–10% of all proteins ( Maret & Li, 2009 ). As such, zinc plays a key role in host-microbe interactions ( Cerasi et al ., 2013 ). In a process termed nutritional immunity, the host may restrict bacterial access to zinc in response to infection through the production of calprotectin, an S100 protein produced by cells of the immune system ( Zackular et al ., 2015 ).

The physiological states associated with zinc homeostasis can be generally described as excess, sufficiency, deficiency and limitation (or starvation) ( Chandrangsu et al ., 2017 ). Excess zinc can lead to toxic consequences, and leads to the expression of protective mechanisms including sequestration or efflux. Sufficiency refers to the optimal zinc concentration to support zinc dependent cellular processes. Deficiency is characterized by decreased growth, altered metabolism, and deployment of an adaptive response. As zinc levels fall further, zinc limitation results as defined by the failure of essential zinc dependent processes and cessation of growth.

Bacteria utilize complex mechanisms to respond to metal stress. In Bacillus subtilis , a model Gram-positive bacterium, zinc homeostasis is maintained by the coordinated action of two DNA binding metalloregulators: Zur, the sensor of zinc sufficiency, and CzrA, the sensor of zinc excess. Under conditions of zinc sufficiency, the dimeric Fur family metalloregulator Zur binds DNA in its zinc-loaded form and represses transcription ( Gaballa & Helmann, 1998 ). Genes repressed by Zur are derepressed in three distinct groups as cells transition from sufficiency to limitation ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 ). This sequential regulation is facilitated, in part, by negative cooperativity between the two zinc sensing sites, one in each subunit of the Zur dimer ( Ma et al ., 2011 ).

During the initial response to zinc limitation, zinc independent paralogs of the L31 and L33 ribosomal proteins (L31* and L33* r-proteins, respectively) are expressed ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 , Gaballa et al ., 2002 , Nanamiya et al ., 2004 ). The ribosome is proposed to contain 6–8 equivalents of zinc ( Hensley et al ., 2011 ). Given that cells may contain >30,000 copies of the ribosome during rapid growth, the ribosome represents a substantial zinc storage pool. Two of these zinc containing r-proteins, L31 and L33, are loosely associated with the surface of the ribosome and are non-essential for translation ( Gabriel & Helmann, 2009 , Natori et al ., 2007 , Akanuma et al ., 2006 ). Expression of the Zur-regulated L31* and L33* r-proteins, which do not require zinc for function, facilitates displacement of their zinc-associated paralogs (L31 and L33) thereby enabling mobilization of ribosome-associated zinc. The expression of alternative ribosomal proteins under zinc limitation is a conserved feature in a variety of bacteria ( Panina et al ., 2003 , Mikhaylina et al ., 2018 ), and provides a fitness advantage when zinc is limited ( Gabriel & Helmann, 2009 , Blaby-Haas et al ., 2011 , Dow & Prisic, 2018 ). This mobilization response precedes the expression of high affinity uptake systems in both B. subtilis ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 ) and Salmonella Typhimurium ( Osman et al ., 2019 ).

If cells experience continued zinc starvation, cells shift their adaptive response from zinc mobilization to zinc acquisition. During this phase, cells derepress the genes encoding the ZnuABC high affinity uptake system and the YciC protein, a putative zinc metallochaperone (here renamed ZagA for Z TP a ctivated G TPase A ) ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 ). ZagA is a member of the zinc-associated subfamily 1 of the COG0523 family of G3E GTPases ( Haas et al ., 2009 ). COG0523 proteins are evolutionarily related to well characterized nickel metallochaperones, including UreG for urease and HypB for nickel hydrogenase ( Capdevila et al ., 2017 ). The functions of COG0523 proteins, which are found in all domains of life, are generally associated with the assembly or function of metalloproteins. COG0523 family metallochaperones have been identified with functions related to cobalt (CobW), iron (Nha3) and zinc (YeiR and ZigA) homeostasis ( Haas et al ., 2009 , Nairn et al ., 2016 ). However, the functions of COG0523 GTPases with respect to zinc homeostasis are poorly understood. GTPase and zinc-binding activities have been reported for both Escherichia coli YeiR and Acinetobacter baumannii ZigA( Blaby-Haas et al ., 2012 , Nairn et al ., 2016 ). ZigA is postulated to help activate a zinc-dependent histidine ammonia-lyase, HutH, which is implicated in the mobilization of a histidine-associated zinc pool ( Nairn et al ., 2016 ).

As zinc levels are depleted further and essential zinc dependent processes begin to fail, genes encoding zinc-independent functions are derepressed to compensate and allow for survival. In B. subtilis , derepression of the rpsNB gene encoding a zinc-independent S14 paralog (S14*) ensures continued ribosome synthesis if the zinc-containing S14 paralog can no longer access the zinc required for proper folding and function ( Natori et al ., 2007 ). S14 is an early assembling r-protein and is essential for de novo ribosome synthesis. Similarly, expression of FolEB, a zinc independent GTP cyclohydrolase IB (GCYH-IB), serves to replace the zinc dependent FolE ( Sankaran et al ., 2009 ). In most organisms, folate synthesis begins with a FolE (GCYH-IA) type enzyme, and the corresponding gene is typically designated folE (in Bacteria) or gch1 (mammals). However, a subset of Bacteria encode an alternate isozyme designated GCYH-IB (COG1469). The name folE2 was proposed for the genes encoding GCYH-IB proteins ( El Yacoubi et al ., 2006 ), but this does not follow accepted conventions for naming bacterial genes in which numbers refer to specific alleles ( Demerec et al ., 1966 ), and we therefore prefer folEB as the designation for this gene ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 ). This is analogous to the use of rpsNB and rpmEB for the Zur-regulated genes encoding the zinc-independent ribosomal proteins (S14* and L31*) that replace those encoded by rpsN and rpmE . The order of the adaptive response to declining zinc levels in B. subtilis is mobilization (from ribosomal proteins), acquisition (ZnuABC), and finally replacement of zinc-dependent functions (e.g. S14, FolE) with non-zinc containing paralogs (S14*, FolEB) ( Shin & Helmann, 2016 ). This same order of response is also predicted from an analysis of Zur-binding affinities in Salmonella Typhimurium ( Osman et al ., 2019 ).

Here, we demonstrate that zinc limitation results in failure of the folate biosynthetic pathway due to a loss of FolE (GCYH-IA) activity, and this results in a transient purine auxotrophy that can be partially overcome by the eventual derepression of folEB encoding FolEB (GCYH-IB). At the onset of zinc limitation, the purine biosynthetic intermediate 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR), also known as ZMP, accumulates and is known to be phosphorylated to ZTP. The Zur-regulated metallochaperone ZagA is activated by ZTP to bind FolE, and this interaction likely allows delivery of zinc to FolE to sustain folate synthesis. These results suggest that a subset of zinc-associated COG0523 proteins are activated by ZTP, rather than GTP. We propose the name ZagA for these ZTP-activated GTPases, and suggest that they represent a physiologically relevant ZTP-receptor protein.

Discussion

Accumulation of Z nucleotides as a result of folate limitation has been linked to diverse metabolic consequences. In mammals, ZMP (or AICAR) is able to inhibit the proliferation of many types of cancer cells due to the activation of AMP-activated protein kinase, a regulator of the cellular response to metabolic imbalances ( Rattan et al ., 2005 ). In bacteria, ZMP is known to be an allosteric inhibitor of enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis (fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase) and coenzyme A biosynthesis (pantoate β-alanine ligase) ( Bazurto & Downs, 2014 , Dougherty et al ., 2006 ). However, the impact of ZTP, the triphosphorylated ZMP derivative, on cellular physiology is less well understood.

Over 30 years ago, ZTP was proposed to act as a signal of 10f-THF deficiency ( Bochner & Ames, 1982 ). Only recently, with the recent discovery of the ZMP/ZTP sensing pfl riboswitch, was ZTP accumulation shown to influence purine and folate biosynthesis gene expression ( Kim et al ., 2015 ). To date, no protein target for ZTP has been identified. Here, we describe a role for the ZTP alarmone in activation of the ZagA zinc metallochaperone. ZagA is a ZTPase, and we suggest that ZTP is likely required for delivery of zinc to FolE, as supported by our bacterial two-hybrid studies, and perhaps to other client proteins.

The role of Z nucleotides is coordinated with the transcriptional response (regulated by Zur in B. subtilis ) to zinc limitation ( Fig 7 ). When B. subtilis experiences zinc deficiency, folate biosynthesis begins to fail due to a decrease in the activity of the zinc dependent FolE and this results in accumulation of ZMP/ZTP. Concurrently, the ZagA metallochaperone is derepressed which can respond to ZTP by binding FolE, presumably for zinc delivery, thereby allowing for continued FolE activity and a restoration of folate biosynthesis. Eventually, as cells transitions from zinc deficiency to limitation, expression of the folEB -encoded, zinc-independent isozyme (GCYH-IB) allows for continued folate biosynthesis even as FolE fails. Biochemical studies reveal that FolEB functions with a variety of divalent ions ( Paranagama et al ., 2017 , Sankaran et al ., 2009 ). Maximal activity of B. subtilis FolEB was obtained with 500 μM Mn(II) in vitro , but this is well above physiological levels of free Mn(II) ( Helmann, 2014 ). Since B. subtilis FolEB also has high activity (43% of maximal activity) with 100 μM Mg(II), and free Mg(II) levels in the cell are in excess of 3 mM ( Dann et al ., 2007 ), we infer that FolEB is likely a Mg-enzyme in cells.

Metallochaperones play a central role in metal homeostasis by delivering metal cofactors to their cognate proteins, thereby providing metal specificity as well as preventing toxicity associated with free cytosolic metal ions ( Capdevila et al ., 2017 ). The ZagA zinc metallochaperone belongs to subfamily 1 of the COG0523 family of G3E GTPases, proteins associated with the maturation of metal dependent proteins. COG0523 proteins are related to well characterized metallochaperones for nickel, including UreG (for urease) and HypB (for hydrogenase). The first characterized COG0523 protein characterized was Pseudomonas denitrificans CobW, which is proposed to contribute to the delivery of cobalt into the cobalamin (Vitamin B12) cofactor ( Crouzet et al ., 1991 ). A second class of COG0523 proteins is comprised of nitrile hydratase activators that facilitate the hydration of nitriles to amides by enzymes utilizing either iron or cobalt ( Nojiri et al ., 1999 ).

The third class of COG0523 proteins is related to zinc homeostasis as hinted by their regulation by the zinc sensing metalloregulator, Zur. ZigA, a Zur regulated COG0523 protein from A. baumanni , is suggested to deliver zinc to histidine lyase thereby modulating cellular histidine levels, an intercellular zinc buffer ( Nairn et al ., 2016 ). Recent results suggest that A. baumanni zigA mutants grown in conditions of zinc and iron depletion, as imposed by calprotectin, experience flavin rather than folate limitation. Flavin synthesis in this organism can be initiated by RibA, a Zn-dependent GTP cyclohydrolase II (GCYH-II), which appears to fail under conditions of zinc limitation ( Wang et al ., 2019 ). However, whether ZigA helps to metallate RibA and/or other specific client proteins is not yet established.

Our data suggest that the B. subtilis COG0523 protein, ZagA, is able to hydrolyse ZTP, as well as GTP ( Fig 4B ). Under folate limiting conditions in Salmonella Typhimurium, ZMP accumulates dramatically and phosphorylation results in ZTP which accumulates to levels comparable to GTP ( Bochner & Ames, 1982 ). This suggests that ZagA and related metallochaperones may function with either GTP or ZTP in vivo . We speculate that as Z nucleotide levels accumulate under zinc limiting conditions, and prior to the derepression of folEB , ZagA utilizes ZTP to facilitate recognition of the client protein FolE, as suggested by bacterial two hybrid experiments. As zinc levels fall further, FolE eventually fails and folate biosynthesis is only restored upon folEB derepression. This then leads to a decrease in Z nucleotide levels ( Fig 3B ). Whether or not ZagA continues to function as a metallochaperone (perhaps using GTP rather than ZTP) under these conditions is unknown.

Genomic analysis offers insight into the cellular processes where COG0523 metallochaperones such as ZagA and ZigA may be required. COG0523 proteins are often encoded near or within operons containing paralogs of zinc-dependent proteins ( Haas et al ., 2009 ). Interestingly, the ZagA client protein is not the GCYH-IB enzyme encoded by folEB , which is often located close to zagA genes, but rather the zinc containing FolE protein ( Fig 5A ). In other organisms, proteins predicted to fail under zinc starvation include those involved in heme, flavin, pyrimidine, and amino acid biosynthesis ( Mikhaylina et al ., 2018 ). For instance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa encodes DksA2, a zinc independent paralog of DksA, which is an RNAP binding transcription factor required for appropriate response to amino acid starvation (the “stringent” response) ( Blaby-Haas et al ., 2011 ). DksA contains a structural zinc binding site, whereas DksA2 does not. Thus, DksA2 can functionally substitute for DksA under conditions of zinc limitation or thiol stress ( Crawford et al ., 2016 , Henard et al ., 2014 ). By analogy with our observation that ZagA interacts with FolE, it is reasonable to hypothesize that a P. aeruginosa COG0523 protein may interact with the zinc containing DksA to ensure that the cell can mount an effective stringent response. Additionally, the link between DksA and COG0523 proteins also suggests a possible role for the alarmone, guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp) in the response to zinc limitation. Thus, the processes that fail as zinc levels become limiting for growth will likely be organism dependent and the proper delivery of zinc to the most critical client proteins may be determined by both the expression of specific COG0523 GTPases and their ability to respond to cellular effectors such as ZTP and perhaps other nucleotide alarmones.
