---
pmid: '12553664'
title: A novel phospholipid-binding protein from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
  with dual binding specificities for the transport GTPase Ypt7p and the Sec1-related
  Vps33p.
authors:
- Lazar T
- Scheglmann D
- Gallwitz D
journal: Eur J Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00290
---

# A novel phospholipid-binding protein from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with dual binding specificities for the transport GTPase Ypt7p and the Sec1-related Vps33p.
**Authors:** Lazar T, Scheglmann D, Gallwitz D
**Journal:** Eur J Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1078/0171-9335-00290](https://doi.org/10.1078/0171-9335-00290)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;81(12):635-46. doi: 10.1078/0171-9335-00290.

A novel phospholipid-binding protein from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
with dual binding specificities for the transport GTPase Ypt7p and the 
Sec1-related Vps33p.

Lazar T(1), Scheglmann D, Gallwitz D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

The gene product of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae open reading frame YDR229w 
(named IVY1 for: Interacting with Vps33p and Ypt7p) was found to interact with 
both the GTPase Ypt7p and the Sec1-related Vps33 protein. While deletion of IVY1 
does not lead to any recognized change in phenotype, overexpression of Ivy1p 
leads to fragmentation of the vacuole, missorting of the vacuolar enzyme 
carboxypeptidase Y (CPY) to the exterior of the cell, and an accumulation of 
multivesicular bodies inside the cell. All effects caused by the overexpression 
of Ivy1p can be reset by simultaneously raising the amount of Vps33p. This 
suppression activity of Vps33p suggests that Ivy1p and Vps33p at least partially 
counteract the action of each other in the cell. The intracellular level of 
Ivy1p increases in cells approaching stationary growth phase at which part of 
the protein is located at the rim of the vacuole. In addition to its specific 
interactions with members of two regulatory protein families, Ivy1p in vitro 
shows a marked propensity for binding phospholipids with high affinity.

DOI: 10.1078/0171-9335-00290
PMID: 12553664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
