---
pmid: '9392419'
title: Post-translational regulation of mevalonate kinase by intermediates of the
  cholesterol and nonsterol isoprene biosynthetic pathways.
authors:
- Hinson DD
- Chambliss KL
- Toth MJ
- Tanaka RD
- Gibson KM
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Post-translational regulation of mevalonate kinase by intermediates of the cholesterol and nonsterol isoprene biosynthetic pathways.
**Authors:** Hinson DD, Chambliss KL, Toth MJ, Tanaka RD, Gibson KM
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (1997)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 1997 Nov;38(11):2216-23.

Post-translational regulation of mevalonate kinase by intermediates of the 
cholesterol and nonsterol isoprene biosynthetic pathways.

Hinson DD(1), Chambliss KL, Toth MJ, Tanaka RD, Gibson KM.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX 
75226, USA.

To assess the potential for feedback inhibition by isoprene intermediates in the 
cholesterol and nonsterol isoprene biosynthetic pathway, we expressed human 
cDNAs encoding mevalonate kinase (MKase), phosphomevalonate kinase (PMKase), and 
mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase (MDDase) as fusion proteins in Escherichia 
coli DH5alpha, and purified these proteins by affinity chromatography. Several 
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated isoprenes were analyzed as inhibitors of 
the enzymes using a standard spectrophotometric assay. Of the three proteins, 
only MKase was inhibited through competitive interaction at the ATP-binding 
site. The intermediates studied (and their relative inhibitory capacity) were: 
geranylgeranyl-diphosphate (GGPP, C20) > farnesyl-diphosphate (FPP, C15) > 
geranyl-diphosphate (GPP, C10) > isopentenyl-diphosphate (IPP, C5) > or = 
3,3-dimethylallyl-diphosphate (DMAPP, C5) > farnesol (C15) > dolichol-phosphate 
(DP, C(80-100)). Mevalonate-diphosphate, geraniol, and dolichol were not 
inhibitors. Our data further define the spectrum of physiologic inhibitors of 
MKase, and provide the first evidence for feedback inhibition of MKase by a 
nonsterol isoprene produced by the branched pathway, dolichol-phosphate. These 
results provide additional evidence that MKase may occupy a central regulatory 
role in the control of cholesterol and nonsterol isoprene biosynthesis.

PMID: 9392419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
