---
pmid: '10637769'
title: Phosphoserine aminotransferase, the second step-catalyzing enzyme for serine
  biosynthesis.
authors:
- Basurko MJ
- Marche M
- Darriet M
- Cassaigne A
journal: IUBMB Life
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/713803557
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phosphoserine aminotransferase, the second step-catalyzing enzyme for serine biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Basurko MJ, Marche M, Darriet M, Cassaigne A
**Journal:** IUBMB Life (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1080/713803557](https://doi.org/10.1080/713803557)

## Abstract

1. IUBMB Life. 1999 Nov;48(5):525-9. doi: 10.1080/713803557.

Phosphoserine aminotransferase, the second step-catalyzing enzyme for serine 
biosynthesis.

Basurko MJ(1), Marche M, Darriet M, Cassaigne A.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie Médicale et Biologie Moléculaire, Université Victor 
Segalen, Bordeaux, France.

As a step toward analyzing the serine biosynthetic pathway in mammals, we have 
studied the properties of phosphoserine aminotransferase, the second 
step-catalyzing enzyme. The K(m) values for 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate and 
L-phosphoserine are 5 and 35 microM, respectively, and those for glutamate and 
alpha-ketoglutarate are 1.2 and 0.8 mM, respectively. The product inhibition 
studies strengthened the support for a ping-pong mechanism and allowed 
evaluation of Ki values for the four substrates. The equilibrium constant 
evaluated from the kinetic parameters is approximately 40. Additionally, some 
physical properties relative to the bound coenzyme and the secondary structure 
were investigated. The results are consistent with a structural relationship 
between the Escherichia coli enzyme and the mammalian enzyme. The mammalian 
enzyme has specific kinetic parameters, the determination of which is a 
prerequisite to analyzing the serine biosynthetic pathway in mammals.

DOI: 10.1080/713803557
PMID: 10637769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
