---
pmid: '18952847'
title: Mouse and human phenotypes indicate a critical conserved role for ERK2 signaling
  in neural crest development.
authors:
- Newbern J
- Zhong J
- Wickramasinghe RS
- Li X
- Wu Y
- Samuels I
- Cherosky N
- Karlo JC
- O'Loughlin B
- Wikenheiser J
- Gargesha M
- Doughman YQ
- Charron J
- Ginty DD
- Watanabe M
- Saitta SC
- Snider WD
- Landreth GE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2579387
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0805239105
---

# Mouse and human phenotypes indicate a critical conserved role for ERK2 signaling in neural crest development.
**Authors:** Newbern J, Zhong J, Wickramasinghe RS, Li X, Wu Y, Samuels I, Cherosky N, Karlo JC, O'Loughlin B, Wikenheiser J, Gargesha M, Doughman YQ, Charron J, Ginty DD, Watanabe M, Saitta SC, Snider WD, Landreth GE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0805239105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805239105)
**PMC:** [PMC2579387](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2579387/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 4;105(44):17115-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0805239105. Epub 2008 Oct 24.

Mouse and human phenotypes indicate a critical conserved role for ERK2 signaling 
in neural crest development.

Newbern J(1), Zhong J, Wickramasinghe RS, Li X, Wu Y, Samuels I, Cherosky N, 
Karlo JC, O'Loughlin B, Wikenheiser J, Gargesha M, Doughman YQ, Charron J, Ginty 
DD, Watanabe M, Saitta SC, Snider WD, Landreth GE.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, 
USA.

Disrupted ERK1/2 (MAPK3/MAPK1) MAPK signaling has been associated with several 
developmental syndromes in humans; however, mutations in ERK1 or ERK2 have not 
been described. We demonstrate haplo-insufficient ERK2 expression in patients 
with a novel approximately 1 Mb micro-deletion in distal 22q11.2, a region that 
includes ERK2. These patients exhibit conotruncal and craniofacial anomalies 
that arise from perturbation of neural crest development and exhibit defects 
comparable to the DiGeorge syndrome spectrum. Remarkably, these defects are 
replicated in mice by conditional inactivation of ERK2 in the developing neural 
crest. Inactivation of upstream elements of the ERK cascade (B-Raf and C-Raf, 
MEK1 and MEK2) or a downstream effector, the transcription factor serum response 
factor resulted in analogous developmental defects. Our findings demonstrate 
that mammalian neural crest development is critically dependent on a 
RAF/MEK/ERK/serum response factor signaling pathway and suggest that the 
craniofacial and cardiac outflow tract defects observed in patients with a 
distal 22q11.2 micro-deletion are explained by deficiencies in neural crest 
autonomous ERK2 signaling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0805239105
PMCID: PMC2579387
PMID: 18952847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
