---
pmid: '7827495'
title: Reduction of tomato polygalacturonase beta subunit expression affects pectin
  solubilization and degradation during fruit ripening.
authors:
- Watson CF
- Zheng L
- DellaPenna D
journal: Plant Cell
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC160548
doi: 10.1105/tpc.6.11.1623
---

# Reduction of tomato polygalacturonase beta subunit expression affects pectin solubilization and degradation during fruit ripening.
**Authors:** Watson CF, Zheng L, DellaPenna D
**Journal:** Plant Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.6.11.1623](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.6.11.1623)
**PMC:** [PMC160548](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC160548/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 1994 Nov;6(11):1623-34. doi: 10.1105/tpc.6.11.1623.

Reduction of tomato polygalacturonase beta subunit expression affects pectin 
solubilization and degradation during fruit ripening.

Watson CF(1), Zheng L, DellaPenna D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson 85721.

The developmental changes that accompany tomato fruit ripening include increased 
solubilization and depolymerization of pectins due to the action of 
polygalacturonase (PG). Two PG isoenzymes can be extracted from ripe fruit: PG2, 
which is a single catalytic PG polypeptide, and PG1, which is composed of PG2 
tightly associated with a second noncatalytic protein, the beta subunit. 
Previous studies have correlated ripening-associated increases in pectin 
solubilization and depolymerization with the presence of extractable PG1 
activity, prior to the appearance of PG2, suggesting a functional role for the 
beta subunit and PG1 in pectin metabolism. To assess the function of the beta 
subunit, we produced and characterized transgenic tomatoes constitutively 
expressing a beta subunit antisense gene. Fruit from antisense lines had greatly 
reduced levels of beta subunit mRNA and protein and accumulated < 1% of their 
total extractable PG activity in ripe fruit as PG1, as compared with 25% for 
wild type. Inhibition of beta subunit expression resulted in significantly 
elevated levels of EDTA-soluble polyuronides at all stages of fruit ripening and 
a significantly higher degree of depolymerization at later ripening stages. 
Decreased beta subunit protein and extractable PG1 enzyme activity and increased 
pectin solubility and depolymerization all cosegregated with the beta subunit 
antisense transgene in T2 progeny. These results indicate (1) that PG2 is 
responsible for pectin solubilization and depolymerization in vivo and (2) that 
the beta subunit protein is not required for PG2 activity in vivo but (3) does 
play a significant role in regulating pectin metabolism in wild-type fruit by 
limiting the extent of pectin solubilization and depolymerization that can occur 
during ripening. Whether this occurs by direct interaction of the beta subunit 
with PG2 or indirectly by interaction of the beta subunit with the pectic 
substrate remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.6.11.1623
PMCID: PMC160548
PMID: 7827495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
