---
pmid: '15366765'
title: 'Comparison of molecular mechanisms mediating cell contact phenomena in model
  developmental systems: an exploration of universality.'
authors:
- Bowers-Morrow VM
- Ali SO
- Williams KL
journal: Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1017/s1464793103006389
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# Comparison of molecular mechanisms mediating cell contact phenomena in model developmental systems: an exploration of universality.
**Authors:** Bowers-Morrow VM, Ali SO, Williams KL
**Journal:** Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s1464793103006389](https://doi.org/10.1017/s1464793103006389)

## Abstract

1. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2004 Aug;79(3):611-42. doi:
10.1017/s1464793103006389.

Comparison of molecular mechanisms mediating cell contact phenomena in model 
developmental systems: an exploration of universality.

Bowers-Morrow VM(1), Ali SO, Williams KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.

Are there universal molecular mechanisms associated with cell contact phenomena 
during metazoan ontogenesis? Comparison of adhesion systems in disparate model 
systems indicates the existence of unifying principles. Requirements for 
multicellularity are (a) the construction of three-dimensional structures 
involving a crucial balance between adhesiveness and motility; and (b) the 
establishment of integration at molecular, cellular, tissue, and organismal 
levels of organization. Mechanisms for (i) cell-cell and cell-substrate 
adhesion, (ii) cell movement, (iii) cell-cell communication, (iv) cellular 
responses, (v) regulation of these processes, and (vi) their integration with 
patterning, growth, and other developmental processes are all crucial to 
metazoan development, and must have been present for the emergence and radiation 
of Metazoa. The principal unifying themes of this review are the dynamics and 
regulation of cell contact phenomena. Our knowledge of the dynamic molecular 
mechanisms underlying cell contact phenomena remains fragmentary. Here we 
examine the molecular bases of cell contact phenomena using extant model 
developmental systems (representing a wide range of phyla) including the 
simplest i.e. sponges, and the eukaryotic protist Dictyostelium discoideum, the 
more complex Drosophila melanogaster, and vertebrate systems. We discuss cell 
contact phenomena in a broad developmental context. The molecular language of 
cell contact phenomena is complex; it involves a plethora of structurally and 
functionally diverse molecules, and diverse modes of intermolecular interactions 
mediated by protein and/or carbohydrate moieties. Reasons for this are 
presumably the necessity for a high degree of specificity of intermolecular 
interactions, the requirement for a multitude of different signals, and the 
apparent requirement for an increasingly large repertoire of cell contact 
molecules in more complex developmental systems, such as the developing 
vertebrate nervous system. However, comparison of molecular models for dynamic 
adhesion in sponges and in vertebrates indicates that, in spite of significant 
differences in the details of the way specific cell-cell adhesion is mediated, 
similar principles are involved in the mechanisms employed by members of 
disparate phyla. Universal requirements are likely to include (a) rapidly 
reversible intermolecular interactions; (b) low-affinity intermolecular 
interactions with fast on-off rates; (c) the compounding of multiple 
intermolecular interactions; (d) associated regulatory signalling systems. The 
apparent widespread employment of molecular mechanisms involving cadherin-like 
cell adhesion molecules suggests the fundamental importance of cadherin function 
during development, particularly in epithelial morphogenesis, cell sorting, and 
segregation of cells.

DOI: 10.1017/s1464793103006389
PMID: 15366765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
