---
pmid: '17954556'
title: The hsp90 molecular chaperone modulates multiple telomerase activities.
authors:
- Toogun OA
- Dezwaan DC
- Freeman BC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2223280
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01417-07
---

# The hsp90 molecular chaperone modulates multiple telomerase activities.
**Authors:** Toogun OA, Dezwaan DC, Freeman BC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01417-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01417-07)
**PMC:** [PMC2223280](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2223280/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):457-67. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01417-07. Epub 2007 Oct
 22.

The hsp90 molecular chaperone modulates multiple telomerase activities.

Toogun OA(1), Dezwaan DC, Freeman BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, 
Urbana-Champaign, 601 S. Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

The Hsp90 molecular chaperone is a highly abundant eukaryotic molecular 
chaperone. While it is understood that Hsp90 modulates a significant number of 
proteins, the mechanistic contributions made by Hsp90 to a client protein 
typically are not well understood. Here we investigate the yeast Hsp90 
regulatory roles with telomerase. Telomerase lengthens chromosome termini by 
specifically associating with single-stranded telomeric DNA and appending 
nucleotides by reverse transcription. We have found that the yeast Hsp90 homolog 
Hsp82p promotes both telomerase DNA binding and nucleotide addition properties. 
By isolating telomerase from different allelic backgrounds we observed distinct 
defects. For example, in an hsp82 T101I strain telomerase displayed decreased 
nucleotide processivity, whereas both DNA binding and extension activities were 
lowered in a G170D background. The decline in telomerase DNA binding correlated 
with a loss of Hsp82p association. No matter the defect, telomerase activity was 
recovered upon Hsp82p addition. Importantly, telomere length and telomerase 
telomere occupancy was yeast Hsp90 dependent. Taken together, our results 
indicate that Hsp82p promotes telomerase DNA association and facilitates DNA 
extension once telomerase is engaged with the DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01417-07
PMCID: PMC2223280
PMID: 17954556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
