---
pmid: '12857745'
title: Structure of the ubiquitin-associated domain of p62 (SQSTM1) and implications
  for mutations that cause Paget's disease of bone.
authors:
- Ciani B
- Layfield R
- Cavey JR
- Sheppard PW
- Searle MS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307416200
---

# Structure of the ubiquitin-associated domain of p62 (SQSTM1) and implications for mutations that cause Paget's disease of bone.
**Authors:** Ciani B, Layfield R, Cavey JR, Sheppard PW, Searle MS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M307416200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M307416200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37409-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307416200. Epub 
2003 Jul 11.

Structure of the ubiquitin-associated domain of p62 (SQSTM1) and implications 
for mutations that cause Paget's disease of bone.

Ciani B(1), Layfield R, Cavey JR, Sheppard PW, Searle MS.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom.

The p62 protein (also known as SQSTM1) mediates diverse cellular functions 
including control of NFkappaB signaling and transcriptional activation. p62 
binds non-covalently to ubiquitin and co-localizes with ubiquitylated inclusions 
in a number of human protein aggregation diseases. Mutations in the gene 
encoding p62 cause Paget's disease of bone (PDB), a common disorder of the 
elderly characterized by excessive bone resorption and formation. All of the p62 
PDB mutations identified to date cluster within the C-terminal region of the 
protein, which shows low sequence identity to previously characterized 
ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domains. We report the first NMR structure of a 
recombinant polypeptide that contains the C-terminal UBA domain of the human p62 
protein (residues 387-436). This sequence, which confers multiubiquitin chain 
binding, forms a compact three-helix bundle with a structure analogous to the 
UBA domains of HHR23A but with differences in the loop regions connecting 
helices that may be involved in binding accessory proteins. We show that the 
Pro392 --> Leu PDB substitution mutation modifies the structure of the UBA 
domain by extending the N terminus of helix 1. In contrast to the p62 PDB 
deletion mutations that remove the UBA domain and ablate multiubiquitin chain 
binding, the Pro392 --> Leu substitution does not affect interaction of the UBA 
domain with multiubiquitin chains. Thus, phenotypically identical substitution 
and deletion mutations do not appear to predispose to PDB through a mechanism 
dependent on a common loss of ubiquitin chain binding by p62.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307416200
PMID: 12857745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
