---
pmid: '15916963'
title: Loss of HAUSP-mediated deubiquitination contributes to DNA damage-induced destabilization
  of Hdmx and Hdm2.
authors:
- Meulmeester E
- Maurice MM
- Boutell C
- Teunisse AF
- Ovaa H
- Abraham TE
- Dirks RW
- Jochemsen AG
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.024
---

# Loss of HAUSP-mediated deubiquitination contributes to DNA damage-induced destabilization of Hdmx and Hdm2.
**Authors:** Meulmeester E, Maurice MM, Boutell C, Teunisse AF, Ovaa H, Abraham TE, Dirks RW, Jochemsen AG
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.024)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 May 27;18(5):565-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.024.

Loss of HAUSP-mediated deubiquitination contributes to DNA damage-induced 
destabilization of Hdmx and Hdm2.

Meulmeester E(1), Maurice MM, Boutell C, Teunisse AF, Ovaa H, Abraham TE, Dirks 
RW, Jochemsen AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
P.O. Box 9503, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell. 2005 Jul 1;19(1):143-4.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein has a major role in protecting the integrity of 
the genome. In unstressed cells, p53 is maintained at low levels by the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. A balance between ubiquitin ligase activity (Hdm2, 
COP1, and Pirh2) and the ubiquitin protease activity of the Herpes 
virus-associated ubiquitin-specific protease (HAUSP) determines the half-life of 
p53. HAUSP also modulates p53 stability indirectly by deubiquitination and 
stabilization of Hdm2. The Hdmx protein affects p53 stability as well through 
its interaction with and regulation of Hdm2. Vice versa, Hdmx is a target for 
Hdm2-mediated ubiquitination and degradation. Here, we show that HAUSP also 
interacts with Hdmx, resulting in its direct deubiquitination and stabilization. 
HAUSP activity is required to maintain normal Hdmx protein levels. Therefore, 
the balance between HAUSP and Hdm2 activity determines Hdmx protein stability. 
Importantly, impaired deubiquitination of Hdmx/Hdm2 by HAUSP contributes to the 
DNA damage-induced degradation of Hdmx and transient instability of Hdm2.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.04.024
PMID: 15916963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
