---
pmid: '11462050'
title: Physical and functional interactions between the corepressor CtBP and the Epstein-Barr
  virus nuclear antigen EBNA3C.
authors:
- Touitou R
- Hickabottom M
- Parker G
- Crook T
- Allday MJ
journal: J Virol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC115013
doi: 10.1128/JVI.75.16.7749-7755.2001
---

# Physical and functional interactions between the corepressor CtBP and the Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen EBNA3C.
**Authors:** Touitou R, Hickabottom M, Parker G, Crook T, Allday MJ
**Journal:** J Virol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.75.16.7749-7755.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.75.16.7749-7755.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC115013](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC115013/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2001 Aug;75(16):7749-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.75.16.7749-7755.2001.

Physical and functional interactions between the corepressor CtBP and the 
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen EBNA3C.

Touitou R(1), Hickabottom M, Parker G, Crook T, Allday MJ.

Author information:
(1)Section of Virology and Cell Biology and Ludwig Institute for Cancer 
Research, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, St. Mary's 
Campus, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

CtBP has been shown to be a highly conserved corepressor of transcription. E1A 
and all the various transcription factors to which CtBP binds contain a 
conserved PLDLS CtBP-interacting domain, and EBNA3C includes a PLDLS motif 
(amino acids [aa] 728 to 732). Here we show that EBNA3C binds to CtBP both in 
vitro and in vivo and that the interaction requires an intact PLDLS. The C 
terminus of EBNA3C (aa 580 to 992) has modest trans-repressor activity when it 
is fused to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4, and deletion or mutation of the 
PLDLS sequence ablates this and unmasks a transactivation function within the 
fragment. However, loss of the CtBP interaction motif had little effect on the 
ability of full-length EBNA3C to repress transcription. A striking correlation 
between CtBP binding and the capacity of EBNA3C to cooperate with (Ha-)Ras in 
the immortalization and transformation of primary rat embryo fibroblasts was 
also revealed.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.75.16.7749-7755.2001
PMCID: PMC115013
PMID: 11462050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
