---
pmid: '2779654'
title: The LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP, is an apolipoprotein E-binding protein.
authors:
- Beisiegel U
- Weber W
- Ihrke G
- Herz J
- Stanley KK
journal: Nature
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/341162a0
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP, is an apolipoprotein E-binding protein.
**Authors:** Beisiegel U, Weber W, Ihrke G, Herz J, Stanley KK
**Journal:** Nature (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1038/341162a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/341162a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1989 Sep 14;341(6238):162-4. doi: 10.1038/341162a0.

The LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP, is an apolipoprotein E-binding protein.

Beisiegel U(1), Weber W, Ihrke G, Herz J, Stanley KK.

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg.

The low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) receptor is a cell-surface protein that plays 
an important part in the metabolism of cholesterol by mediating the uptake of 
LDL from plasma into cells. Although LDL particles bind to the LDL receptor 
through their apolipoprotein B (apo B) and apolipoprotein E (apo E) moieties, 
other apo E-containing particles, like chylomicron remnants, are not dependent 
on the LDL receptor for uptake into cells. Chylomicrons formed in the intestinal 
mucosa during the absorption of the products of digestion, are processed by the 
peripheral circulation by lipoprotein lipase, which catalyses the breakdown of 
triglycerides in chylomicrons to free fatty acids and glycerol. The resulting 
chylomicron remnants, which are cholesterol-rich lipoproteins, are subsequently 
taken up in the liver. A second distinct protein that binds to apo E-containing 
lipoproteins, but not to LDL, has been proposed to be the receptor mediating the 
clearance of chylomicron remnants from the plasma. This protein has a relative 
molecular mass (Mr) of 56,000 (56K). More recent studies have failed, however, 
to establish whether this protein is a cell-surface receptor. Here we describe 
crosslinking experiments in which apo E liposomes were found to bind 
specifically to the cell surface of hepG2 cells and to human liver membranes. 
The size and immunological cross-reactivity of the protein to which the 
liposomes bound was indistinguishable from that of the recently cloned and 
sequenced LDL-receptor-related protein, LRP. We therefore conclude that the LRP 
might function as an apo E receptor.

DOI: 10.1038/341162a0
PMID: 2779654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
