---
pmid: '11278756'
title: Ski-interacting protein interacts with Smad proteins to augment transforming
  growth factor-beta-dependent transcription.
authors:
- Leong GM
- Subramaniam N
- Figueroa J
- Flanagan JL
- Hayman MJ
- Eisman JA
- Kouzmenko AP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010815200
---

# Ski-interacting protein interacts with Smad proteins to augment transforming growth factor-beta-dependent transcription.
**Authors:** Leong GM, Subramaniam N, Figueroa J, Flanagan JL, Hayman MJ, Eisman JA, Kouzmenko AP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M010815200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M010815200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):18243-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M010815200. Epub
2001  Mar 6.

Ski-interacting protein interacts with Smad proteins to augment transforming 
growth factor-beta-dependent transcription.

Leong GM(1), Subramaniam N, Figueroa J, Flanagan JL, Hayman MJ, Eisman JA, 
Kouzmenko AP.

Author information:
(1)Bone & Mineral Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 
Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia. g.leong@garvan.unsw.edu.au

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling requires the action of Smad 
proteins in association with other DNA-binding factors and coactivator and 
corepressor proteins to modulate target gene transcription. Smad2 and Smad3 both 
associate with the c-Ski and Sno oncoproteins to repress transcription of Smad 
target genes via recruitment of a nuclear corepressor complex. Ski-interacting 
protein (SKIP), a nuclear hormone receptor coactivator, was examined as a 
possible modulator of transcriptional regulation of the TGF-beta-responsive 
promoter from the plasminogen activator inhibitor gene-1. SKIP augmented 
TGF-beta-dependent transactivation in contrast to Ski/Sno-dependent repression 
of this reporter. SKIP interacted with Smad2 and Smad3 proteins in vivo in yeast 
and in mammalian cells through a region of SKIP between amino acids 201-333. In 
vitro, deletion of the Mad homology domain 2 (MH2) domain of Smad3 abrogated 
SKIP binding, like Ski/Sno, but the MH2 domain of Smad3 alone was not sufficient 
for protein-protein interaction. Overexpression of SKIP partially overcame 
Ski/Sno-dependent repression, whereas Ski/Sno overexpression attenuated SKIP 
augmentation of TGF-beta-dependent transcription. Our results suggest a 
potential mechanism for transcriptional control of TGF-beta signaling that 
involves the opposing and competitive actions of SKIP and Smad MH2-interacting 
factors, such as Ski and/or Sno. Thus, SKIP appears to modulate both TGF-beta 
and nuclear hormone receptor signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M010815200
PMID: 11278756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
