---
pmid: '34681573'
title: Identification of Binding Proteins for TSC22D1 Family Proteins Using Mass Spectrometry.
authors:
- Kamimura R
- Uchida D
- Kanno SI
- Shiraishi R
- Hyodo T
- Sawatani Y
- Shimura M
- Hasegawa T
- Tsubura-Okubo M
- Yaguchi E
- Komiyama Y
- Fukumoto C
- Izumi S
- Fujita A
- Wakui T
- Kawamata H
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8536140
doi: 10.3390/ijms222010913
---

# Identification of Binding Proteins for TSC22D1 Family Proteins Using Mass Spectrometry.
**Authors:** Kamimura R, Uchida D, Kanno SI, Shiraishi R, Hyodo T, Sawatani Y, Shimura M, Hasegawa T, Tsubura-Okubo M, Yaguchi E, Komiyama Y, Fukumoto C, Izumi S, Fujita A, Wakui T, Kawamata H
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222010913](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222010913)
**PMC:** [PMC8536140](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8536140/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 9;22(20):10913. doi: 10.3390/ijms222010913.

Identification of Binding Proteins for TSC22D1 Family Proteins Using Mass 
Spectrometry.

Kamimura R(1), Uchida D(2), Kanno SI(3), Shiraishi R(1), Hyodo T(1), Sawatani 
Y(1)(4), Shimura M(1)(5), Hasegawa T(1), Tsubura-Okubo M(1)(5), Yaguchi E(1), 
Komiyama Y(1), Fukumoto C(1), Izumi S(1), Fujita A(1), Wakui T(1), Kawamata 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Dokkyo Medical University 
School of Medicine, 880 Kita-kobayashi, Shimotsuga, Mibu 321-0293, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ehime University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, Toon 791-0295, Ehime, Japan.
(3)Division of Dynamic Proteome, Institute of Development, Aging, and Cancer, 
Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Sendai 980-8575, Aobaku, Japan.
(4)Section of Dentistry, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kamitsuga General 
Hospital, 1-1033 Shimoda-machi, Kanuma 322-8550, Tochigi, Japan.
(5)Section of Dentistry and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Sano Kosei General 
Hospital, 1728 Horigomecho, Sano 327-8511, Tochigi, Japan.

TSC-22 (TGF-β stimulated clone-22) has been reported to induce differentiation, 
growth inhibition, and apoptosis in various cells. TSC-22 is a member of a 
family in which many proteins are produced from four different family genes. 
TSC-22 (corresponding to TSC22D1-2) is composed of 144 amino acids translated 
from a short variant mRNA of the TSC22D1 gene. In this study, we attempted to 
determine the intracellular localizations of the TSC22D1 family proteins 
(TSC22D1-1, TSC-22 (TSC22D1-2), and TSC22(86) (TSC22D1-3)) and identify the 
binding proteins for TSC22D1 family proteins by mass spectrometry. We determined 
that TSC22D1-1 was mostly localized in the nucleus, TSC-22 (TSC22D1-2) was 
localized in the cytoplasm, mainly in the mitochondria and translocated from the 
cytoplasm to the nucleus after DNA damage, and TSC22(86) (TSC22D1-3) was 
localized in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. We identified multiple candidates 
of binding proteins for TSC22D1 family proteins in in vitro pull-down assays and 
in vivo binding assays. Histone H1 bound to TSC-22 (TSC22D1-2) or TSC22(86) 
(TSC22D1-3) in the nucleus. Guanine nucleotide-binding protein-like 3 (GNL3), 
which is also known as nucleostemin, bound to TSC-22 (TSC22D1-2) in the nucleus. 
Further investigation of the interaction of the candidate binding proteins with 
TSC22D1 family proteins would clarify the biological roles of TSC22D1 family 
proteins in several cell systems.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222010913
PMCID: PMC8536140
PMID: 34681573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
