---
pmid: '20231292'
title: Identification and characterization of mitochondrial targeting sequence of
  human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1.
authors:
- Li M
- Zhong Z
- Zhu J
- Xiang D
- Dai N
- Cao X
- Qing Y
- Yang Z
- Xie J
- Li Z
- Baugh L
- Wang G
- Wang D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2865269
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069591
---

# Identification and characterization of mitochondrial targeting sequence of human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1.
**Authors:** Li M, Zhong Z, Zhu J, Xiang D, Dai N, Cao X, Qing Y, Yang Z, Xie J, Li Z, Baugh L, Wang G, Wang D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.069591](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.069591)
**PMC:** [PMC2865269](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2865269/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 14;285(20):14871-14881. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069591.
Epub  2010 Mar 15.

Identification and characterization of mitochondrial targeting sequence of human 
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1.

Li M(1), Zhong Z(1), Zhu J(1), Xiang D(2), Dai N(1), Cao X(1), Qing Y(1), Yang 
Z(1), Xie J(1), Li Z(2), Baugh L(3), Wang G(1), Wang D(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Center, Cancer Center, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 
400042, China.
(2)Department of Pathology of Research, Institute of Surgery, Daping Hospital, 
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400042, China.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Dallas, Irving, Texas 75062.
(4)Cancer Center, Cancer Center, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 
400042, China. Electronic address: dongwang64@hotmail.com.

Dually targeted mitochondrial proteins usually possess an unconventional 
mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS), which makes them difficult to predict by 
current bioinformatics approaches. Human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 
(APE1) plays a central role in the cellular response to oxidative stress. It is 
a dually targeted protein preferentially residing in the nucleus with 
conditional distribution in the mitochondria. However, the mitochondrial 
translocation mechanism of APE1 is not well characterized because it harbors an 
unconventional MTS that is difficult to predict by bioinformatics analysis. Two 
experimental approaches were combined in this study to identify the MTS of APE1. 
First, the interactions between the peptides from APE1 and the three purified 
translocase receptors of the outer mitochondrial membrane (Tom) were evaluated 
using a peptide array screen. Consequently, the intracellular distribution of 
green fluorescent protein-tagged, truncated, or mutated APE1 proteins was traced 
by tag detection. The results demonstrated that the only MTS of APE1 is harbored 
within residues 289-318 in the C terminus, which is normally masked by the 
intact N-terminal structure. As a dually targeted mitochondrial protein, APE1 
possesses a special distribution pattern of different subcellular targeting 
signals, the identification of which sheds light on future prediction of MTSs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.069591
PMCID: PMC2865269
PMID: 20231292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
