---
pmid: '14718572'
title: CRB3 binds directly to Par6 and regulates the morphogenesis of the tight junctions
  in mammalian epithelial cells.
authors:
- Lemmers C
- Michel D
- Lane-Guermonprez L
- Delgrossi MH
- Médina E
- Arsanto JP
- Le Bivic A
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC363137
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e03-04-0235
---

# CRB3 binds directly to Par6 and regulates the morphogenesis of the tight junctions in mammalian epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Lemmers C, Michel D, Lane-Guermonprez L, Delgrossi MH, Médina E, Arsanto JP, Le Bivic A
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e03-04-0235](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e03-04-0235)
**PMC:** [PMC363137](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC363137/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Mar;15(3):1324-33. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e03-04-0235. Epub 2004
 Jan 12.

CRB3 binds directly to Par6 and regulates the morphogenesis of the tight 
junctions in mammalian epithelial cells.

Lemmers C(1), Michel D, Lane-Guermonprez L, Delgrossi MH, Médina E, Arsanto JP, 
Le Bivic A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurogenèse et Morphogenèse au cours du Développement et chez 
l'Adulte, Unité Mixte Recherche 6156 Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Sep;23(17):3278. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-03-0191.

Crumbs is an apical transmembrane protein crucial for epithelial morphogenesis 
in Drosophila melanogaster embryos. A protein with all the characteristics for a 
Crumbs homologue has been identified from patients suffering from retinitis 
pigmentosa group 12, but this protein (CRB1) is only expressed in retina and 
some parts of the brain, both in human and mouse. Here, we describe CRB3, 
another Crumbs homologue that is preferentially expressed in epithelial tissues 
and skeletal muscles in human. CRB3 shares the conserved cytoplasmic domain with 
other Crumbs but exhibits a very short extracellular domain without the EGF- and 
laminin A-like G repeats present in the other Crumbs. CRB3 is localized to the 
apical and subapical area of epithelial cells from the mouse and human 
intestine, suggesting that it could play a role in epithelial morphogenesis. 
Indeed, expression of CRB3 or of a chimera containing the extracellular domain 
of the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR and the transmembrane and cytoplasmic 
domains of CRB3 led to a slower development of functional tight junctions in 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. This phenotype relied on the presence of CRB3 
four last amino acids (ERLI) that are involved in a direct interaction with 
Par6, a regulator of epithelial polarity and tight junction formation. Thus, 
CRB3, through its cytoplasmic domain and its interactors, plays a role in apical 
membrane morphogenesis and tight junction regulation.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e03-04-0235
PMCID: PMC363137
PMID: 14718572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
