---
pmid: '15885097'
title: Characterization of structural and catalytic differences in rat intestinal
  alkaline phosphatase isozymes.
authors:
- Harada T
- Koyama I
- Matsunaga T
- Kikuno A
- Kasahara T
- Hassimoto M
- Alpers DH
- Komoda T
journal: FEBS J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04668.x
---

# Characterization of structural and catalytic differences in rat intestinal alkaline phosphatase isozymes.
**Authors:** Harada T, Koyama I, Matsunaga T, Kikuno A, Kasahara T, Hassimoto M, Alpers DH, Komoda T
**Journal:** FEBS J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04668.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04668.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2005 May;272(10):2477-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04668.x.

Characterization of structural and catalytic differences in rat intestinal 
alkaline phosphatase isozymes.

Harada T(1), Koyama I, Matsunaga T, Kikuno A, Kasahara T, Hassimoto M, Alpers 
DH, Komoda T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, Saitama, Japan.

To understand the differences between the rat intestinal alkaline phosphatase 
isozymes rIAP-I and rIAP-II, we constructed structural models based on the 
previously determined crystal structure for human placental alkaline phosphatase 
(hPLAP). Our models of rIAP-I and rIAP-II displayed a typical alpha/beta 
topology, but the crown domain of rIAP-I contained an additional beta-sheet, 
while the embracing arm region of rIAP-II lacked the alpha-helix, when each 
model was compared to hPLAP. The representations of surface potential in the 
rIAPs were predominantly positive at the base of the active site. The 
coordinated metal at the active site was predicted to be a zinc triad in rIAP-I, 
whereas the typical combination of two zinc atoms and one magnesium atom was 
proposed for rIAP-II. Using metal-depleted extracts from rat duodenum or jejunum 
and hPLAP, we performed enzyme assays under restricted metal conditions. With 
the duodenal and jejunal extract, but not with hPLAP, enzyme activity was 
restored by the addition of zinc, whereas in nonchelated extracts, the addition 
of zinc inhibited duodenal IAP and hPLAP, but not jejunal IAP. Western blotting 
revealed that nearly all of the rIAP in the jejunum extracts was rIAP-I, whereas 
in duodenum the percentage of rIAP-I (55%) correlated with the degree of AP 
activation (60% relative to that seen with jejunal extracts). These data are 
consistent with the presence of a triad of zinc atoms at the active site of 
rIAP-I, but not rIAP-II or hPLAP. Although no differences in amino acid 
alignment in the vicinity of metal-binding site 3 were predicted between the 
rIAPs and hPLAP, the His153 residue of both rIAPs was closer to the metal 
position than that in hPLAP. Between the rIAPs, a difference was observed at 
amino acid position 317 that is indirectly related to the coordination of the 
metal at metal-binding site 3 and water molecules. These findings suggest that 
the side-chain position of His153, and the alignment of Q317, might be the major 
determinants for activation of the zinc triad in rIAP-I.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04668.x
PMID: 15885097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
