---
pmid: '1637300'
title: A recombinant human 'mini'-hexokinase is catalytically active and regulated
  by hexose 6-phosphates.
authors:
- Magnani M
- Bianchi M
- Casabianca A
- Stocchi V
- Daniele A
- Altruda F
- Ferrone M
- Silengo L
journal: Biochem J
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1132765
doi: 10.1042/bj2850193
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A recombinant human 'mini'-hexokinase is catalytically active and regulated by hexose 6-phosphates.
**Authors:** Magnani M, Bianchi M, Casabianca A, Stocchi V, Daniele A, Altruda F, Ferrone M, Silengo L
**Journal:** Biochem J (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2850193](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2850193)
**PMC:** [PMC1132765](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1132765/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1992 Jul 1;285 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):193-9. doi: 10.1042/bj2850193.

A recombinant human 'mini'-hexokinase is catalytically active and regulated by 
hexose 6-phosphates.

Magnani M(1), Bianchi M, Casabianca A, Stocchi V, Daniele A, Altruda F, Ferrone 
M, Silengo L.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Chimica Biologica Giorgio Fornaini, Università degli Studi di 
Urbino, Italy.

Mammalian hexokinase type I is a 100 kDa enzyme that has been considered to be 
evolved from an ancestral 50 kDa yeast-type hexokinase, insensitive to product 
inhibition, by gene duplication and fusion. According to this model, and based 
on many experimental data, the catalytic site is associated with the C-terminal 
half of the enzyme, although an allosteric site for the binding of glucose 
6-phosphate could be present on the N-terminal half of the molecule. We have 
isolated a cDNA clone of hexokinase from a lambda gt11 human placenta library 
comprising 2658 bp, containing a single open reading frame of 1893 nucleotides, 
which encodes a truncate form of hexokinase starting from asparagine-287 to the 
terminal serine-917. This clone was further digested with restriction enzyme 
NcoI to obtain almost only the C-terminal half of human hexokinase starting from 
methionine-455 to the terminal amino acid and was overexpressed in active form 
in Escherichia coli and purified by ion-exchange h.p.l.c. The overexpressed 
'mini'-hexokinase was found not only to catalyse glucose phosphorylation, but 
also to be inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate and other mono- and bis-phosphate 
sugars exactly like the complete mammalian enzyme. These results suggest that 
the C-terminal half of human hexokinase, in addition to the catalytic site, also 
contains the regulatory site and that the evolutionary relationship between the 
hexokinases should be reconsidered by including the appearance of a regulatory 
site before the gene duplication.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2850193
PMCID: PMC1132765
PMID: 1637300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
