---
pmid: '11568182'
title: Interaction of EVI1 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein
  (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) results in reversible acetylation of
  EVI1 and in co-localization in nuclear speckles.
authors:
- Chakraborty S
- Senyuk V
- Sitailo S
- Chi Y
- Nucifora G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106733200
---

# Interaction of EVI1 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) results in reversible acetylation of EVI1 and in co-localization in nuclear speckles.
**Authors:** Chakraborty S, Senyuk V, Sitailo S, Chi Y, Nucifora G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106733200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106733200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44936-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106733200. Epub 
2001 Sep 21.

Interaction of EVI1 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein 
(CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) results in reversible acetylation 
of EVI1 and in co-localization in nuclear speckles.

Chakraborty S(1), Senyuk V, Sitailo S, Chi Y, Nucifora G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

EVI1 is a very complex protein with two domains of zinc fingers and is 
inappropriately expressed in many types of human myeloid leukemias. Using 
reporter gene assays, several investigators showed that EVI1 is a transcription 
repressor, and recently it was shown that EVI1 interacts with the co-repressor 
carboxyl-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1). Earlier, we showed that the 
inappropriate expression of EVI1 in murine hematopoietic precursor cells leads 
to their abnormal differentiation and to increased proliferation. Using 
biochemical assays, we have identified two groups of transcription co-regulators 
that associate with EVI1 presumably to regulate gene expression. One group of 
co-regulators includes the CtBP1 and histone deacetylase. The second group 
includes the two co-activators cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding 
protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), both of which have histone 
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. All of these proteins require separate regions 
of EVI1 for efficient interaction, and they divergently affect the ability of 
EVI1 to regulate gene transcription in reporter gene assays. Confocal microscopy 
analysis shows that in the majority of the cells, EVI1 is nuclear and diffused, 
whereas in about 10% of the cells EVI1 localizes in nuclear speckles. However, 
in the presence of the added exogenous co-repressors histone deacetylase or 
CtBP1, all of the nuclei have a diffuse EVI1 staining, and the proteins do not 
appear to reside together in obvious nuclear structures. In contrast, when CBP 
or P/CAF are added, defined speckled bodies appear in the nucleus. Analysis of 
the staining pattern indicates that EVI1 and CBP or EVI1 and P/CAF are contained 
within these structures. These nuclear structures are not observed when CBP is 
substituted with a point mutant HAT-inactive CBP with which EVI1 also physically 
interacts. Finally, we show that the interaction of EVI1 with either CBP or 
P/CAF leads to acetylation of EVI1. These results suggest that the assembly of 
EVI1 in nuclear speckles requires the intact HAT activity of the co-activators.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106733200
PMID: 11568182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
