---
pmid: '16618808'
title: Cross-regulation between Notch and p63 in keratinocyte commitment to differentiation.
authors:
- Nguyen BC
- Lefort K
- Mandinova A
- Antonini D
- Devgan V
- Della Gatta G
- Koster MI
- Zhang Z
- Wang J
- Tommasi di Vignano A
- Kitajewski J
- Chiorino G
- Roop DR
- Missero C
- Dotto GP
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1472299
doi: 10.1101/gad.1406006
---

# Cross-regulation between Notch and p63 in keratinocyte commitment to differentiation.
**Authors:** Nguyen BC, Lefort K, Mandinova A, Antonini D, Devgan V, Della Gatta G, Koster MI, Zhang Z, Wang J, Tommasi di Vignano A, Kitajewski J, Chiorino G, Roop DR, Missero C, Dotto GP
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1406006](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1406006)
**PMC:** [PMC1472299](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1472299/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2006 Apr 15;20(8):1028-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.1406006.

Cross-regulation between Notch and p63 in keratinocyte commitment to 
differentiation.

Nguyen BC(1), Lefort K, Mandinova A, Antonini D, Devgan V, Della Gatta G, Koster 
MI, Zhang Z, Wang J, Tommasi di Vignano A, Kitajewski J, Chiorino G, Roop DR, 
Missero C, Dotto GP.

Author information:
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA, and Department of Biochemistry, 
University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

Notch signaling promotes commitment of keratinocytes to differentiation and 
suppresses tumorigenesis. p63, a p53 family member, has been implicated in 
establishment of the keratinocyte cell fate and/or maintenance of epithelial 
self-renewal. Here we show that p63 expression is suppressed by Notch1 
activation in both mouse and human keratinocytes through a mechanism independent 
of cell cycle withdrawal and requiring down-modulation of selected 
interferon-responsive genes, including IRF7 and/or IRF3. In turn, elevated p63 
expression counteracts the ability of Notch1 to restrict growth and promote 
differentiation. p63 functions as a selective modulator of Notch1-dependent 
transcription and function, with the Hes-1 gene as one of its direct negative 
targets. Thus, a complex cross-talk between Notch and p63 is involved in the 
balance between keratinocyte self-renewal and differentiation.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1406006
PMCID: PMC1472299
PMID: 16618808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
