---
pmid: '41296734'
title: ATG2 is a triglyceride transfer protein.
authors:
- Korfhage JL
- Elhan H
- Wan N
- Lu Y
- Kauffmann L
- Pilli G
- Fuller DM
- Rios AM
- Reinisch KM
- Maddipati KR
- Thiam AR
- Melia TJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC12685032
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2517469122
---

# ATG2 is a triglyceride transfer protein.
**Authors:** Korfhage JL, Elhan H, Wan N, Lu Y, Kauffmann L, Pilli G, Fuller DM, Rios AM, Reinisch KM, Maddipati KR, Thiam AR, Melia TJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2517469122](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2517469122)
**PMC:** [PMC12685032](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12685032/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2025 Dec 2;122(48):e2517469122. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2517469122. Epub 2025 Nov 26.

ATG2 is a triglyceride transfer protein.

Korfhage JL(1), Elhan H(#)(2), Wan N(#)(1), Lu Y(#)(1), Kauffmann L(2), Pilli 
G(3), Fuller DM(1), Rios AM(1), Reinisch KM(1), Maddipati KR(3), Thiam AR(2), 
Melia TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510.
(2)Laboratoire de Physique de l'École Normale Supérieure, École Normale 
Supérieure, Université Paris Sciences et Lettres, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, 
Université Paris Cité, Paris 75005, France.
(3)Department of Pathology, Lipidomics Core Facility, Wayne State University, 
Detroit, MI 48202.
(#)Contributed equally

Bridge-like lipid transfer proteins (BLTPs) are established to function in 
phospholipid transport between bilayers at organelle-organelle contact sites. 
However, the BLTP ATG2A also associates with lipid droplets in cells, which 
present a unique phospholipid monolayer topology and which are composed of many 
additional types of lipids. Whether BLTPs are active in this environment and 
which lipid species are substrates for transport has been unknown. Here, we use 
synthetic organelles with bilayers (liposomes), monolayers (artificial lipid 
droplets), or a mixture of the two membrane structures to demonstrate the tight 
binding of ATG2 specifically to monolayers via its collection of COOH-terminal 
amphipathic helices. This stable binding enables ATG2 to transfer phospholipids 
much more effectively. Unexpectedly, the neutral lipid triacylglycerol is also 
rapidly transported, with kinetics similar to those of phospholipid transport. 
Lipidomics of purified ATG2A suggests that a similar transfer of both 
phospholipids and triacylglycerol occurs in cells. Our work implies that BLTPs 
likely collect on LDs as part of a broad lipid homeostasis program, which will 
include the movement of both phospholipids and neutral lipids.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2517469122
PMCID: PMC12685032
PMID: 41296734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.
