---
pmid: '11756565'
title: 'Cloning and characterization of a human orthologue of testis-specific succinyl
  CoA: 3-oxo acid CoA transferase (Scot-t) cDNA.'
authors:
- Tanaka H
- Kohroki J
- Iguchi N
- Onishi M
- Nishimune Y
journal: Mol Hum Reprod
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/molehr/8.1.16
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and characterization of a human orthologue of testis-specific succinyl CoA: 3-oxo acid CoA transferase (Scot-t) cDNA.
**Authors:** Tanaka H, Kohroki J, Iguchi N, Onishi M, Nishimune Y
**Journal:** Mol Hum Reprod (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/molehr/8.1.16](https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/8.1.16)

## Abstract

1. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Jan;8(1):16-23. doi: 10.1093/molehr/8.1.16.

Cloning and characterization of a human orthologue of testis-specific succinyl 
CoA: 3-oxo acid CoA transferase (Scot-t) cDNA.

Tanaka H(1), Kohroki J, Iguchi N, Onishi M, Nishimune Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Science for Laboratory Animal Experimentation, Research 
Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita City, 
Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Succinyl CoA: 3-oxo acid CoA transferase (scot; EC 2.8.3.5) is a key enzyme for 
metabolism of ketone bodies. Previously, we have cloned a testis-specific 
succinyl CoA: 3-oxo acid CoA transferase (scot-t) cDNA from a subtracted cDNA 
library of mouse testis and demonstrated its expression to be specific to late 
haploid male germ cells. In this study, the human orthologue of mouse scot-t was 
cloned and characterized. The entire coding region of the mRNA and the deduced 
amino acid sequence of human Scot-t (h-Scot-t) showed 75.4 and 75.8% identity 
with mouse scot-t respectively. The mRNA was exclusively expressed in the 
testis, and the protein was localized to the midpiece of ejaculated spermatozoa 
where mitochondria exist. We showed that the h-Scot-t gene was intronless by 
using a polymerase chain reaction technique and that a non-functional 
pseudogene, 98% similar to h-Scot-t, was also located on the human genome 
(1p33-34.3). Furthermore, the genomic structure of the actual h-Scot-t 
transcription unit was found to be located in an intron (1p34.1-35.3) of the 
bone morphogenetic protein 8 (BMP8) gene. In conclusion, we have demonstrated 
that h-Scot-t is a single intronless gene specifically expressed in the testis.

DOI: 10.1093/molehr/8.1.16
PMID: 11756565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
