---
pmid: '27440897'
title: MORC3, a Component of PML Nuclear Bodies, Has a Role in Restricting Herpes
  Simplex Virus 1 and Human Cytomegalovirus.
authors:
- Sloan E
- Orr A
- Everett RD
journal: J Virol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5021396
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00621-16
---

# MORC3, a Component of PML Nuclear Bodies, Has a Role in Restricting Herpes Simplex Virus 1 and Human Cytomegalovirus.
**Authors:** Sloan E, Orr A, Everett RD
**Journal:** J Virol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00621-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00621-16)
**PMC:** [PMC5021396](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5021396/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2016 Sep 12;90(19):8621-33. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00621-16. Print 2016 Oct
 1.

MORC3, a Component of PML Nuclear Bodies, Has a Role in Restricting Herpes 
Simplex Virus 1 and Human Cytomegalovirus.

Sloan E(1), Orr A(2), Everett RD(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, 
United Kingdom elizabeth.sloan@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, 
United Kingdom.

We previously reported that MORC3, a protein associated with promyelocytic 
leukemia nuclear bodies (PML NBs), is a target of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) 
ICP0-mediated degradation (E. Sloan, et al., PLoS Pathog 11:e1005059, 2015, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005059). Since it is well known that 
certain other components of the PML NB complex play an important role during an 
intrinsic immune response to HSV-1 and are also degraded or inactivated by ICP0, 
here we further investigate the role of MORC3 during HSV-1 infection. We 
demonstrate that MORC3 has antiviral activity during HSV-1 infection and that 
this antiviral role is counteracted by ICP0. In addition, MORC3's antiviral role 
extends to wild-type (wt) human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, as its 
plaque-forming efficiency increased in MORC3-depleted cells. We found that MORC3 
is recruited to sites associated with HSV-1 genomes after their entry into the 
nucleus of an infected cell, and in wt infections this is followed by its 
association with ICP0 foci prior to its degradation. The RING finger domain of 
ICP0 was required for degradation of MORC3, and we confirmed that no other HSV-1 
protein is required for the loss of MORC3. We also found that MORC3 is required 
for fully efficient recruitment of PML, Sp100, hDaxx, and γH2AX to sites 
associated with HSV-1 genomes entering the host cell nucleus. This study further 
unravels the intricate ways in which HSV-1 has evolved to counteract the host 
immune response and reveals a novel function for MORC3 during the host intrinsic 
immune response.
IMPORTANCE: Herpesviruses have devised ways to manipulate the host intrinsic 
immune response to promote their own survival and persistence within the human 
population. One way in which this is achieved is through degradation or 
functional inactivation of PML NB proteins, which are recruited to viral genomes 
in order to repress viral transcription. Because MORC3 associates with PML NBs 
in uninfected cells and is a target for HSV-1-mediated degradation, we 
investigated the role of MORC3 during HSV-1 infection. We found that MORC3 is 
also recruited to viral HSV-1 genomes, and importantly it contributes to the 
fully efficient recruitment of PML, hDaxx, Sp100, and γH2AX to these sites. 
Depletion of MORC3 resulted in an increase in ICP0-null HSV-1 and wt HCMV 
replication and plaque formation; therefore, this study reveals that MORC3 is an 
antiviral factor which plays an important role during HSV-1 and HCMV infection.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00621-16
PMCID: PMC5021396
PMID: 27440897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
