---
pmid: '1322798'
title: The SH2 and SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases
  to ras signaling.
authors:
- Lowenstein EJ
- Daly RJ
- Batzer AG
- Li W
- Margolis B
- Lammers R
- Ullrich A
- Skolnik EY
- Bar-Sagi D
- Schlessinger J
journal: Cell
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90167-b
---

# The SH2 and SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases to ras signaling.
**Authors:** Lowenstein EJ, Daly RJ, Batzer AG, Li W, Margolis B, Lammers R, Ullrich A, Skolnik EY, Bar-Sagi D, Schlessinger J
**Journal:** Cell (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(92)90167-b](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(92)90167-b)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1992 Aug 7;70(3):431-42. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90167-b.

The SH2 and SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases 
to ras signaling.

Lowenstein EJ(1), Daly RJ, Batzer AG, Li W, Margolis B, Lammers R, Ullrich A, 
Skolnik EY, Bar-Sagi D, Schlessinger J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University Medical Center, New York 
10016.

A cDNA clone encoding a novel, widely expressed protein (called growth factor 
receptor-bound protein 2 or GRB2) containing one src homology 2 (SH2) domain and 
two SH3 domains was isolated. Immunoblotting experiments indicate that GRB2 
associates with tyrosine-phosphorylated epidermal growth factor receptors 
(EGFRs) and platelet-derived growth factor receptors (PDGFRs) via its SH2 
domain. Interestingly, GRB2 exhibits striking structural and functional homology 
to the C. elegans protein sem-5. It has been shown that sem-5 and two other 
genes called let-23 (EGFR like) and let-60 (ras like) lie along the same signal 
transduction pathway controlling C. elegans vulval induction. To examine whether 
GRB2 is also a component of ras signaling in mammalian cells, microinjection 
studies were performed. While injection of GRB2 or H-ras proteins alone into 
quiescent rat fibroblasts did not have mitogenic effect, microinjection of GRB2 
together with H-ras protein stimulated DNA synthesis. These results suggest that 
GRB2/sem-5 plays a crucial role in a highly conserved mechanism for growth 
factor control of ras signaling.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90167-b
PMID: 1322798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
