---
pmid: '7926755'
title: The Aspergillus nidulans fluG gene is required for production of an extracellular
  developmental signal and is related to prokaryotic glutamine synthetase I.
authors:
- Lee BN
- Adams TH
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.8.6.641
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Aspergillus nidulans fluG gene is required for production of an extracellular developmental signal and is related to prokaryotic glutamine synthetase I.
**Authors:** Lee BN, Adams TH
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.8.6.641](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.6.641)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1994 Mar 15;8(6):641-51. doi: 10.1101/gad.8.6.641.

The Aspergillus nidulans fluG gene is required for production of an 
extracellular developmental signal and is related to prokaryotic glutamine 
synthetase I.

Lee BN(1), Adams TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A & M University, College Station 77843.

Mutations in the Aspergillus nidulans fluG gene disrupt the programmed induction 
of asexual sporulation and result in formation of fluffy colonies that are 
characterized by undifferentiated cotton-like masses of vegetative cells. We 
show that the fluG mutant phenotype is suppressed when fluG mutant colonies are 
grown next to wild-type colonies even if the two strains are separated by 
dialysis membrane with a 6000- to 8000-dalton pore size. fluG encodes a 
cytoplasmically localized approximately 96,000-dalton polypeptide that is 
present at relatively constant levels during vegetative growth and following 
developmental induction. Sequence analysis of fluG demonstrated that the 
carboxy-terminal 436 amino acids predicted by the 864-codon FluG open reading 
frame shares approximately 28% identity with GSI-type prokaryotic glutamine 
synthetases. We consider it unlikely that FluG functions in synthesis of 
glutamine but instead propose that FluG functions as a GSI-related enzyme in 
synthesizing an extracellular signal directing asexual sporulation and perhaps 
other aspects of colony growth. The relationships between fluG and other genes 
identified by fluffy mutants are discussed.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.8.6.641
PMID: 7926755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
