---
pmid: '2541251'
title: DNA sequences of two expressed nuclear genes for human mitochondrial ADP/ATP
  translocase.
authors:
- Cozens AL
- Runswick MJ
- Walker JE
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90477-4
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# DNA sequences of two expressed nuclear genes for human mitochondrial ADP/ATP translocase.
**Authors:** Cozens AL, Runswick MJ, Walker JE
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0022-2836(89)90477-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(89)90477-4)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 1989 Mar 20;206(2):261-80. doi: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90477-4.

DNA sequences of two expressed nuclear genes for human mitochondrial ADP/ATP 
translocase.

Cozens AL(1), Runswick MJ, Walker JE.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, U.K.

Mitochondrial ADP/ATP translocase is an abundant component of the inner 
membrane. It carries ATP from the matrix into the intermembrane space and 
transports ADP back. Clones coding for two different but related forms of the 
protein have been characterized from bovine cDNA libraries. The corresponding 
genes are referred to as T1 and T2 and they are expressed at different levels in 
bovine tissues. The bovine cDNAs have been used to isolate clones from a human 
genomic library that contain the human T1 and T2 genes. Two nucleotide sequences 
of 9756 and 8625 base-pairs have been determined and they contain the 
transcribed regions of the human T1 and T2 genes which cover 4.2 and 5.9 kb of 
the human genome, respectively (1 kb = 10(3) base-pairs). Both genes are split 
into four exons. The introns in each gene are at exactly equivalent locations 
and interrupt sequences coding for segments of the protein that are thought to 
be extramembranous loops linking transmembrane segments. The proteins encoded in 
the genes differ in 32 amino acids out of 297, and in common with other ADP/ATP 
translocases, neither has a processed mitochondrial import sequence. The human 
T1 and T2 genes are members of a larger gene family that includes a third 
expressed gene T3 and also at least two spliced pseudogenes. Other studies have 
shown that T3 is expressed in liver and HeLa cells, and different levels of 
transcripts of T1 have been found in various tissues. A notable feature of the 
T1 and T2 genes, that may influence their expression, is that "CpG-rich islands" 
are associated with their 5' ends. That of the T2 gene contains numerous 
potential sites for binding the mammalian transcription factor SP1, but no TATA 
or CCAAT sequences are evident near to its 5' end, although these latter 
features are associated with the human T1 gene. The two DNA sequence also 
contain many short interspersed repetitive sequences including 11 Alu repeats, 
and a novel element about 236 base-pairs in length, which is repeated in a 
six-fold tandem array in intron B of the T2 gene.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-2836(89)90477-4
PMID: 2541251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
