---
pmid: '23495099'
title: Oct4 interaction with Hmgb2 regulates Akt signaling and pluripotency.
authors:
- Campbell PA
- Rudnicki MA
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/stem.1365
---

# Oct4 interaction with Hmgb2 regulates Akt signaling and pluripotency.
**Authors:** Campbell PA, Rudnicki MA
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.1365](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1365)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1107-20. doi: 10.1002/stem.1365.

Oct4 interaction with Hmgb2 regulates Akt signaling and pluripotency.

Campbell PA(1), Rudnicki MA.

Author information:
(1)Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

In pluripotent stem cells, bivalent domains mark the promoters of 
developmentally regulated loci. Histones in these chromatin regions contain 
coincident epigenetic modifications of gene activation and repression. How these 
marks are transmitted to maintain the pluripotent state in daughter progeny 
remains poorly understood. Our study demonstrates that Oct4 post-translational 
modifications (PTMs) form a positive feedback loop, which promotes Akt 
activation and interaction with Hmgb2 and the SET complex. This preserves 
H3K27me3 modifications in daughter progeny and maintains the pluripotent gene 
expression signature in murine embryonic stem cells. However, if Oct4 is not 
phosphorylated, a negative feedback loop is formed that inactivates Akt and 
initiates the DNA damage response. Oct4 sumoylation then is required for G1/S 
progression and transmission of the repressive H3K27me3 mark. Therefore, PTMs 
regulate the ability of Oct4 to direct the spatio-temporal formation of 
activating and repressing complexes to orchestrate chromatin plasticity and 
pluripotency. Our work highlights a previously unappreciated role for Oct4 
PTM-dependent interactions in maintaining restrained Akt signaling and promoting 
a primitive epigenetic state.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1365
PMID: 23495099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
