---
pmid: '1378832'
title: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived relaxing
  factor/nitric oxide synthase.
authors:
- Janssens SP
- Shimouchi A
- Quertermous T
- Bloch DB
- Bloch KD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived relaxing factor/nitric oxide synthase.
**Authors:** Janssens SP, Shimouchi A, Quertermous T, Bloch DB, Bloch KD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jul 25;267(21):14519-22.

Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived relaxing 
factor/nitric oxide synthase.

Janssens SP(1), Shimouchi A, Quertermous T, Bloch DB, Bloch KD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston 02114.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 1992 Nov 5;267(31):22694.

Nitric oxide, which accounts for the biological activity of endothelium-derived 
relaxing factor (EDRF), is synthesized in endothelial cells from L-arginine by 
nitric oxide synthase (NOS). We report here the cloning and functional 
expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelial NOS. Oligonucleotides 
corresponding to amino acid sequences shared by cytochrome P450 reductase and 
the recently identified brain NOS were synthesized to amplify a partial cDNA 
encoding a bovine endothelial cell NOS-related protein. This partial cDNA was 
used to isolate a cDNA encoding a human vascular endothelial NOS. The translated 
human protein is 1294 amino acids long and shares 52% of its amino acid sequence 
with brain NOS. Using RNA blot hybridization, abundant endothelial NOS mRNA was 
detected in unstimulated human umbilical vein endothelial cells. To determine 
the functional activity of the endothelial protein, we ligated the cDNA into an 
expression vector and transfected it into NIH3T3 cells. Cells expressing this 
cDNA contained abundant NADPH diaphorase activity, a histochemical marker for 
NOS. In co-culture assays, nitric oxide production by transfected cells 
increased guanylate cyclase activity in reporter rat fetal lung fibroblasts. In 
addition, NOS-catalyzed conversion of arginine to citrulline in transfected 
cells was significantly increased by A23187, a calcium ionophore. Isolation of a 
cDNA encoding a calcium-regulated, constitutively expressed human endothelial 
NOS, capable of producing EDRF in blood vessels, will accelerate the 
characterization of the role of this enzyme in normal and abnormal endothelial 
regulation of vascular tone.

PMID: 1378832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
