---
pmid: '31665741'
title: The human Shu complex functions with PDS5B and SPIDR to promote homologous
  recombination.
authors:
- Martino J
- Brunette GJ
- Barroso-González J
- Moiseeva TN
- Smith CM
- Bakkenist CJ
- O'Sullivan RJ
- Bernstein KA
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6821187
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz738
---

# The human Shu complex functions with PDS5B and SPIDR to promote homologous recombination.
**Authors:** Martino J, Brunette GJ, Barroso-González J, Moiseeva TN, Smith CM, Bakkenist CJ, O'Sullivan RJ, Bernstein KA
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkz738](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz738)
**PMC:** [PMC6821187](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6821187/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019 Nov 4;47(19):10151-10165. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz738.

The human Shu complex functions with PDS5B and SPIDR to promote homologous 
recombination.

Martino J(1), Brunette GJ(1), Barroso-González J(2), Moiseeva TN(3), Smith 
CM(1), Bakkenist CJ(3), O'Sullivan RJ(2), Bernstein KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UPMC Hillman Cancer 
Center, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology; UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

RAD51 plays a central role in homologous recombination during double-strand 
break repair and in replication fork dynamics. Misregulation of RAD51 is 
associated with genetic instability and cancer. RAD51 is regulated by many 
accessory proteins including the highly conserved Shu complex. Here, we report 
the function of the human Shu complex during replication to regulate RAD51 
recruitment to DNA repair foci and, secondly, during replication fork restart 
following replication fork stalling. Deletion of the Shu complex members, SWS1 
and SWSAP1, using CRISPR/Cas9, renders cells specifically sensitive to the 
replication fork stalling and collapse caused by methyl methanesulfonate and 
mitomycin C exposure, a delayed and reduced RAD51 response, and fewer sister 
chromatid exchanges. Our additional analysis identified SPIDR and PDS5B as novel 
Shu complex interacting partners and genetically function in the same pathway 
upon DNA damage. Collectively, our study uncovers a protein complex, which 
consists of SWS1, SWSAP1, SPIDR and PDS5B, involved in DNA repair and provides 
insight into Shu complex function and composition.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkz738
PMCID: PMC6821187
PMID: 31665741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
