---
pmid: '19820695'
title: Helicobacter pylori CagA activates NF-kappaB by targeting TAK1 for TRAF6-mediated
  Lys 63 ubiquitination.
authors:
- Lamb A
- Yang XD
- Tsang YH
- Li JD
- Higashi H
- Hatakeyama M
- Peek RM
- Blanke SR
- Chen LF
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2775174
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.210
---

# Helicobacter pylori CagA activates NF-kappaB by targeting TAK1 for TRAF6-mediated Lys 63 ubiquitination.
**Authors:** Lamb A, Yang XD, Tsang YH, Li JD, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M, Peek RM, Blanke SR, Chen LF
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.210](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.210)
**PMC:** [PMC2775174](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2775174/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Nov;10(11):1242-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.210. Epub 2009 Oct
9.

Helicobacter pylori CagA activates NF-kappaB by targeting TAK1 for 
TRAF6-mediated Lys 63 ubiquitination.

Lamb A(1), Yang XD, Tsang YH, Li JD, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M, Peek RM, Blanke 
SR, Chen LF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2010 Jan;11(1):10-1; author reply 11-2. doi: 
10.1038/embor.2009.263.

Helicobacter pylori-initiated chronic gastritis is characterized by the cag 
pathogenicity island-dependent upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines, which 
is largely mediated by the transcription factor nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB. 
However, the cag pathogenicity island-encoded proteins and cellular signalling 
molecules that are involved in H. pylori-induced NF-kappaB activation and 
inflammatory response remain unclear. Here, we show that H. pylori virulence 
factor CagA and host protein transforming growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 
(TAK1) are essential for H. pylori-induced activation of NF-kappaB. CagA 
physically associates with TAK1 and enhances its activity and TAK1-induced 
NF-kappaB activation through the tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated 
factor 6-mediated, Lys 63-linked ubiquitination of TAK1. These findings show 
that polyubiquitination of TAK1 regulates the activation of NF-kappaB, which in 
turn is used by H. pylori CagA for the H. pylori-induced inflammatory response.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.210
PMCID: PMC2775174
PMID: 19820695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Helicobacter pylori -initiated chronic gastritis is characterized by the cag pathogenicity island-dependent upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines, which is largely mediated by the transcription factor nuclear factor (NF)-κB. However, the cag pathogenicity island-encoded proteins and cellular signalling molecules that are involved in H. pylori -induced NF-κB activation and inflammatory response remain unclear. Here, we show that H. pylori virulence factor CagA and host protein transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) are essential for H. pylori -induced activation of NF-κB. CagA physically associates with TAK1 and enhances its activity and TAK1-induced NF-κB activation through the tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6-mediated, Lys 63-linked ubiquitination of TAK1. These findings show that polyubiquitination of TAK1 regulates the activation of NF-κB, which in turn is used by H. pylori CagA for the H. pylori -induced inflammatory response.

Introduction

Helicobacter pylori infection causes chronic gastritis and peptic ulceration, and is the strongest risk factor for the development of gastric cancer ( Peek & Blaser, 2002 ; Hatakeyama, 2008 ). The inflammatory response associated with gastritis is characterized by the expression of various proinflammatory cytokines, and transcription factor nuclear factor (NF)-κB has an important role in the regulation of their expression ( Ghosh & Karin, 2002 ). H. pylori infection activates NF-κB and the expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8) in epithelial cells, which is believed to be critical for H. pylori -initiated chronic inflammation ( Sharma et al , 1998 ; Maeda et al , 2001 ; Naumann, 2001 ; Hirata et al , 2006 ).

The H. pylori cag pathogenicity island is required for activation of NF-κB and expression of NF-κB target genes ( Glocker et al , 1998 ; Foryst-Ludwig & Naumann, 2000 ), and its encoded virulence factor, CagA, has an important role in the pathogenicity of H. pylori , including H. pylori -induced inflammation ( Brandt et al , 2005 ; Kim et al , 2006 ). Infection with H. pylori cagA -positive strains is associated with higher grades of gastric inflammation and an increased risk of gastric cancer than infection with cagA -negative strains ( Blaser et al , 1995 ; Parsonnet et al , 1997 ), thereby highlighting the role of CagA in the H. pylori -mediated inflammatory response. However, the exact function of CagA in the activation of NF-κB and the NF-κB-dependent inflammatory response is yet to be addressed.

CagA is injected into H. pylori -infected host epithelial cells—by using a type-IV secretion system—where it is often activated by tyrosine phosphorylation through the host src kinase and targets host proteins to modify cellular responses ( Peek, 2005 ; Hatakeyama, 2008 ). For example, phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated CagA interact, respectively, with Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase (SHP2) and with host proteins such as growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) and zona occludens 1 (ZO-1) to induce abnormal proliferation and movement of gastric epithelial cells ( Mimuro et al , 2002 ; Amieva et al , 2003 ; Hatakeyama, 2004 ). Non-phosphorylated CagA also destabilizes the E-cadherin/β-catenin complex to induce the activation of the β-catenin signal that underlies intestinal metaplasia ( Franco et al , 2005 ; Murata-Kamiya et al , 2007 ). However, the cellular proteins CagA targets that are involved in inducing the inflammatory response remain elusive.

NF-κB has an important role in the regulation of inflammatory responses in mammals. The prototypical NF-κB complex, which is a heterodimer of p50 and RelA, is sequestered in the cytoplasm by its inhibitor IκBα. On stimulation, the IκB kinase (IKK) complex is activated, leading to phosphorylation and degradation of IκBα, nuclear translocation of NF-κB and activation of its target genes ( Ghosh & Karin, 2002 ). Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) is a key regulator of signal transduction cascades that lead to stimulus-coupled phosphorylation and activation of IKK ( Adhikari et al , 2007 ). Emerging evidence indicates that activation of TAK1 and IKK is regulated by tumour necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6)-mediated, Lys 63-linked ubiquitination of TRAF6, interleukin 1 receptor-associated kinase 1 and NF-κB essential modulator ( Adhikari et al , 2007 ). Recent studies also show that TAK1 is polyubiquitinated by TRAF6 in response to TGF-β, and that Lys 63-linked ubiquitination is required for TGF-β-induced activation of p38/Jun N-terminal kinase and AP-1 ( Sorrentino et al , 2008 ), indicating that TAK1 ubiquitination might also be crucial for the activation of IKK and NF-κB.

Here, we show that CagA is essential for H. pylori -induced activation of NF-κB, and identify TAK1 as a new cellular target of CagA.

Methods

Cell lines, H. pylori culture and infection. Human AGS gastric adenocarcinoma, HEK293T and MEF cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. H. pylori G27, NCTC11637 and 7.13 strains and their cagA -deficient mutants were cultured in bisulphite-free Brucella broth on agar media containing Ham's F-12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 5 μg/ml vancomycin at 37°C in the presence of 10% CO 2 . H. pylori was added to AGS or MEF cells for infection at a multiplicity of infection of 50–100. All wt H. pylori and the corresponding cagA -deficient strains have similar abilities to adhere to the cells.

Immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting analysis and EMSA. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting analysis were performed as described previously ( Chen et al , 2002 ). For electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA), whole-cell extracts were collected from infected cells by freeze–thaw lysis ( Chen & Greene, 2005 ) and used for DNA binding assay as described previously ( Chen et al , 2001 ).

Quantitative real-time PCR analysis. AGS or MEF cell lines were infected with H. pylori for various times and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Complementary DNA was synthesized using the Omniscript RT kit (Qiagen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using the Qiagen SYBR green PCR kit, with the aid of the 7300 Real-time PCR system (ABI, Foster City, CA, USA). PCR primers for human β-actin, IL-8 and TNF-α, as well as mouse β-actin, E-selectin, IL-6 and TNF-α, were purchased from Qiagen.

Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assay. Transient transfection and luciferase reporter assays were performed as described previously ( Chen et al , 2002 ). In each luciferase experiment, cells were also co-transfected with the EF1– Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid, which was used as the internal control. Results represent the average of three independent experiments±s.d.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
