---
pmid: '15027896'
title: Angiotensin II-induced ERK1/ERK2 activation and protein synthesis are redox-dependent
  in glomerular mesangial cells.
authors:
- Gorin Y
- Ricono JM
- Wagner B
- Kim NH
- Bhandari B
- Choudhury GG
- Abboud HE
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1133781
doi: 10.1042/BJ20031614
---

# Angiotensin II-induced ERK1/ERK2 activation and protein synthesis are redox-dependent in glomerular mesangial cells.
**Authors:** Gorin Y, Ricono JM, Wagner B, Kim NH, Bhandari B, Choudhury GG, Abboud HE
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20031614](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20031614)
**PMC:** [PMC1133781](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1133781/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Jul 1;381(Pt 1):231-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20031614.

Angiotensin II-induced ERK1/ERK2 activation and protein synthesis are 
redox-dependent in glomerular mesangial cells.

Gorin Y(1), Ricono JM, Wagner B, Kim NH, Bhandari B, Choudhury GG, Abboud HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. gorin@uthscsa.edu

Angiotensin II (Ang II) stimulates hypertrophy of glomerular mesangial cells. 
The signalling mechanism by which Ang II exerts this effect is not precisely 
known. Downstream potential targets of Ang II are the 
extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/ERK2). We demonstrate that 
Ang II activates ERK1/ERK2 via the AT1 receptor. Arachidonic acid (AA) mimics 
the action of Ang II on ERK1/ERK2 and phospholipase A2 inhibitors blocked Ang 
II-induced ERK1/ERK2 activation. The antioxidant N-acetylcysteine as well as the 
NAD(P)H oxidase inhibitors diphenylene iodonium and phenylarsine oxide abolished 
both Ang II- and AA-induced ERK1/ERK2 activation. Moreover, dominant-negative 
Rac1 (N17Rac1) blocks activation of ERK1/ERK2 in response to Ang II and AA, 
whereas constitutively active Rac1 resulted in an increase in ERK1/ERK2 
activity. Antisense oligonucleotides for Nox4 NAD(P)H oxidase significantly 
reduce activation of ERK1/ERK2 by Ang II and AA. We also show that protein 
synthesis in response to Ang II and AA is inhibited by N17Rac1 or MEK 
(mitogen-activated protein kinase/ERK kinase) inhibitor. These results 
demonstrate that Ang II stimulates ERK1/ERK2 by AA and Nox4-derived reactive 
oxygen species, suggesting that these molecules act as downstream signal 
transducers of Ang II in the signalling pathway linking the Ang II receptor AT1 
to ERK1/ERK2 activation. This pathway involving AA, Rac1, Nox4, reactive oxygen 
species and ERK1/ERK2 may play an important role in Ang II-induced mesangial 
cell hypertrophy.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20031614
PMCID: PMC1133781
PMID: 15027896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
