---
pmid: '26320582'
title: Tom1 Modulates Binding of Tollip to Phosphatidylinositol 3-Phosphate via a
  Coupled Folding and Binding Mechanism.
authors:
- Xiao S
- Brannon MK
- Zhao X
- Fread KI
- Ellena JF
- Bushweller JH
- Finkielstein CV
- Armstrong GS
- Capelluto DGS
journal: Structure
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.07.017
---

# Tom1 Modulates Binding of Tollip to Phosphatidylinositol 3-Phosphate via a Coupled Folding and Binding Mechanism.
**Authors:** Xiao S, Brannon MK, Zhao X, Fread KI, Ellena JF, Bushweller JH, Finkielstein CV, Armstrong GS, Capelluto DGS
**Journal:** Structure (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2015.07.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2015.07.017)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2015 Oct 6;23(10):1910-1920. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.07.017. Epub 
2015 Aug 27.

Tom1 Modulates Binding of Tollip to Phosphatidylinositol 3-Phosphate via a 
Coupled Folding and Binding Mechanism.

Xiao S(1), Brannon MK(1), Zhao X(1), Fread KI(1), Ellena JF(2), Bushweller 
JH(2), Finkielstein CV(3), Armstrong GS(4), Capelluto DGS(5).

Author information:
(1)Protein Signaling Domains Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA.
(3)Integrated Cellular Responses Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(4)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder, 
Boulder, CO 80309, USA.
(5)Protein Signaling Domains Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA. 
Electronic address: capellut@vt.edu.

Comment in
    Structure. 2015 Oct 6;23(10):1781-1782. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2015.09.003.

Early endosomes represent the first sorting station for vesicular ubiquitylated 
cargo. Tollip, through its C2 domain, associates with endosomal 
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PtdIns(3)P) and binds ubiquitylated cargo in 
these compartments via its C2 and CUE domains. Tom1, through its GAT domain, is 
recruited to endosomes by binding to the Tollip Tom1-binding domain (TBD) 
through an unknown mechanism. Nuclear magnetic resonance data revealed that 
Tollip TBD is a natively unfolded domain that partially folds at its N terminus 
when bound to Tom1 GAT through high-affinity hydrophobic contacts. Furthermore, 
this association abrogates binding of Tollip to PtdIns(3)P by additionally 
targeting its C2 domain. Tom1 GAT is also able to bind ubiquitin and PtdIns(3)P 
at overlapping sites, albeit with modest affinity. We propose that association 
with Tom1 favors the release of Tollip from endosomal membranes, allowing Tollip 
to commit to cargo trafficking.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2015.07.017
PMID: 26320582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
