---
pmid: '12006491'
title: Human SIR2 deacetylates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53-induced cellular senescence.
authors:
- Langley E
- Pearson M
- Faretta M
- Bauer UM
- Frye RA
- Minucci S
- Pelicci PG
- Kouzarides T
journal: EMBO J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC126010
doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2383
---

# Human SIR2 deacetylates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53-induced cellular senescence.
**Authors:** Langley E, Pearson M, Faretta M, Bauer UM, Frye RA, Minucci S, Pelicci PG, Kouzarides T
**Journal:** EMBO J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/21.10.2383](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/21.10.2383)
**PMC:** [PMC126010](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC126010/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2002 May 15;21(10):2383-96. doi: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2383.

Human SIR2 deacetylates p53 and antagonizes PML/p53-induced cellular senescence.

Langley E(1), Pearson M, Faretta M, Bauer UM, Frye RA, Minucci S, Pelicci PG, 
Kouzarides T.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Institute/Cancer Research UK and Department of Pathology, University 
of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, CB2 1QR, UK.

The yeast Sir2 protein mediates chromatin silencing through an intrinsic 
NAD-dependent histone deacetylase activity. Sir2 is a conserved protein and was 
recently shown to regulate lifespan extension both in budding yeast and worms. 
Here, we show that SIRT1, the human Sir2 homolog, is recruited to the 
promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies of mammalian cells upon 
overexpression of either PML or oncogenic Ras (Ha-rasV12). SIRT1 binds and 
deacetylates p53, a component of PML nuclear bodies, and it can repress 
p53-mediated transactivation. Moreover, we show that SIRT1 and p53 co-localize 
in nuclear bodies upon PML upregulation. When overexpressed in primary mouse 
embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), SIRT1 antagonizes PML-induced acetylation of p53 and 
rescues PML-mediated premature cellular senescence. Taken together, our data 
establish the SIRT1 deacetylase as a novel negative regulator of p53 function 
capable of modulating cellular senescence.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/21.10.2383
PMCID: PMC126010
PMID: 12006491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The yeast Sir2 protein mediates chromatin silencing through an intrinsic NAD-dependent histone deacetylase activity. Sir2 is a conserved protein and was recently shown to regulate lifespan extension both in budding yeast and worms. Here, we show that SIRT1, the human Sir2 homolog, is recruited to the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies of mammalian cells upon overexpression of either PML or oncogenic Ras (Ha-rasV12). SIRT1 binds and deacetylates p53, a component of PML nuclear bodies, and it can repress p53-mediated transactivation. Moreover, we show that SIRT1 and p53 co-localize in nuclear bodies upon PML upregulation. When overexpressed in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), SIRT1 antagonizes PML-induced acetylation of p53 and rescues PML-mediated premature cellular senescence. Taken together, our data establish the SIRT1 deacetylase as a novel negative regulator of p53 function capable of modulating cellular senescence.

Introduction

It is becoming increasingly clear that the post-translational modifications of histones, within the context of chromatin, regulate gene expression. It has been proposed that these histone modifications constitute an epigenetic code, which can be interpreted in terms of chromatin structural changes leading to subsequent genome regulation ( Strahl and Allis, 2000 ; Jenuwein and Allis, 2001 ). An example of such a signal is the acetylation of specific lysine residues in the conserved histone tails, which can be reversed by histone deacetylases (HDACs) (reviewed in Kouzarides, 1999 ). To date, three classes of HDACs have been discovered in eukaryotes, known as class I and II HDACs, and the silent information regulator 2 (Sir2) family (for reviews see Gray and Ekstrom, 2001 ; Khochbin et al ., 2001 ).

Sir2 is an evolutionarily conserved protein, present in Archaea, Eubacteria through to humans ( Brachmann et al ., 1995 ; Frye, 1999 , 2000 ). Originally discovered in budding yeast, ySir2 is a structural component of silent chromatin and is required for transcriptional silencing of the silent mating-type loci, telomeres and rDNA repeats (reviewed in Guarente, 1999 ; Gartenberg, 2000 ). Additionally, yeast Sir2 functions in double-stranded DNA repair, regulation of mitotic and meiotic cell cycle progression, suppression of rDNA homologous recombination, chromosome stability and modulation of lifespan ( Brachmann et al ., 1995 ; Cockell and Gasser, 1999 ; Guarente, 1999 ; Haber, 1999 ; Kaeberlein et al ., 1999 ; Lin et al ., 2000 ).

Recent studies have shown that ySir2 and its homologs possess NAD-dependent HDAC activity ( Imai et al., 2000 ; Landry et al., 2000 ; Smith et al., 2000 ). Indeed, Sir2-like enzymes catalyze a unique reaction in which NAD cleavage is tightly coupled to histone deacetylation, thus distinguishing them from the previously characterized class I and II HDACs ( Tanner et al., 2000 ; Tanny and Moazed, 2001 ). The hallmark of the Sir2 family is a conserved globular core domain of ∼250 amino acids, which harbors the catalytic activity and the three-dimensional structure of which has been elucidated ( Finnin et al., 2001 ; Min et al., 2001 ). Mutations of conserved residues within this region lead to a loss of function in vitro and in vivo ( Frye, 1999 ; Sherman et al., 1999 ; Tanny et al., 1999 ; Imai et al., 2000 ).

So far, little is known concerning the function of Sir2 homologs in organisms other than yeast. A recent study has shown that, like its yeast counterpart, Sir2 modulates lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans , raising the exciting possibility that these enzymes link longevity, metabolism and chromatin silencing in many eukaryotic organisms ( Guarente, 2000 ; Guarente and Kenyon, 2000 ; Tissenbaum and Guarente, 2001 ). As for the seven human homologs of Sir2, named SIRT1–7, no precise function has been described so far ( Frye, 1999 , 2000 ). However, a previous study showed that the core region of SIRT2 can function in transcriptional silencing when substituting that of ySir2 ( Sherman et al., 1999 ). The cytoplasmic localization of certain members, as well as the conservation of the Sir2 family in prokaryotes, which on the whole do not possess histones, strongly suggests that other physiological substrates must exist ( Afshar and Murnane, 1999 ; Perrod et al., 2001 ). Furthermore, a recent study shows that recombinant murine Sir2α deacetylates TAF I 68, a subunit of TIF-Ib/SL1, and decreases RNA polymerase I transcription in vitro ( Muth et al., 2001 ).

The nuclear bodies (NBs), often termed promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) NBs, are discrete nuclear substructures and represent the natural accumulation sites of PML (reviewed in Matera, 1999 ; Seeler and Dejean, 1999 ; Zhong et al ., 2000b ). A cell typically contains 10–30 NBs per nucleus, although their number and size vary during the cell cycle ( Everett et al ., 1999 ; McNeil et al ., 2000 ). NBs are dynamic structures, which are altered or disrupted in certain human diseases and in response to different cellular stresses. It is becoming increasingly apparent that NBs play a role in transcriptional regulation. Although many components of the NB have been identified to date, PML is the defining component and is essential for its proper formation ( Ishov et al ., 1999 ; Zhong et al ., 2000a ).

The PML protein was originally identified as part of the oncogenic fusion protein PML–retinoic acid receptor α (RARα) produced by the chromosomal translocation t(15;17) associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; reviewed in Melnick and Licht, 1999 ). Alternative splice variants exist, resulting in seven PML isoforms, named PML I–VII, which all contain an identical N-terminal region but differ in their C-terminal sequences (reviewed in Jensen et al ., 2001 ). Although little is known to date concerning the specific roles of the PML variants, PML appears to have multiple functions: first, PML acts as a growth and tumor suppressor ( Mu et al ., 1994 ); secondly, PML is a mediator of multiple apoptotic signals ( Quignon et al ., 1998 ; Wang et al ., 1998 ); and finally, PML acts both as a co-activator and co-repressor of various transcription factors, some of which localize to the NBs ( Alcalay et al ., 1998 ; Doucas et al ., 1999 ; Fogal et al ., 2000 ).

To date, several components of the NBs have been identified, and these include SUMO-1, Sp100, Sp140, CREB binding protein (CBP), BLM, Daxx, pRB, p53 and spectrin. Of particular interest is the tumor suppressor p53, which has been shown to physically interact with PML. p53 plays a key role in the control of cell growth, apoptosis and DNA repair, and is activated in response to many forms of stress (reviewed in Vogelstein et al., 2000 ; Ryan et al., 2001 ). The rapid induction of p53 is achieved through post-translational modifications leading to its stabilization and activation. In particular, acetylation of lysine residues in the C-terminus of p53 by P/CAF in vitro , and CBP/p300 in vitro and in vivo , has been reported ( Sakaguchi et al., 1998 ; Liu et al., 1999 ; Ito et al., 2001 ). These acetyltransferases co-activate p53-mediated transcription in transient expression assays, and acetylation of p53 increases its DNA-binding activity in vitro ( Avantaggiati et al., 1997 ; Gu and Roeder, 1997 ; Scolnick et al., 1997 ). More recently, acetylation has been linked to p53 stability and to the recruitment of co-activators ( Barlev et al., 2001 ; Ito et al., 2001 ). In primary cells, p53 induces cellular senescence in response to oncogenic signals, and new evidence indicates that PML regulates this p53-dependent process (reviewed in Itahana et al., 2001 ; Pearson and Pelicci, 2001 ). Indeed, upon overexpression of a specific PML isoform, PML IV, p53 and CBP are recruited to the NBs, which favors the formation of a stable tricomplex with PML. It has been suggested that this results in increased p53 acetylation at lysine 382, enhancement of p53 activity and the induction of premature cellular senescence. Intriguingly, acetylation of lysine 382 occurs in serially passaged replicative senescent cells and is essential for optimal activation of p53 by PML ( Pearson et al., 2000 ).

In this study, we investigated the function of SIRT1, the closest human homolog of ySir2. We show that SIRT1 is an active NAD-dependent HDAC that localizes to the NBs upon PML IV or oncogenic Ras overexpression and is able to physically interact with PML. SIRT1 binds p53 and promotes p53 deacetylation both in vitro and in vivo . Furthermore, SIRT1 represses p53-mediated transactivation in transient expression assays. Finally, SIRT1 co-localizes with p53 to the NBs upon PML IV upregulation, and antagonizes PML IV-induced cellular senescence, a process that is dependent on p53.

Discussion

In this study, we have provided evidence for a function of SIRT1, the human Sir2 homolog. We show that the NAD-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 is recruited to the PML NBs together with its substrate p53. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SIRT1 can downregulate a p53-dependent process, namely the induction of cellular senescence, giving strength to a physiologically relevant role of SIRT1 in the p53 regulatory network.
