---
pmid: '18434541'
title: Structural diversity in the RGS domain and its interaction with heterotrimeric
  G protein alpha-subunits.
authors:
- Soundararajan M
- Willard FS
- Kimple AJ
- Turnbull AP
- Ball LJ
- Schoch GA
- Gileadi C
- Fedorov OY
- Dowler EF
- Higman VA
- Hutsell SQ
- Sundström M
- Doyle DA
- Siderovski DP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2359823
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0801508105
---

# Structural diversity in the RGS domain and its interaction with heterotrimeric G protein alpha-subunits.
**Authors:** Soundararajan M, Willard FS, Kimple AJ, Turnbull AP, Ball LJ, Schoch GA, Gileadi C, Fedorov OY, Dowler EF, Higman VA, Hutsell SQ, Sundström M, Doyle DA, Siderovski DP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0801508105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801508105)
**PMC:** [PMC2359823](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2359823/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 29;105(17):6457-62. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0801508105. Epub 2008 Apr 23.

Structural diversity in the RGS domain and its interaction with heterotrimeric G 
protein alpha-subunits.

Soundararajan M(1), Willard FS, Kimple AJ, Turnbull AP, Ball LJ, Schoch GA, 
Gileadi C, Fedorov OY, Dowler EF, Higman VA, Hutsell SQ, Sundström M, Doyle DA, 
Siderovski DP.

Author information:
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 7DQ, United 
Kingdom.

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins accelerate GTP hydrolysis by 
Galpha subunits and thus facilitate termination of signaling initiated by G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). RGS proteins hold great promise as disease 
intervention points, given their signature role as negative regulators of 
GPCRs-receptors to which the largest fraction of approved medications are 
currently directed. RGS proteins share a hallmark RGS domain that interacts most 
avidly with Galpha when in its transition state for GTP hydrolysis; by binding 
and stabilizing switch regions I and II of Galpha, RGS domain binding 
consequently accelerates Galpha-mediated GTP hydrolysis. The human genome 
encodes more than three dozen RGS domain-containing proteins with varied Galpha 
substrate specificities. To facilitate their exploitation as drug-discovery 
targets, we have taken a systematic structural biology approach toward 
cataloging the structural diversity present among RGS domains and identifying 
molecular determinants of their differential Galpha selectivities. Here, we 
determined 14 structures derived from NMR and x-ray crystallography of members 
of the R4, R7, R12, and RZ subfamilies of RGS proteins, including 10 uncomplexed 
RGS domains and 4 RGS domain/Galpha complexes. Heterogeneity observed in the 
structural architecture of the RGS domain, as well as in engagement of switch 
III and the all-helical domain of the Galpha substrate, suggests that unique 
structural determinants specific to particular RGS protein/Galpha pairings exist 
and could be used to achieve selective inhibition by small molecules.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0801508105
PMCID: PMC2359823
PMID: 18434541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
