---
pmid: '19236849'
title: Carboxy-terminal phosphorylation of SIRT1 by protein kinase CK2.
authors:
- Zschoernig B
- Mahlknecht U
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.085
---

# Carboxy-terminal phosphorylation of SIRT1 by protein kinase CK2.
**Authors:** Zschoernig B, Mahlknecht U
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.085](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.085)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 10;381(3):372-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.085. Epub 2009 Feb 21.

Carboxy-terminal phosphorylation of SIRT1 by protein kinase CK2.

Zschoernig B(1), Mahlknecht U.

Author information:
(1)Saarland University Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Division 
of Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy, D-66421 Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Previous analyses of the sirtuin family of histone deacetylases and its most 
prominent member SIRT1 have focused primarily on the identification of cellular 
targets exploring the underlying molecular mechanisms of its implicated function 
in the control of metabolic homeostasis, differentiation, apoptosis and cell 
survival. So far, little is known about the regulation of SIRT1 itself. In the 
study presented herein, we assigned the main region of SIRT1 in vivo 
phosphorylation to amino acids 643-691 of the unique carboxy-terminal domain. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate that SIRT1 is a substrate for protein kinase CK2 
both in vitro and in vivo. Both, deletion construct analyses and 
serine-to-alanine mutations identified SIRT1 Ser-659 and Ser-661 as major CK2 
phosphorylation sites that are phosphorylated in vivo as well.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.085
PMID: 19236849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
