---
pmid: '16023992'
title: Mitochondrial targeting signals and mature peptides of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA
  carboxylase.
authors:
- Stadler SC
- Polanetz R
- Meier S
- Mayerhofer PU
- Herrmann JM
- Anslinger K
- Roscher AA
- Röschinger W
- Holzinger A
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.06.190
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mitochondrial targeting signals and mature peptides of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase.
**Authors:** Stadler SC, Polanetz R, Meier S, Mayerhofer PU, Herrmann JM, Anslinger K, Roscher AA, Röschinger W, Holzinger A
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.06.190](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.06.190)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Sep 2;334(3):939-46. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.06.190.

Mitochondrial targeting signals and mature peptides of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA 
carboxylase.

Stadler SC(1), Polanetz R, Meier S, Mayerhofer PU, Herrmann JM, Anslinger K, 
Roscher AA, Röschinger W, Holzinger A.

Author information:
(1)Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Department of Biochemical Genetics and 
Molecular Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

Inherited deficiency of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC), an enzyme of 
leucine degradation, is an organic acidemia detectable by expanded newborn 
screening with a variable phenotype that ranges from asymptomatic to death in 
infancy. Here, we show that the two subunits of the enzyme (MCCalpha; MCCbeta) 
are imported into the mitochondrial matrix by the classical pathway involving 
cleavable amino-terminal targeting presequences. We identified the cleavage 
sites (Tyr41/Thr42 and Ala22/Tyr23 for MCCalpha and MCCbeta, respectively) of 
the targeting signals and the amino-termini of the mature polypeptides of MCC 
and propionyl-CoA carboxylase, a mitochondrial paralog. The amino-termini 
containing 39 (MCCalpha) or 20 amino acids (MCCbeta) were both necessary and 
sufficient for targeting. Structural requirements for mitochondrial import were 
defined by site-directed mutagenesis. Our studies provide the prerequisite to 
understand the impact of specific mutations on the clinical phenotype of MCC 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2005.06.190
PMID: 16023992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
