---
pmid: '11500939'
title: Regulation of the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase-3 axis by insulin-like growth
  factor-II via activation of the human insulin receptor isoform-A.
authors:
- Scalia P
- Heart E
- Comai L
- Vigneri R
- Sung CK
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.1196
---

# Regulation of the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase-3 axis by insulin-like growth factor-II via activation of the human insulin receptor isoform-A.
**Authors:** Scalia P, Heart E, Comai L, Vigneri R, Sung CK
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.1196](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.1196)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2001;82(4):610-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.1196.

Regulation of the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase-3 axis by insulin-like growth 
factor-II via activation of the human insulin receptor isoform-A.

Scalia P(1), Heart E, Comai L, Vigneri R, Sung CK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Southern California, 
Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA. 
plscalia@hsc.usc.edu

Insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) plays a key role in mitogenesis during 
development and tumorigenesis and is believed to exert its mitogenic functions 
mainly through the IGF-I receptor. Recently, we identified the insulin receptor 
isoform A (IR(A)) as an additional high affinity receptor for IGF-II in both 
fetal and cancer cells. Here we investigated the mitogenic signaling of IGF-II 
via the Akt/Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (Gsk3) axis employing R-IR(A) cells that 
are IGF-I receptor null mouse embryonic fibroblasts expressing the human IR(A). 
IGF-II induced activation of the proto-oncogenic serine kinase Akt, reaching 
maximal at 5-10 min. IGF-II also caused the rapid and sustained deactivation of 
glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta (Gsk3beta), reaching maximal at 1-3 min, shortly 
preceding, therefore, maximal activation of Akt. Under our conditions, IGF-II 
and insulin induced 70-80% inhibition of Gsk3betaactivity. In these cells IGF-II 
also deactivated Gsk3alpha although less effectively than Gsk3beta. In parallel 
experiments, we found that IGF-II induced transient activation of 
extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (Erk) reaching maximal at 5-10 min and 
decreasing thereafter. Time courses and potencies of regulation of both 
mitogenic pathways (Akt/Gsk3beta and Erk) by IGF-II via IR(A) were similar to 
those of insulin. Furthermore, IGF-II like insulin effectively stimulated cell 
cycle progression from the G0/G1 to the S and G2/M phases. Interestingly, 
AP-1-mediated gene expression, that was reported to be negatively regulated by 
Gsk3beta was only weakly increased after IGF-II stimulation. Our present data 
suggest that the coordinated activation or deactivation of Akt, Gsk3beta, and 
Erk may account for IGF-II mitogenic effects and support an active role for 
IR(A) in IGF-II action.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.1196
PMID: 11500939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
