---
pmid: '18515547'
title: C. elegans La-related protein, LARP-1, localizes to germline P bodies and attenuates
  Ras-MAPK signaling during oogenesis.
authors:
- Nykamp K
- Lee MH
- Kimble J
journal: RNA
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2441978
doi: 10.1261/rna.1066008
---

# C. elegans La-related protein, LARP-1, localizes to germline P bodies and attenuates Ras-MAPK signaling during oogenesis.
**Authors:** Nykamp K, Lee MH, Kimble J
**Journal:** RNA (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.1066008](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.1066008)
**PMC:** [PMC2441978](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2441978/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2008 Jul;14(7):1378-89. doi: 10.1261/rna.1066008. Epub 2008 May 30.

C. elegans La-related protein, LARP-1, localizes to germline P bodies and 
attenuates Ras-MAPK signaling during oogenesis.

Nykamp K(1), Lee MH, Kimble J.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

RNA regulators are critical for animal development, especially in the germ line 
where gene expression is often modulated by changes in mRNA stability, 
translation, and localization. In this paper, we focus on Caenorhabditis elegans 
LARP-1, a representative of one La-related protein (Larp) family found broadly 
among eukaryotes. LARP-1 possesses a signature La motif, which is an ancient 
RNA-binding domain, plus a second conserved motif, typical of LARP-1 homologs 
and therefore dubbed the LARP1 domain. LARP-1 appears to bind RNA in vitro via 
both the La motif and the LARP1 domain. larp-1 null mutants have an oogenesis 
defect reminiscent of hyperactive Ras-MAPK signaling; this defect is suppressed 
or enhanced by down- or up-regulating the Ras-MAPK pathway, respectively. 
Consistent with a role in down-regulating the Ras-MAPK pathway, larp-1 null 
mutants have higher than normal levels of selected pathway mRNAs and proteins. 
LARP-1 protein colocalizes with P bodies, which function in RNA degradation. We 
suggest that LARP-1 functions in P bodies to attenuate the abundance of 
conserved Ras-MAPK mRNAs. We also propose that the cluster of LARP-1 homologs 
may function generally to control the expression of key developmental 
regulators.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.1066008
PMCID: PMC2441978
PMID: 18515547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
