---
pmid: '24030950'
title: Defective autophagy in spastizin mutated patients with hereditary spastic paraparesis
  type 15.
authors:
- Vantaggiato C
- Crimella C
- Airoldi G
- Polishchuk R
- Bonato S
- Brighina E
- Scarlato M
- Musumeci O
- Toscano A
- Martinuzzi A
- Santorelli FM
- Ballabio A
- Bresolin N
- Clementi E
- Bassi MT
journal: Brain
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3784282
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt227
---

# Defective autophagy in spastizin mutated patients with hereditary spastic paraparesis type 15.
**Authors:** Vantaggiato C, Crimella C, Airoldi G, Polishchuk R, Bonato S, Brighina E, Scarlato M, Musumeci O, Toscano A, Martinuzzi A, Santorelli FM, Ballabio A, Bresolin N, Clementi E, Bassi MT
**Journal:** Brain (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt227](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt227)
**PMC:** [PMC3784282](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3784282/)

## Abstract

1. Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):3119-39. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt227. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Defective autophagy in spastizin mutated patients with hereditary spastic 
paraparesis type 15.

Vantaggiato C(1), Crimella C, Airoldi G, Polishchuk R, Bonato S, Brighina E, 
Scarlato M, Musumeci O, Toscano A, Martinuzzi A, Santorelli FM, Ballabio A, 
Bresolin N, Clementi E, Bassi MT.

Author information:
(1)1 Scientific Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, 23842 
Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy.

Hereditary spastic paraparesis type 15 is a recessive complicated form of the 
disease clinically characterized by slowly progressive spastic paraparesis and 
mental deterioration with onset between the first and second decade of life. 
Thinning of corpus callosum is the neuroradiological distinctive sign frequently 
associated with white matter abnormalities. The causative gene, ZFYVE26, encodes 
a large protein of 2539 amino acid residues, termed spastizin, containing three 
recognizable domains: a zinc finger, a leucine zipper and a FYVE domain. 
Spastizin protein has a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution and co-localizes 
partially with early endosomes, the endoplasmic reticulum, microtubules and 
vesicles involved in protein trafficking. In addition, spastizin localizes to 
the mid-body during the final step of mitosis and contributes to successful 
cytokinesis. Spastizin interacts with Beclin 1, a protein required for 
cytokinesis and autophagy, which is the major lysosome-mediated degradation 
process in the cell. In view of the Beclin 1-spastizin interaction, we 
investigated the possible role of spastizin in autophagy. We carried out this 
analysis by using lymphoblast and fibroblast cells derived from four different 
spastizin mutated patients (p.I508N, p.L243P, p.R1209fsX, p.S1312X) and from 
control subjects. Of note, the truncating p.R1209fsX and p.S1312X mutations lead 
to loss of spastizin protein. The results obtained indicate that spastizin 
interacts with the autophagy related Beclin 1-UVRAG-Rubicon multiprotein complex 
and is required for autophagosome maturation. In cells lacking spastizin or with 
mutated forms of the protein, spastizin interaction with Beclin 1 is lost 
although the formation of the Beclin 1-UVRAG-Rubicon complex can still be 
observed. However, in these cells we demonstrate an impairment of autophagosome 
maturation and an accumulation of immature autophagosomes. Autophagy defects 
with autophagosome accumulation can be observed also in neuronal cells upon 
spastizin silencing. These results indicate that autophagy is a central process 
in the pathogenesis of complicated forms of hereditary spastic paraparesis with 
thin corpus callosum.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt227
PMCID: PMC3784282
PMID: 24030950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
