---
pmid: '1973834'
title: Isolation and characterization of the human tyrosine aminotransferase gene.
authors:
- Rettenmeier R
- Natt E
- Zentgraf H
- Scherer G
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC331086
doi: 10.1093/nar/18.13.3853
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation and characterization of the human tyrosine aminotransferase gene.
**Authors:** Rettenmeier R, Natt E, Zentgraf H, Scherer G
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/18.13.3853](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/18.13.3853)
**PMC:** [PMC331086](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC331086/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jul 11;18(13):3853-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/18.13.3853.

Isolation and characterization of the human tyrosine aminotransferase gene.

Rettenmeier R(1), Natt E, Zentgraf H, Scherer G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg i. Br., FRG.

Structure and sequence of the human gene for tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) was 
determined by analysis of cDNA and genomic clones. The gene extends over 10.9 
kbl and consists of 12 exons giving rise to a 2,754 nucleotide long mRNA 
(excluding the poly(A)tail). The human TAT gene is predicted to code for a 454 
amino acid protein of molecular weight 50,399 dalton. The overall sequence 
identity within the coding region of the human and the previously characterized 
rat TAT genes is 87% at the nucleotide and 92% at the protein level. A minor 
human TAT mRNA results from the use of an alternative polyadenylation signal in 
the 3' exon which is present but not used at the corresponding position in the 
rat TAT gene. The non-coding region of the 3' exon contains a complete Alu 
element which is absent in the rat TAT gene but present in apes and old world 
monkeys. Two functional glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) reside 2.5 kb 
upstream of the rat TAT gene. The DNA sequence of the corresponding region of 
the human TAT gene shows the distal GRE mutated and the proximal GRE replaced by 
Alu elements.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/18.13.3853
PMCID: PMC331086
PMID: 1973834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
