---
pmid: '22922874'
title: Mutations in ABCD4 cause a new inborn error of vitamin B12 metabolism.
authors:
- Coelho D
- Kim JC
- Miousse IR
- Fung S
- du Moulin M
- Buers I
- Suormala T
- Burda P
- Frapolli M
- Stucki M
- Nürnberg P
- Thiele H
- Robenek H
- Höhne W
- Longo N
- Pasquali M
- Mengel E
- Watkins D
- Shoubridge EA
- Majewski J
- Rosenblatt DS
- Fowler B
- Rutsch F
- Baumgartner MR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.2386
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in ABCD4 cause a new inborn error of vitamin B12 metabolism.
**Authors:** Coelho D, Kim JC, Miousse IR, Fung S, du Moulin M, Buers I, Suormala T, Burda P, Frapolli M, Stucki M, Nürnberg P, Thiele H, Robenek H, Höhne W, Longo N, Pasquali M, Mengel E, Watkins D, Shoubridge EA, Majewski J, Rosenblatt DS, Fowler B, Rutsch F, Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2386](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2386)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2012 Oct;44(10):1152-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2386. Epub 2012 Aug 26.

Mutations in ABCD4 cause a new inborn error of vitamin B12 metabolism.

Coelho D(1), Kim JC, Miousse IR, Fung S, du Moulin M, Buers I, Suormala T, Burda 
P, Frapolli M, Stucki M, Nürnberg P, Thiele H, Robenek H, Höhne W, Longo N, 
Pasquali M, Mengel E, Watkins D, Shoubridge EA, Majewski J, Rosenblatt DS, 
Fowler B, Rutsch F, Baumgartner MR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism, Children's Research Center (CRC), University 
Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

Inherited disorders of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) have provided important clues to 
how this vitamin, which is essential for hematological and neurological 
function, is transported and metabolized. We describe a new disease that results 
in failure to release vitamin B12 from lysosomes, which mimics the cblF defect 
caused by LMBRD1 mutations. Using microcell-mediated chromosome transfer and 
exome sequencing, we identified causal mutations in ABCD4, a gene that codes for 
an ABC transporter, which was previously thought to have peroxisomal 
localization and function. Our results show that ABCD4 colocalizes with the 
lysosomal proteins LAMP1 and LMBD1, the latter of which is deficient in the cblF 
defect. Furthermore, we show that mutations altering the putative ATPase domain 
of ABCD4 affect its function, suggesting that the ATPase activity of ABCD4 may 
be involved in intracellular processing of vitamin B12.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2386
PMID: 22922874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
