---
pmid: '9774107'
title: Replication checkpoint requires phosphorylation of the phosphatase Cdc25 by
  Cds1 or Chk1.
authors:
- Zeng Y
- Forbes KC
- Wu Z
- Moreno S
- Piwnica-Worms H
- Enoch T
journal: Nature
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/26766
---

# Replication checkpoint requires phosphorylation of the phosphatase Cdc25 by Cds1 or Chk1.
**Authors:** Zeng Y, Forbes KC, Wu Z, Moreno S, Piwnica-Worms H, Enoch T
**Journal:** Nature (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/26766](https://doi.org/10.1038/26766)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1998 Oct 1;395(6701):507-10. doi: 10.1038/26766.

Replication checkpoint requires phosphorylation of the phosphatase Cdc25 by Cds1 
or Chk1.

Zeng Y(1), Forbes KC, Wu Z, Moreno S, Piwnica-Worms H, Enoch T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Checkpoints maintain the order and fidelity of events of the cell cycle by 
blocking mitosis in response to unreplicated or damaged DNA. In most species 
this is accomplished by preventing activation of the cell-division kinase Cdc2, 
which regulates entry into mitosis. The Chk1 kinase, an effector of the 
DNA-damage checkpoint, phosphorylates Cdc25, an activator of Cdc2. 
Phosphorylation of Cdc25 promotes its binding to 14-3-3 proteins, preventing it 
from activating Cdc2. Here we propose that a similar pathway is required for 
mitotic arrest in the presence of unreplicated DNA (that is, in the replication 
checkpoint) in fission yeast. We show by mutagenesis that Chk1 functions 
redundantly with the kinase Cds1 at the replication checkpoint and that both 
kinases phosphorylate Cdc25 on the same sites, which include serine residues at 
positions 99, 192 and 359. Mutation of these residues reduces binding of 14-3-3 
proteins to Cdc25 in vitro and disrupts the replication checkpoint in vivo. We 
conclude that both Cds1 and Chk1 regulate the binding of Cdc25 to 14-3-3 
proteins as part of the checkpoint response to unreplicated DNA.

DOI: 10.1038/26766
PMID: 9774107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
