---
pmid: '9990017'
title: Modulation of type M2 pyruvate kinase activity by the human papillomavirus
  type 16 E7 oncoprotein.
authors:
- Zwerschke W
- Mazurek S
- Massimi P
- Banks L
- Eigenbrodt E
- Jansen-Dürr P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC15456
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1291
---

# Modulation of type M2 pyruvate kinase activity by the human papillomavirus type 16 E7 oncoprotein.
**Authors:** Zwerschke W, Mazurek S, Massimi P, Banks L, Eigenbrodt E, Jansen-Dürr P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.4.1291](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.4.1291)
**PMC:** [PMC15456](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC15456/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1291-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.96.4.1291.

Modulation of type M2 pyruvate kinase activity by the human papillomavirus type 
16 E7 oncoprotein.

Zwerschke W(1), Mazurek S, Massimi P, Banks L, Eigenbrodt E, Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information:
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte 
Tumorvirologie, Abt. F0301, INF 242, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

We report here that the E7 oncoprotein encoded by the oncogenic human 
papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 binds to the glycolytic enzyme type M2 pyruvate 
kinase (M2-PK). M2-PK occurs in a tetrameric form with a high affinity to its 
substrate phosphoenolpyruvate and a dimeric form with a low affinity to 
phosphoenolpyruvate, and the transition between both conformations regulates the 
glycolytic flux in tumor cells. The glycolytic intermediate fructose 1, 
6-bisphosphate induces the reassociation of the dimeric to the tetrameric form 
of M2-PK. The expression of E7 in an experimental cell line shifts the 
equilibrium to the dimeric state despite a significant increase in the fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate levels. Investigations of HPV-16 E7 mutants and the 
nononcogenic HPV-11 subtype suggest that the interaction of HPV-16 E7 with M2-PK 
may be linked to the transforming potential of the viral oncoprotein.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.4.1291
PMCID: PMC15456
PMID: 9990017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
