---
pmid: '15003443'
title: A sensitive predictor for potential GPI lipid modification sites in fungal
  protein sequences and its application to genome-wide studies for Aspergillus nidulans,
  Candida albicans, Neurospora crassa, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Eisenhaber B
- Schneider G
- Wildpaner M
- Eisenhaber F
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.01.025
---

# A sensitive predictor for potential GPI lipid modification sites in fungal protein sequences and its application to genome-wide studies for Aspergillus nidulans, Candida albicans, Neurospora crassa, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Eisenhaber B, Schneider G, Wildpaner M, Eisenhaber F
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2004.01.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2004.01.025)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2004 Mar 19;337(2):243-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.01.025.

A sensitive predictor for potential GPI lipid modification sites in fungal 
protein sequences and its application to genome-wide studies for Aspergillus 
nidulans, Candida albicans, Neurospora crassa, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Eisenhaber B(1), Schneider G, Wildpaner M, Eisenhaber F.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Dr Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030 
Vienna, Austria. eisenhaber@imp.univie.ac.at

The fungal transamidase complex that executes glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) 
lipid anchoring of precursor proteins has overlapping but distinct sequence 
specificity compared with the animal system. Therefore, a taxon-specific 
prediction tool for the recognition of the C-terminal signal in fungal sequences 
is necessary. We have collected a learning set of fungal precursor protein 
sequences from the literature and fungal proteomes. Although the general four 
segment scheme of the recognition signal is maintained also in fungal 
precursors, there are taxon specificities in details. A fungal big-Pi predictor 
has been developed for the assessment of query sequence concordance with 
fungi-specific recognition signal requirements. The sensitivity of this 
predictor is close to 90%. The rate of false positive prediction is in the range 
of 0.1%. The fungal big-Pi tool successfully predicts the Gas1 mutation series 
described by C. Nuoffer and co-workers, and recognizes that the human PLAP C 
terminus is not a target for the fungal transamidase complex. Lists of 
potentially GPI lipid anchored proteins for five fungal proteomes have been 
generated and the hits have been functionally classified. The fungal big-Pi 
prediction WWW server as well as precursor lists are available at

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2004.01.025
PMID: 15003443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
