---
pmid: '20048160'
title: Androgen receptor-dependent transactivation of growth arrest-specific gene
  6 mediates inhibitory effects of testosterone on vascular calcification.
authors:
- Son BK
- Akishita M
- Iijima K
- Ogawa S
- Maemura K
- Yu J
- Takeyama K
- Kato S
- Eto M
- Ouchi Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2844201
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055087
---

# Androgen receptor-dependent transactivation of growth arrest-specific gene 6 mediates inhibitory effects of testosterone on vascular calcification.
**Authors:** Son BK, Akishita M, Iijima K, Ogawa S, Maemura K, Yu J, Takeyama K, Kato S, Eto M, Ouchi Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.055087](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.055087)
**PMC:** [PMC2844201](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2844201/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7537-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055087. Epub
2010  Jan 4.

Androgen receptor-dependent transactivation of growth arrest-specific gene 6 
mediates inhibitory effects of testosterone on vascular calcification.

Son BK(1), Akishita M, Iijima K, Ogawa S, Maemura K, Yu J, Takeyama K, Kato S, 
Eto M, Ouchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, the Graduate School of Medicine, Graduate 
School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
113-8655, Japan.

Recent epidemiological studies have found that androgen deficiency is associated 
with a higher incidence of cardiovascular disease in men. However, little is 
known about the mechanism underlying the cardioprotective effects of androgens. 
Here we show the inhibitory effects of testosterone on vascular calcification 
and a critical role of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transactivation of 
growth arrest-specific gene 6 (Gas6), a key regulator of inorganic phosphate 
(P(i))-induced calcification of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). 
Testosterone and nonaromatizable androgen dihydrotestosterone inhibited 
P(i)-induced calcification of human aortic VSMC in a concentration-dependent 
manner. Androgen inhibited P(i)-induced VSMC apoptosis, an essential process for 
VSMC calcification. The effects on VSMC calcification were mediated by 
restoration of P(i)-induced down-regulation of Gas6 expression and a subsequent 
reduction of Akt phosphorylation. These effects of androgen were blocked by an 
AR antagonist, flutamide, but not by an estrogen receptor antagonist, ICI 
182,780. We then explored the mechanistic role of the AR in Gas6 expression and 
found an abundant expression of AR predominantly in the nucleus of VSMC and two 
consensus ARE sequences in the Gas6 promoter region. Dihydrotestosterone 
stimulated Gas6 promoter activity, and this effect was abrogated by flutamide 
and by AR siRNA. Site-specific mutation revealed that the proximal ARE was 
essential for androgen-dependent transactivation of Gas6. Furthermore, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated ligand-dependent binding of the AR to 
the proximal ARE of Gas6. These results indicate that AR signaling directly 
regulates Gas6 transcription, which leads to inhibition of vascular 
calcification, and provides a mechanistic insight into the cardioprotective 
action of androgens.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055087
PMCID: PMC2844201
PMID: 20048160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
