---
pmid: '9528782'
title: DBF2 protein kinase binds to and acts through the cell cycle-regulated MOB1
  protein.
authors:
- Komarnitsky SI
- Chiang YC
- Luca FC
- Chen J
- Toyn JH
- Winey M
- Johnston LH
- Denis CL
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC121440
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2100
---

# DBF2 protein kinase binds to and acts through the cell cycle-regulated MOB1 protein.
**Authors:** Komarnitsky SI, Chiang YC, Luca FC, Chen J, Toyn JH, Winey M, Johnston LH, Denis CL
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.4.2100](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.4.2100)
**PMC:** [PMC121440](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC121440/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2100-7. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2100.

DBF2 protein kinase binds to and acts through the cell cycle-regulated MOB1 
protein.

Komarnitsky SI(1), Chiang YC, Luca FC, Chen J, Toyn JH, Winey M, Johnston LH, 
Denis CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of New 
Hampshire, Durham 03824, USA.

The DBF2 gene of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae encodes a cell 
cycle-regulated protein kinase that plays an important role in the telophase/G1 
transition. As a component of the multisubunit CCR4 transcriptional complex, 
DBF2 is also involved in the regulation of gene expression. We have found that 
MOB1, an essential protein required for a late mitotic event in the cell cycle, 
genetically and physically interacts with DBF2. DBF2 binds MOB1 in vivo and can 
bind it in vitro in the absence of other yeast proteins. We found that the 
expression of MOB1 is also cell cycle regulated, its expression peaking slightly 
before that of DBF2 at the G2/M boundary. While overexpression of DBF2 
suppressed phenotypes associated with mob1 temperature-sensitive alleles, it 
could not suppress a mob1 deletion. In contrast, overexpression of MOB1 
suppressed phenotypes associated with a dbf2-deleted strain and suppressed the 
lethality associated with a dbf2 dbf20 double deletion. A mob1 
temperature-sensitive allele with a dbf2 disruption was also found to be 
synthetically lethal. These results are consistent with DBF2 acting through MOB1 
and aiding in its function. Moreover, the ability of temperature-sensitive 
mutated versions of the MOB1 protein to interact with DBF2 was severely reduced, 
confirming that binding of DBF2 to MOB1 is required for a late mitotic event. 
While MOB1 and DBF2 were found to be capable of physically associating in a 
complex that did not include CCR4, MOB1 did interact with other components of 
the CCR4 transcriptional complex. We discuss models concerning the role of DBF2 
and MOB1 in controlling the telophase/G1 transition.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.4.2100
PMCID: PMC121440
PMID: 9528782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
