---
pmid: '24847765'
title: From inception to output, Tcf1 and Lef1 safeguard development of T cells and
  innate immune cells.
authors:
- Steinke FC
- Xue HH
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9
---

# From inception to output, Tcf1 and Lef1 safeguard development of T cells and innate immune cells.
**Authors:** Steinke FC, Xue HH
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9)

## Abstract

1. Immunol Res. 2014 Aug;59(1-3):45-55. doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9.

From inception to output, Tcf1 and Lef1 safeguard development of T cells and 
innate immune cells.

Steinke FC(1), Xue HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.

Transcription factors have recurring roles during T cell development and 
activation. Tcf1 and Lef1 are known to be essential for early stages of 
thymocyte maturation. Recent research has revealed several novel aspects of 
their functionality. Tcf1 is induced at the very earliest step of specifying 
hematopoietic progenitors to the T cell lineage as a key target gene downstream 
of Notch activation. In addition to promoting maturation of T-lineage-committed 
thymocytes, Tcf1 functions as a tumor suppressor in developing thymocytes, and 
this is mediated, paradoxically, by restraining Lef1 expression. After positive 
selection, Tcf1 and Lef1 act together to direct CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive 
thymocytes to a CD4(+) T cell fate. Although not required for CD8(+) T cell 
differentiation, Tcf1 and Lef1 cooperate with Runx factors to achieve stable 
silencing of the Cd4 gene in CD8(+) T cells. Tcf1 is also found to have 
versatile roles in innate immune cells, which partly mirror its functions in 
mature T helper cells. Discrepancy in requirements of Tcf1/Lef1 and β-catenin in 
T cells has been a long-standing enigma. We will review other protein factors 
interacting with Tcf1 and Lef1 and discuss their regulatory roles independent of 
β-catenin.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9
PMID: 24847765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
