---
pmid: '12915448'
title: The Lafora disease gene product laforin interacts with HIRIP5, a phylogenetically
  conserved protein containing a NifU-like domain.
authors:
- Ganesh S
- Tsurutani N
- Suzuki T
- Ueda K
- Agarwala KL
- Osada H
- Delgado-Escueta AV
- Yamakawa K
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg253
---

# The Lafora disease gene product laforin interacts with HIRIP5, a phylogenetically conserved protein containing a NifU-like domain.
**Authors:** Ganesh S, Tsurutani N, Suzuki T, Ueda K, Agarwala KL, Osada H, Delgado-Escueta AV, Yamakawa K
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg253](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg253)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Sep 15;12(18):2359-68. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg253. Epub 2003 
Jul 29.

The Lafora disease gene product laforin interacts with HIRIP5, a 
phylogenetically conserved protein containing a NifU-like domain.

Ganesh S(1), Tsurutani N, Suzuki T, Ueda K, Agarwala KL, Osada H, 
Delgado-Escueta AV, Yamakawa K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurogenetics, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1, Hirosawa, 
Wakoshi 351-0198, Japan. sganesh@iitk.ac.in

Lafora disease is an autosomal recessive type of progressive myoclonus epilepsy 
caused by mutations in the EPM2A gene. The EPM2A gene-encoded protein laforin is 
a dual-specificity phosphatase that associates with polyribosomes. Because the 
cellular functions of laforin are largely unknown, we used the yeast-two hybrid 
system to screen for protein(s) that interact with laforin. We found that 
laforin interacts with a phylogenetically conserved protein HIRIP5 that harbors 
a NifU-like domain. Both in vitro and in vivo assay have shown that the 
interaction is specific and that laforin probably uses its N-terminal CBD-4 
domain to interact with the C-terminal NifU-like domain of the HIRIP5 protein. 
HIRIP5 encodes a cytosolic protein and is expressed ubiquitously, perhaps 
reflecting a house-keeping function. The presence of a NifU-like domain in the 
HIRIP5 protein raises an interesting possibility that it may be involved in iron 
homeostasis. Although the significance of the interaction between HIRIP5 and 
laforin proteins is not yet fully known, because laforin dephosphorylated HIRIP5 
in vitro, HIRIP5 promises to be an interesting laforin-binding partner and would 
contribute to the understanding of the molecular pathology of Lafora disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg253
PMID: 12915448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
