---
pmid: '19690162'
title: Salmonella type III secretion effector SlrP is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for mammalian
  thioredoxin.
authors:
- Bernal-Bayard J
- Ramos-Morales F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2785687
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.010363
---

# Salmonella type III secretion effector SlrP is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for mammalian thioredoxin.
**Authors:** Bernal-Bayard J, Ramos-Morales F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.010363](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.010363)
**PMC:** [PMC2785687](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2785687/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 2;284(40):27587-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.010363. Epub 
2009 Aug 18.

Salmonella type III secretion effector SlrP is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for 
mammalian thioredoxin.

Bernal-Bayard J(1), Ramos-Morales F.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, 41080 
Sevilla, Spain.

Salmonella enterica encodes two virulence-related type III secretion systems in 
Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2, respectively. These systems mediate 
the translocation of protein effectors into the eukaryotic host cell, where they 
alter cell signaling and manipulate host cell functions. However, the precise 
role of most effectors remains unknown. Using a genetic screen, we identified 
the small, reduction/oxidation-regulatory protein thioredoxin as a mammalian 
binding partner of the Salmonella effector SlrP. The interaction was confirmed 
by affinity chromatography and coimmunoprecipitation. In vitro, SlrP was able to 
mediate ubiquitination of ubiquitin and thioredoxin. A Cys residue conserved in 
other effectors of the same family that also possess E3 ubiquitin ligase 
activity was essential for this catalytic function. Stable expression of SlrP in 
HeLa cells resulted in a significant decrease of thioredoxin activity and in an 
increase of cell death. The physiological significance of these results was 
strengthened by the finding that Salmonella was able to trigger cell death and 
inhibit thioredoxin activity in HeLa cells several hours post-infection. This 
study assigns a functional role to the Salmonella effector SlrP as a binding 
partner and an E3 ubiquitin ligase for mammalian thioredoxin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.010363
PMCID: PMC2785687
PMID: 19690162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
