---
pmid: '9202126'
title: A new protein containing an SH2 domain that inhibits JAK kinases.
authors:
- Endo TA
- Masuhara M
- Yokouchi M
- Suzuki R
- Sakamoto H
- Mitsui K
- Matsumoto A
- Tanimura S
- Ohtsubo M
- Misawa H
- Miyazaki T
- Leonor N
- Taniguchi T
- Fujita T
- Kanakura Y
- Komiya S
- Yoshimura A
journal: Nature
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/43213
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A new protein containing an SH2 domain that inhibits JAK kinases.
**Authors:** Endo TA, Masuhara M, Yokouchi M, Suzuki R, Sakamoto H, Mitsui K, Matsumoto A, Tanimura S, Ohtsubo M, Misawa H, Miyazaki T, Leonor N, Taniguchi T, Fujita T, Kanakura Y, Komiya S, Yoshimura A
**Journal:** Nature (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/43213](https://doi.org/10.1038/43213)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1997 Jun 26;387(6636):921-4. doi: 10.1038/43213.

A new protein containing an SH2 domain that inhibits JAK kinases.

Endo TA(1), Masuhara M, Yokouchi M, Suzuki R, Sakamoto H, Mitsui K, Matsumoto A, 
Tanimura S, Ohtsubo M, Misawa H, Miyazaki T, Leonor N, Taniguchi T, Fujita T, 
Kanakura Y, Komiya S, Yoshimura A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Aikawamachi, Japan.

The proliferation and differentiation of cells of many lineages are regulated by 
secreted proteins known as cytokines. Cytokines exert their biological effect 
through binding to cell-surface receptors that are associated with one or more 
members of the JAK family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases. Cytokine-induced 
receptor dimerization leads to the activation of JAKs, rapid 
tyrosine-phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic domains, and subsequent recruitment 
of various signalling proteins, including members of the STAT family of 
transcription factors, to the receptor complex. Using the yeast two-hybrid 
system, we have now isolated a new SH2-domain-containing protein, JAB, which is 
a JAK-binding protein that interacts with the Jak2 tyrosine-kinase JH1 domain. 
JAB is structurally related to CIS, a cytokine-inducible SH2 protein. 
Interaction of JAB with Jak1, Jak2 or Jak3 markedly reduces their 
tyrosine-kinase activity and suppresses the tyrosine-phosphorylation and 
activation of STATs. JAB and CIS appear to function as negative regulators in 
the JAK signalling pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/43213
PMID: 9202126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
