---
pmid: '15628863'
title: Oxidative stress-responsive intracellular regulation specific for the angiostatic
  form of human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase.
authors:
- Wakasugi K
- Nakano T
- Morishima I
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi048313k
---

# Oxidative stress-responsive intracellular regulation specific for the angiostatic form of human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase.
**Authors:** Wakasugi K, Nakano T, Morishima I
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi048313k](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi048313k)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2005 Jan 11;44(1):225-32. doi: 10.1021/bi048313k.

Oxidative stress-responsive intracellular regulation specific for the 
angiostatic form of human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase.

Wakasugi K(1), Nakano T, Morishima I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan. kei@wakasugi.mbox.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) exists in two forms in human cells, i.e., a 
major form which represents the full-length protein and a truncated form (mini 
TrpRS) in which an NH(2)-terminal extension is deleted because of alternative 
splicing of its pre-mRNA. Mini TrpRS can act as an angiostatic factor, while 
full-length TrpRS is inactive. We herein show that an oxidized form of human 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GapDH) interacts with both full-length 
and mini TrpRSs and specifically stimulates the aminoacylation potential of 
mini, but not full-length, TrpRS. In contrast, reduced GapDH did not bind to 
TrpRSs and did not influence their aminoacylation activity. Mutagenesis 
experiments clarified that the NH(2)-terminal Rossmann fold region of GapDH is 
crucial for its interaction with mini TrpRS as well as tRNA and for the 
regulation of its aminoacylation potential and suggested that monomeric GapDH 
can bind to mini TrpRS and stimulate its aminoacylation activity. These results 
suggest that the angiostatic human mini, but not the full-length, TrpRS may play 
an important role in the intracellular regulation of protein synthesis under 
conditions of oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1021/bi048313k
PMID: 15628863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
