---
pmid: '12881524'
title: Differential gene expression induced by insulin and insulin-like growth factor-II
  through the insulin receptor isoform A.
authors:
- Pandini G
- Medico E
- Conte E
- Sciacca L
- Vigneri R
- Belfiore A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304980200
---

# Differential gene expression induced by insulin and insulin-like growth factor-II through the insulin receptor isoform A.
**Authors:** Pandini G, Medico E, Conte E, Sciacca L, Vigneri R, Belfiore A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304980200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304980200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 24;278(43):42178-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304980200. Epub 
2003 Jul 24.

Differential gene expression induced by insulin and insulin-like growth 
factor-II through the insulin receptor isoform A.

Pandini G(1), Medico E, Conte E, Sciacca L, Vigneri R, Belfiore A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e di Medicine Specialistiche, Cattedra di 
Endocrinologia, University of Catania, USL 34, Ospedale Garibaldi, 95123 
Catania, Italy.

The human insulin receptor (IR) exists in two isoforms (IR-A and IR-B). IR-A is 
a short isoform, generated by the skipping of exon 11, a small exon encoding for 
12 amino acid residues at the carboxyl terminus of the IR alpha-subunit. 
Recently, we found that IR-A is the predominant isoform in fetal tissues and 
malignant cells and binds with a high affinity not only insulin but also 
insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II). To investigate whether the activation of 
IR-A by the two ligands differentially activate post-receptor molecular 
mechanisms, we studied gene expression in response to IR-A activation by either 
insulin or IGF-II, using microarray technology. To avoid the interfering effect 
of the IGF-IR, IGF-II binding to the IR-A was studied in IGF-IR-deficient murine 
fibroblasts (R- cells) transfected with the human IR-A cDNA (R-/IR-A cells). 
Gene expression was studied at 0.5, 3, and 8 h. We found that 214 transcripts 
were similarly regulated by insulin and IGF-II, whereas 45 genes were 
differentially transcribed. Eighteen of these differentially regulated genes 
were responsive to only one of the two ligands (12 to insulin and 6 to IGF-II). 
Twenty-seven transcripts were regulated by both insulin and IGF-II, but a 
significant difference between the two ligands was present at least in one time 
point. Interestingly, IGF-II was a more potent and/or persistent regulator than 
insulin for these genes. Results were validated by measuring the expression of 
12 genes by quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR. In conclusion, we 
show that insulin and IGF-II, acting via the same receptor, may differentially 
affect gene expression in cells. These studies provide a molecular basis for 
understanding some of the biological differences between the two ligands and may 
help to clarify the biological role of IR-A in embryonic/fetal growth and the 
selective biological advantage that malignant cells producing IGF-II may acquire 
via IR-A overexpression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304980200
PMID: 12881524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
