---
pmid: '2460457'
title: Structure and regulation of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase.
authors:
- Pajunen A
- Crozat A
- Jänne OA
- Ihalainen R
- Laitinen PH
- Stanley B
- Madhubala R
- Pegg AE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structure and regulation of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase.
**Authors:** Pajunen A, Crozat A, Jänne OA, Ihalainen R, Laitinen PH, Stanley B, Madhubala R, Pegg AE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1988)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1988 Nov 15;263(32):17040-9.

Structure and regulation of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase.

Pajunen A(1), Crozat A, Jänne OA, Ihalainen R, Laitinen PH, Stanley B, Madhubala 
R, Pegg AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oulu, Finland.

In order to understand the structure and regulation of S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase, cDNA clones encoding this enzyme have been isolated from rat 
prostate and human fibroblast cDNA libraries. The authenticity of the cDNAs was 
verified by: (a) transfecting the Chinese hamster ovary cells with the human 
cDNA in the pcD vector which resulted in a transient 10-20-fold increase in 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase activity in recipient cells; and (b) 
translating the mRNA formed by transcription of the cDNA insert in a 
reticulocyte lysate and recording an increase in S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase activity. The amino acid sequences deduced from the cDNAs indicate 
that the human proenzyme for this protein contains 334 amino acids and has a 
molecular weight of 38,331 whereas the rat proenzyme contains 333 amino acid 
residues. The human and rat enzymes are very similar having only 11 amino acid 
differences and the cDNAs are also closely related showing over 90% homology in 
the 1617-nucleotide overlap which was sequenced. A further indication of the 
highly conserved nature of mammalian S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylases is that 
the amino acid sequences deduced from the human and the rat cDNAs contained 
peptide sequences identical to those previously reported for the purified bovine 
enzyme. In vitro transcription/translation experiments showed that the proenzyme 
is converted to two polypeptides of molecular weights about 32,000 and 6,000 in 
a processing reaction which generates the prosthetic pyruvate group and that the 
final enzyme contains both polypeptides. Two forms of S-adenosylmethionine 
decarboxylase mRNA (2.1 and about 3.4-3.6 kilobases) are present in human and 
rodent tissues and may originate from the utilization of two different 
polyadenylation signals. Southern blots of rat genomic DNA indicated that the 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase gene belongs to a multigene family. Depletion 
of cellular polyamines by inhibitors or ornithine decarboxylase or the 
aminopropyltransferases led to an increase in the content of 
S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase protein and mRNA, but the elevation in the 
mRNA was not sufficient to account for all of the change in the enzyme level, 
particularly in cells in which spermine was depleted.

PMID: 2460457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
