---
pmid: '21728994'
title: The phosphatidylinositol transfer protein RdgBβ binds 14-3-3 via its unstructured
  C-terminus, whereas its lipid-binding domain interacts with the integral membrane
  protein ATRAP (angiotensin II type I receptor-associated protein).
authors:
- Garner K
- Li M
- Ugwuanya N
- Cockcroft S
journal: Biochem J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20110649
---

# The phosphatidylinositol transfer protein RdgBβ binds 14-3-3 via its unstructured C-terminus, whereas its lipid-binding domain interacts with the integral membrane protein ATRAP (angiotensin II type I receptor-associated protein).
**Authors:** Garner K, Li M, Ugwuanya N, Cockcroft S
**Journal:** Biochem J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20110649](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20110649)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2011 Oct 1;439(1):97-111. doi: 10.1042/BJ20110649.

The phosphatidylinositol transfer protein RdgBβ binds 14-3-3 via its 
unstructured C-terminus, whereas its lipid-binding domain interacts with the 
integral membrane protein ATRAP (angiotensin II type I receptor-associated 
protein).

Garner K(1), Li M, Ugwuanya N, Cockcroft S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Physiology and Pharmacology, University College 
London, London WC1E 6JJ, UK.

PITPs [PI (phosphatidylinositol) transfer proteins] bind and transfer PI between 
intracellular membranes and participate in many cellular processes including 
signalling, lipid metabolism and membrane traffic. The largely uncharacterized 
PITP RdgBβ (PITPNC1; retinal degeneration type B β), contains a long C-terminal 
disordered region following its defining N-terminal PITP domain. In the present 
study we report that the C-terminus contains two tandem phosphorylated binding 
sites (Ser(274) and Ser(299)) for 14-3-3. The C-terminus also contains PEST 
sequences which are shielded by 14-3-3 binding. Like many proteins containing 
PEST sequences, the levels of RdgBβ are regulated by proteolysis. RdgBβ is 
degraded with a half-life of 4 h following ubiquitination via the proteasome. A 
mutant RdgBβ which is unable to bind 14-3-3 is degraded even faster with a 
half-life of 2 h. In vitro, RdgBβ is 100-fold less active than PITPα for PI 
transfer, and RdgBβ proteins (wild-type and a mutant that cannot bind 14-3-3) 
expressed in COS-7 cells or endogenous proteins from heart cytosol do not 
exhibit transfer activity. When cells are treated with PMA, the PITP domain of 
RdgBβ interacts with the integral membrane protein ATRAP (angiotensin II type I 
receptor-associated protein; also known as AGTRAP) causing membrane recruitment. 
We suggest that RdgBβ executes its function following recruitment to membranes 
via its PITP domain and the C-terminal end of the protein could regulate entry 
to the hydrophobic cavity.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20110649
PMID: 21728994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
