---
pmid: '41269860'
title: Structural determination of the human taurine transporter TauT reveals the
  mechanism of substrate and inhibitor recognition.
authors:
- Lu Y
- Ding D
- Chen H
- Jiang P
- Luo J
- Shan H
- Wang G
- Luo J
- Yin Y
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116591
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural determination of the human taurine transporter TauT reveals the mechanism of substrate and inhibitor recognition.
**Authors:** Lu Y, Ding D, Chen H, Jiang P, Luo J, Shan H, Wang G, Luo J, Yin Y
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116591](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116591)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2025 Dec 23;44(12):116591. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116591. Epub 
2025 Nov 19.

Structural determination of the human taurine transporter TauT reveals the 
mechanism of substrate and inhibitor recognition.

Lu Y(1), Ding D(2), Chen H(3), Jiang P(3), Luo J(4), Shan H(4), Wang G(3), Luo 
J(5), Yin Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Precision Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen 518036, China; Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of 
Pathology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China; Department of Medical Genetics, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of Pathology, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 
Beijing 100191, China; Department of Biological Sciences, Division of Biomedical 
Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 
518036, China.
(3)Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of Pathology, Beijing Key 
Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, 
Beijing 100191, China.
(4)Institute of Precision Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen 518036, China.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking 
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.
(6)Institute of Precision Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, 
Shenzhen 518036, China; Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of 
Pathology, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China; Department of Biological Sciences, 
Division of Biomedical Health Sciences, School of Medicine, Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518036, China. Electronic address: 
yinyuxin@hsc.pku.edu.cn.

Taurine, a sulfur-containing amino acid, is vital for human health because of 
its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and osmoregulatory properties. Its 
homeostasis is maintained by the Na+/Cl--dependent taurine transporter (TauT). 
Here, we present five atomic structures of human TauT: apo, taurine bound, and 
complexes with three taurine-mimetic inhibitors, including β-alanine, 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and guanidinoethyl sulfonate (GES). The structures 
of taurine-, β-alanine-, and GABA-bound human TauT (hTauT) in complex with NaCl 
adopt an occluded conformation, with ligands binding in a central pocket. With 
KCl, GES-bound hTauT adopts an inward-facing conformation, with two GES 
positioned along the substrate translocation pathway in a bipartite manner: one 
in the deep central cavity and the other precluding structural transition to the 
occluded state. The radioactive taurine uptake analyses clearly demonstrate the 
impact of residues on taurine recognition and inhibitor selection. These 
structures provide insights into the overall architecture, substrate 
coordination, and inhibitor recognition mechanism of TauT.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116591
PMID: 41269860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
