---
pmid: '20489164'
title: EH domain proteins regulate cardiac membrane protein targeting.
authors:
- Gudmundsson H
- Hund TJ
- Wright PJ
- Kline CF
- Snyder JS
- Qian L
- Koval OM
- Cunha SR
- George M
- Rainey MA
- Kashef FE
- Dun W
- Boyden PA
- Anderson ME
- Band H
- Mohler PJ
journal: Circ Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2901408
doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.216713
---

# EH domain proteins regulate cardiac membrane protein targeting.
**Authors:** Gudmundsson H, Hund TJ, Wright PJ, Kline CF, Snyder JS, Qian L, Koval OM, Cunha SR, George M, Rainey MA, Kashef FE, Dun W, Boyden PA, Anderson ME, Band H, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** Circ Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.216713](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.216713)
**PMC:** [PMC2901408](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2901408/)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2010 Jul 9;107(1):84-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.216713. Epub
2010  May 20.

EH domain proteins regulate cardiac membrane protein targeting.

Gudmundsson H(1), Hund TJ, Wright PJ, Kline CF, Snyder JS, Qian L, Koval OM, 
Cunha SR, George M, Rainey MA, Kashef FE, Dun W, Boyden PA, Anderson ME, Band H, 
Mohler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, USA.

RATIONALE: Cardiac membrane excitability is tightly regulated by an integrated 
network of membrane-associated ion channels, transporters, receptors, and 
signaling molecules. Membrane protein dynamics in health and disease are 
maintained by a complex ensemble of intracellular targeting, scaffolding, 
recycling, and degradation pathways. Surprisingly, despite decades of research 
linking dysfunction in membrane protein trafficking with human cardiovascular 
disease, essentially nothing is known regarding the molecular identity or 
function of these intracellular targeting pathways in excitable cardiomyocytes.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to discover novel pathways for membrane protein targeting 
in primary cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report the initial characterization of a large family of 
membrane trafficking proteins in human heart. We used a tissue-wide screen for 
novel ankyrin-associated trafficking proteins and identified 4 members of a 
unique Eps15 homology (EH) domain-containing protein family (EHD1, EHD2, EHD3, 
EHD4) that serve critical roles in endosome-based membrane protein targeting in 
other cell types. We show that EHD1-4 directly associate with ankyrin, provide 
the first information on the expression and localization of these molecules in 
primary cardiomyocytes, and demonstrate that EHD1-4 are coexpressed with 
ankyrin-B in the myocyte perinuclear region. Notably, the expression of multiple 
EHD proteins is increased in animal models lacking ankyrin-B, and EHD3-deficient 
cardiomyocytes display aberrant ankyrin-B localization and selective loss of 
Na/Ca exchanger expression and function. Finally, we report significant 
modulation of EHD expression following myocardial infarction, suggesting that 
these proteins may play a key role in regulating membrane excitability in normal 
and diseased heart.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings identify and characterize a new class of cardiac 
trafficking proteins, define the first group of proteins associated with the 
ankyrin-based targeting network, and identify potential new targets to modulate 
membrane excitability in disease. Notably, these data provide the first link 
between EHD proteins and a human disease model.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.216713
PMCID: PMC2901408
PMID: 20489164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
