---
pmid: '7913882'
title: 7B2 is a neuroendocrine chaperone that transiently interacts with prohormone
  convertase PC2 in the secretory pathway.
authors:
- Braks JA
- Martens GJ
journal: Cell
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90296-8
---

# 7B2 is a neuroendocrine chaperone that transiently interacts with prohormone convertase PC2 in the secretory pathway.
**Authors:** Braks JA, Martens GJ
**Journal:** Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(94)90296-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90296-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1994 Jul 29;78(2):263-73. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90296-8.

7B2 is a neuroendocrine chaperone that transiently interacts with prohormone 
convertase PC2 in the secretory pathway.

Braks JA(1), Martens GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The neuroendocrine polypeptide 7B2 is a highly conserved secretory protein 
selectively present in prohormone-producing cells equipped with a regulated 
secretory pathway. We find that the amino-terminal half of 7B2 is distantly 
related to chaperonins, a subclass of molecular chaperones. When incubated in 
vitro with newly synthesized pituitary proteins, recombinant 7B2 specifically 
associates with prohormone convertase PC2. Metabolic cell labeling combined with 
coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that, in vivo, the precursor form of 7B2 
interacts with the proform of PC2. Pulse-chase analysis revealed that this 
association is transient in that it commences early in the secretory pathway, 
while dissociation in the later stages appears to coincide with the cleavages of 
7B2, proPC2, and prohormone. Our results suggest that 7B2 is a novel type of 
molecular chaperone preventing premature activation of proPC2 in the regulated 
secretory pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90296-8
PMID: 7913882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
