---
pmid: '9311995'
title: TGF-beta receptor-mediated signalling through Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4.
authors:
- Nakao A
- Imamura T
- Souchelnytskyi S
- Kawabata M
- Ishisaki A
- Oeda E
- Tamaki K
- Hanai J
- Heldin CH
- Miyazono K
- ten Dijke P
journal: EMBO J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170167
doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.17.5353
---

# TGF-beta receptor-mediated signalling through Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4.
**Authors:** Nakao A, Imamura T, Souchelnytskyi S, Kawabata M, Ishisaki A, Oeda E, Tamaki K, Hanai J, Heldin CH, Miyazono K, ten Dijke P
**Journal:** EMBO J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/16.17.5353](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.17.5353)
**PMC:** [PMC1170167](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170167/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1997 Sep 1;16(17):5353-62. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.17.5353.

TGF-beta receptor-mediated signalling through Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4.

Nakao A(1), Imamura T, Souchelnytskyi S, Kawabata M, Ishisaki A, Oeda E, Tamaki 
K, Hanai J, Heldin CH, Miyazono K, ten Dijke P.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Box 595, S-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.

Smad family members are newly identified essential intracellular signalling 
components of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily. Smad2 
and Smad3 are structurally highly similar and mediate TGF-beta signals. Smad4 is 
distantly related to Smads 2 and 3, and forms a heteromeric complex with Smad2 
after TGF-beta or activin stimulation. Here we show that Smad2 and Smad3 
interacted with the kinase-deficient TGF-beta type I receptor (TbetaR)-I after 
it was phosphorylated by TbetaR-II kinase. TGF-beta1 induced phosphorylation of 
Smad2 and Smad3 in Mv1Lu mink lung epithelial cells. Smad4 was found to be 
constitutively phosphorylated in Mv1Lu cells, the phosphorylation level 
remaining unchanged upon TGF-beta1 stimulation. Similar results were obtained 
using HSC4 cells, which are also growth-inhibited by TGF-beta. Smads 2 and 3 
interacted with Smad4 after TbetaR activation in transfected COS cells. In 
addition, we observed TbetaR-activation-dependent interaction between Smad2 and 
Smad3. Smads 2, 3 and 4 accumulated in the nucleus upon TGF-beta1 treatment in 
Mv1Lu cells, and showed a synergistic effect in a transcriptional reporter assay 
using the TGF-beta-inducible plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 promoter. 
Dominant-negative Smad3 inhibited the transcriptional synergistic response by 
Smad2 and Smad4. These data suggest that TGF-beta induces heteromeric complexes 
of Smads 2, 3 and 4, and their concomitant translocation to the nucleus, which 
is required for efficient TGF-beta signal transduction.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/16.17.5353
PMCID: PMC1170167
PMID: 9311995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
