---
pmid: '16126191'
title: Drosophila myosin V is required for larval development and spermatid individualization.
authors:
- Mermall V
- Bonafé N
- Jones L
- Sellers JR
- Cooley L
- Mooseker MS
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.07.028
---

# Drosophila myosin V is required for larval development and spermatid individualization.
**Authors:** Mermall V, Bonafé N, Jones L, Sellers JR, Cooley L, Mooseker MS
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.07.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.07.028)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 1;286(1):238-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.07.028.

Drosophila myosin V is required for larval development and spermatid 
individualization.

Mermall V(1), Bonafé N, Jones L, Sellers JR, Cooley L, Mooseker MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Class V myosins are multifunctional molecular motors implicated in vesicular 
traffic, RNA transport, and mechanochemical coupling of the actin and 
microtubule-based cytoskeletons. To assess the function of the single myosin V 
gene in Drosophila (MyoV), we have characterized both deletion and truncation 
alleles. Mutant animals exhibit no detectable defects during embryogenesis but 
are delayed in larval development; most die prior to 3rd instar. MyoV protein is 
widely distributed; however, there are no obvious cytological defects in mutant 
larval tissues where MyoV was normally highly expressed. Of the few adult MyoV 
mutant escapers, females were fertile but males were not. We examined the 
expression of MyoV during spermatogenesis. MyoV was associated with membranes, 
microtubule, and actin structures required for spermatid maturation; MyoV was 
strongly associated with the sperm nuclei during the maturation of the 
actin-rich investment cones that package spermatids in individual membranes. In 
MyoV mutant escaper males, the early stages of spermatogenesis were normal; 
however, in the later stages, the investment cones stained weakly for actin and 
their registration was disrupted; no mature sperm were produced. Our results 
suggest that MyoV contributes to the formation of the actin-based investment 
cones and acts to coordinate and/or anchor these structures and other components 
of the individualization complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.07.028
PMID: 16126191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
