---
pmid: '11437381'
title: Tumor autocrine motility factor is an angiogenic factor that stimulates endothelial
  cell motility.
authors:
- Funasaka T
- Haga A
- Raz A
- Nagase H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5135
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Tumor autocrine motility factor is an angiogenic factor that stimulates endothelial cell motility.
**Authors:** Funasaka T, Haga A, Raz A, Nagase H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.2001.5135](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.2001.5135)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 6;285(1):118-28. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.5135.

Tumor autocrine motility factor is an angiogenic factor that stimulates 
endothelial cell motility.

Funasaka T(1), Haga A, Raz A, Nagase H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hygienics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, Gifu, 502, Japan.

Autocrine motility factor (AMF) is a type of tumor-secreted cytokine which 
primarily stimulates tumor cell motility via receptor-mediated signaling 
pathways, and is thought to be connected to tumor progression and metastasis. 
Using in vivo models, we showed that critical neovascularization responded to a 
biological amount of AMF. This angiogenic activity was fixed by specific 
inhibitors against AMF. AMF stimulated in vitro motility of human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVECs), inducing the expression of cell surface AMF receptor 
localizing a single predominant perinuclear pattern closely correlated with its 
motile ability. AMF also elicited the formation of tube-like structures 
mimicking angiogenesis when HUVECs were grown in three-dimensional type I 
collagen gels. We further immunohistochemically detected AMF receptors on the 
surrounding sites of newborn microvessels. These findings suggest that AMF is a 
possible tumor progressive angiogenic factor which may act in a paracrine manner 
for the endothelial cells in the clinical neoplasm, and it will be a new target 
for antiangiogenic treatment.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.5135
PMID: 11437381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
