---
pmid: '24027266'
title: MiR-26b, upregulated in Alzheimer's disease, activates cell cycle entry, tau-phosphorylation,
  and apoptosis in postmitotic neurons.
authors:
- Absalon S
- Kochanek DM
- Raghavan V
- Krichevsky AM
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3810537
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013
---

# MiR-26b, upregulated in Alzheimer's disease, activates cell cycle entry, tau-phosphorylation, and apoptosis in postmitotic neurons.
**Authors:** Absalon S, Kochanek DM, Raghavan V, Krichevsky AM
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013)
**PMC:** [PMC3810537](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3810537/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 11;33(37):14645-59. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013.

MiR-26b, upregulated in Alzheimer's disease, activates cell cycle entry, 
tau-phosphorylation, and apoptosis in postmitotic neurons.

Absalon S(1), Kochanek DM, Raghavan V, Krichevsky AM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

MicroRNA (miRNA) functions in the pathogenesis of major neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) are only beginning to emerge. We have 
observed significantly elevated levels of a specific miRNA, miR-26b, in the 
defined pathological areas of human postmortem brains, starting from early 
stages of AD (Braak III). Ectopic overexpression of miR-26b in rat primary 
postmitotic neurons led to the DNA replication and aberrant cell cycle entry 
(CCE) and, in parallel, increased tau-phosphorylation, which culminated in the 
apoptotic cell death of neurons. Similar tau hyperphosphorylation and CCE are 
typical features of neurons in pre-AD brains. Sequence-specific inhibition of 
miR-26b in culture is neuroprotective against oxidative stress. Retinoblastoma 
protein (Rb1), a major tumor suppressor, appears as the key direct miR-26b 
target, which mediates the observed neuronal phenotypes. The downstream 
signaling involves upregulation of Rb1/E2F cell cycle and pro-apoptotic 
transcriptional targets, including cyclin E1, and corresponding downregulation 
of cell cycle inhibitor p27/Kip1. It further leads to nuclear export and 
activation of Cdk5, a major kinase implicated in tau phosphorylation, regulation 
of cell cycle, and death in postmitotic neurons. Therefore, upregulation of 
miR-26b in neurons causes pleiotropic phenotypes that are also observed in AD. 
Elevated levels of miR-26b may thus contribute to the AD neuronal pathology.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1327-13.2013
PMCID: PMC3810537
PMID: 24027266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

MicroRNA (miRNA) functions in the pathogenesis of major neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) are only beginning to emerge. We have observed significantly elevated levels of a specific miRNA, miR-26b, in the defined pathological areas of human postmortem brains, starting from early stages of AD (Braak III). Ectopic overexpression of miR-26b in rat primary postmitotic neurons led to the DNA replication and aberrant cell cycle entry (CCE) and, in parallel, increased tau-phosphorylation, which culminated in the apoptotic cell death of neurons. Similar tau hyperphosphorylation and CCE are typical features of neurons in pre-AD brains. Sequence-specific inhibition of miR-26b in culture is neuroprotective against oxidative stress. Retinoblastoma protein (Rb1), a major tumor suppressor, appears as the key direct miR-26b target, which mediates the observed neuronal phenotypes. The downstream signaling involves upregulation of Rb1/E2F cell cycle and pro-apoptotic transcriptional targets, including cyclin E1, and corresponding downregulation of cell cycle inhibitor p27/Kip1. It further leads to nuclear export and activation of Cdk5, a major kinase implicated in tau phosphorylation, regulation of cell cycle, and death in postmitotic neurons. Therefore, upregulation of miR-26b in neurons causes pleiotropic phenotypes that are also observed in AD. Elevated levels of miR-26b may thus contribute to the AD neuronal pathology.

Introduction

There are 5.3 million Americans living with Alzheimer's disease (AD), the major neurodegenerative disease of aging, and the number of people affected by the disease is predicted to double within 20 years. Despite significant progress in the field, medical science still has little to offer. Therefore, there is a critical need in new molecular targets, concepts, and approaches to treat this devastating disease.

miRNA, a class of small noncoding transcripts, regulates gene expression in various physiological and pathological conditions. miRNAs are important players in various cancers, acting as oncogenes and tumor suppressors ( Hammond, 2006 ; Hwang and Mendell, 2006 ). In the mammalian nervous system, miRNA is known to play important roles in development, metabolism, and neural plasticity. Studies have shown that dysregulation of miRNA may play a role in several neurodegenerative diseases ( Lau and de Strooper, 2010 ; Provost, 2010 ; Zovoilis et al., 2011 ) and some key AD proteins are predicted or validated as miRNA targets ( Hébert et al., 2008 , 2009 ; Vilardo et al., 2010 ; Zhu et al., 2012b ); however, to date no evidence of miRNA-mediated regulation of AD progression has been demonstrated.

AD is a multifactorial disease characterized by Aβ deposition, tau hyperphosphorylation, oxidative stress, cholinergic deficits, progressive synaptic loss, and neurodegeneration. How all these typical characteristics of AD relate to each other is not clear. One of the earliest neuronal abnormalities in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD is dysregulation of the cell cycle in postmitotic neurons, cells that are not normally cycling ( Nagy et al., 1997 ; Vincent et al., 1997 ; Yang et al., 2001 ; Neve and McPhie, 2006 ; McShea et al., 2007 ; Bonda et al., 2010 ). Neuronal cell cycle regulatory failure presented by aberrant cell cycle entry (CCE) and often leading to cell death, may be a significant component of AD pathogenesis. Accumulating evidence suggests that CCE in neurons may precede tau and amyloid pathology, and that there is a link between CCE and tau-hyperphosphorylation ( Andorfer et al., 2005 ; Park et al., 2007 ; Jaworski et al., 2009 ). A number of studies indicates that almost all neurons that exhibit tau pathology are also positive for various markers of cell cycle ( Busser et al., 1998 ; Keeney et al., 2012 ; Seward et al., 2013 ).

In this study we identified a specific miRNA, miR-26b, whose levels rise at early stages of AD (Braak III, which usually corresponds to MCI) and remain elevated in the defined pathological areas of human AD brains during the disease progression. We demonstrate that overexpression (OE) of this miRNA in cultured postmitotic neurons leads to CCE. We validate tumor suppressor Retinoblastoma 1 (Rb1) as a principal target that mediates miR-26b-induced CCE in neurons. Furthermore, both OE of miR-26b and inhibition of Rb1 cause activation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) and increase tau phosphorylation at AD-relevant epitopes, followed by apoptosis and neurodegeneration in culture. We propose that miR-26b upregulation, observed in AD, perturbs signaling pathways associated with neuronal cell cycle, and thereby causes pleiotropic phenotypes associated with the disease. We propose that miR-26b has an important function in the pathophysiology of AD.

Discussion

miR-26a/b has been associated with the regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis in cancer cells, acting in different cellular contexts either as a growth-promoting or as a growth-suppressive miRNA ( Huse et al., 2009 ; Kota et al., 2009 ; Kim et al., 2010 ; Lu et al., 2011 ; Zhu et al., 2012a ). Our work demonstrates that miR-26b is upregulated in temporal cortex in AD, starting from early prodromal stages, and in postmitotic rodent and human neurons it may induce aberrant CCE, increase tau-phosphorylation, and lead to apoptotic cell death.

It is documented in AD brains that neurons of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex demonstrate appearance of cell cycle markers and partial or full DNA replication. For example a number of cyclins and CDKs, typical for proliferative cells, appear in postmitotic neurons at early stages of AD ( Arendt et al., 1998 ; Smith et al., 1999 ). Conversely, many cell cycle inhibitors, including p27 kip1 , are downregulated in AD ( Janicki and Monteiro, 1999 ). Reports of cell cycle markers preceding other hallmarks of AD (Aβ plaques and NFTs) suggest aberrant CCE in postmitotic neurons may be a causative factor or have a key role in the pathogenesis of the disease ( Lopes et al., 2009 ; Bonda et al., 2010 ; Swerdlow, 2012 ). While many vulnerable neurons in AD enter S-phase of the cell cycle, exhibit DNA replication and sometimes binucleation events, M-phase is not entered ( Bonda et al., 2009 ; Moh et al., 2011 ; Yurov et al., 2011 ). It is generally accepted that neurons entering the cell cycle are ultimately destined for death; better understanding of how aberrant CCE in postmitotic neurons contributes to AD progression and how it relates to other hallmarks of the disease is vital to help decipher the pathogenesis of AD.

Findings presented in this work suggest elevation of miR-26b in AD neurons induces cell cycle, directly targets Rb1, and causes activation of Cdk5, leading to tau-phosphorylation followed by apoptosis. Rb1, a key tumor suppressor protein, regulates cell proliferation by controlling progression through the restriction point within the G 1 -phase of the cell cycle. Hypophosphorylated Rb1 binds and inhibits the transcription factor E2F, which is required for transcription of S-phase genes, while phosphorylation by CDKs inhibits Rb1-E2F binding and thereby allows cell cycle progression. In neurons, Rb1 is expressed at high levels, likely contributing to the postmitotic state of these cells. Remarkably, miR-26b regulates Rb1 directly by binding to Rb1 mRNA and inhibiting its expression and, consequently, indirectly by functional inactivation through its phosphorylation. Similarly, Rb1 downregulation by siRNA also leads to Rb1 phosphorylation ( Fig. 6 ). Rb1 reduction may lead to phosphorylation of the remaining Rb1 protein by increasing Cdk5 kinase activity ( Fig. 7 B , C ). Activated transcription of established E2F targets such as cyclin E and Cdk2 can also lead to elevation of Cdk2-cyclin E that phosphorylates Rb1, and thereby further drive progression into S-phase ( Yoshida et al., 2013 ).

Although, in addition to Rb1, miR-26b may regulate other transcripts, Rb1 appears as the major target in postmitotic neurons as its downregulation by siRNA recapitulated pleiotropic effects (including CCE and apoptosis) induced by miR-26b ( Fig. 6 ). Downregulated Rb1 expression and activity resulted in elevated transcription of E2F target genes, including both S-phase and pro-apoptotic genes, which may provide a direct link between miR-26b-induced CCE and apoptosis. Furthermore, E2F1 silencing abolishes at least some of the key miR-26b-induced effects in neurons ( Fig. 5 D ). Previous studies support the idea of Rb1/E2F pathway coupling CCE and apoptosis, which is often observed in neurons under stress and in neurodegenerative disorders. For example, E2F OE in cortical neurons is sufficient to induce apoptosis ( Hou et al., 2000 ), whereas lack of E2F confers protection from death induced by β-amyloid ( Giovanni et al., 2000 ). OE of constitutively active Rb1 protects neurons from death by camptothecin ( Park et al., 2000 ) and after hypoxic insult ( Rashidian et al., 2005 ). Finally, Rb1 conditional knock-out in mice results in a neurodegeneration of adult forebrain neurons, suggesting postmitotic terminally differentiated neurons require Rb1 for continuous cell cycle repression and survival ( Andrusiak et al., 2012 ).

Altered Rb1/E2F expression and activity have been observed in AD. Several studies reported increased phospho-Rb1 immunoreactivity in neurons during the early stages of AD ( Jordan-Sciutto et al., 2003 ; Hoozemans et al., 2005 ; Thakur et al., 2008 ). An analysis of the transcriptome of brains with different levels of AD severity established a ∼1300 gene signature associated with the disease progression. Notably, more than half of the identified genes (656) were putative E2F transcriptional targets ( Gómez Ravetti et al., 2010 ), further implicating E2F-driven transcription in AD progression.

Clear effects of miR-26b OE in neurons were seen in the strong upregulation of the E2F target CCNE1, and the corresponding downregulation of CCNE1-CDK2 substrate cell cycle inhibitor p27 kip1 ( Fig. 2 ). Zhang et al. (2010) identified p27 as a component of nuclear complex blocking neuronal cell cycle. This complex consisting of p27, Cdk5, and p35, binds to E2F1 and prevents its transcriptional activity. P27 is crucial for nuclear retention of this complex; in conditions of p27 deficiency, Cdk5 is not retained in the nucleus and cannot further suppress E2F-driven transcription, thus eliminating cell cycle suppression. Indeed, in miR-26b overexpressing neurons, p27 reduction was accompanied by the corresponding nuclear export of Cdk5 ( Fig. 3 ). Notably, not only cellular localization of Cdk5 changed but also its enzymatic activity significantly increased, as indicated by the amount of Cdk5 coimmunoprecipitated with its activator p25/p35 and the increased phosphorylation of substrates Rb1, tau, and histone H1 ( Fig. 7 ). Importantly, Cdk5 is one of the key tau kinases involved in pathological tau hyperphosphorylation in AD. Indeed, we observed a significant miR-26b-induced increase in tau-phosphorylation at several residues that are Cdk5 epitopes, characteristic for both early and late NFTs, respectively.

In cycling neural and non-neural cells, tau-phosphorylation at AD-related epitopes is cell cycle dependent: it is low in interphase and reaches its peak in mitosis ( Preuss et al., 1995 ; Illenberger et al., 1998 ). In agreement with previous work describing a link between CCE and tau-phosphorylation ( Schindowski et al., 2008 ; Keeney et al., 2012 ), we show miR-26b elevation leads to both CCE and tau-phosphorylation in neurons. A similarity between the pattern of tau-phosphorylation in dividing neural cells and neurons degenerating in AD suggests aging neurons respond to inappropriate signals by attempts to enter cell cycle and regenerate, and increased phosphorylation of tau may represent a part of this mechanism.

Frequent coincidents between CCE and hyperphosphorylated tau/NFT in the same neurons have been reported. For example, in AD and other tauopathies, almost all NFT-positive neurons are also positive for PCNA ( Busser et al., 1998 ) or other cell cycle markers ( Bonda et al., 2009 ). In normally aged brain, AD, and several other tauopathies, phosphorylated Rb1 is detected mostly in neurons that exhibit tau pathology and NFTs ( Thakur et al., 2008 ; Stone et al., 2011 ). Collectively, these data suggest a spatiotemporal, and perhaps also causative link between CCE and tau-phosphorylation, which is most likely mediated through Cdk5: when it is nuclear it blocks the cell cycle, whereas when exported to the cytosol it does not repress the cell cycle and CCE is induced. It also becomes more enzymatically active as a tau kinase, leading to tau hyperphosphorylation. If this is true, stimuli that induce neuronal CCE by removing the Cdk5 nuclear block might also lead to tau hyperphosphorylation. There are studies that support this, e.g., ectopic cell cycle activation by SV40 oncogene in postmitotic neurons in mice display a neurodegenerative phenotype associated by tau pathology and NFT-like profiles ( Park et al., 2007 ). The aberrant CCE accompanied by tau pathology and changes in neuronal cytoskeleton ultimately lead to apoptosis and neurodegeneration.

Based on our data and previous studies outlined above, we propose the following model of miR-26b function in AD pathogenesis. miR-26b is upregulated in neurons at early stages of AD/MCI by a yet unknown mechanism. miR-26b directly binds and reduces expression of Rb1, which in turn leads to de-repression of E2F1 and activates transcription of both cell cycle and pro-apoptotic gene targets. Significant increase in CCNE1 may lead to CCNE1/Cdk2-dependent phosphorylation and degradation of p27 kip1 ( Sheaff et al., 1997 ; Vlach et al., 1997 ) followed by the remodeling/dissociation of nuclear p27/Cdk5 complex that normally inhibits cell cycle in neurons. Failure of this block leads to further progression into cell cycle and is accompanied by Cdk5 nuclear export and its increased kinase activity ( Fig. 8 D ). This, in turn, leads to increased phosphorylation of tau and Rb1, thereby further perpetuating cell cycle, inducing expression of pro-apoptotic genes, and altering microtubule dynamics. Collectively, these profound miR-26b-induced alterations in neuronal metabolism ultimately cause death of postmitotic neurons, at least in vitro . Since numerous Rb1/E2F target genes (both drivers of cell cycle drivers and apoptosis) are induced by miR-26b, the precise molecular mechanism remains to be further investigated. Our data suggest miR-26b-induced neuron death, which happens as a consequence of aberrant CCE, induction of pro-apoptotic genes, and tau-hyperphosphorylation, might represent part of the process underlying AD pathogenesis. They also suggest inhibition of miR-26 as a novel strategy for neuroprotection.
