---
pmid: '20308583'
title: Out-of-equilibrium conformational cycling of GroEL under saturating ATP concentrations.
authors:
- Frank GA
- Goomanovsky M
- Davidi A
- Ziv G
- Horovitz A
- Haran G
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2852005
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910246107
---

# Out-of-equilibrium conformational cycling of GroEL under saturating ATP concentrations.
**Authors:** Frank GA, Goomanovsky M, Davidi A, Ziv G, Horovitz A, Haran G
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0910246107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910246107)
**PMC:** [PMC2852005](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2852005/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 6;107(14):6270-4. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0910246107. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Out-of-equilibrium conformational cycling of GroEL under saturating ATP 
concentrations.

Frank GA(1), Goomanovsky M, Davidi A, Ziv G, Horovitz A, Haran G.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemical Physics and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

The molecular chaperone GroEL exists in at least two allosteric states, T and R, 
that interconvert in an ATP-controlled manner. Thermodynamic analysis suggests 
that the T-state population becomes negligible with increasing ATP 
concentrations, in conflict with the requirement for conformational cycling, 
which is essential for the operation of molecular machines. To solve this 
conundrum, we performed fluorescence correlation spectroscopy on the single-ring 
version of GroEL, using a fluorescent switch recently built into its structure, 
which turns "on," i.e., increases its fluorescence dramatically, when ATP is 
added. A series of correlation functions was measured as a function of ATP 
concentration and analyzed using singular-value decomposition. The analysis 
assigned the signal to two states whose dynamics clearly differ. Surprisingly, 
even at ATP saturation, approximately 50% of the molecules still populate the T 
state at any instance of time, indicating constant out-of-equilibrium cycling 
between T and R. Only upon addition of the cochaperonin GroES does the T-state 
population vanish. Our results suggest a model in which the T/R ratio is 
controlled by the rate of ADP release after hydrolysis, which can be determined 
accordingly.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0910246107
PMCID: PMC2852005
PMID: 20308583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
