---
pmid: '9855024'
title: Effects of dietary anticarcinogens on rat gastrointestinal glutathione S-transferase
  theta 1-1 levels.
authors:
- van Lieshout EM
- Bedaf MM
- Pieter M
- Ekkel C
- Nijhoff WA
- Peters WH
journal: Carcinogenesis
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/carcin/19.11.2055
---

# Effects of dietary anticarcinogens on rat gastrointestinal glutathione S-transferase theta 1-1 levels.
**Authors:** van Lieshout EM, Bedaf MM, Pieter M, Ekkel C, Nijhoff WA, Peters WH
**Journal:** Carcinogenesis (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/carcin/19.11.2055](https://doi.org/10.1093/carcin/19.11.2055)

## Abstract

1. Carcinogenesis. 1998 Nov;19(11):2055-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/19.11.2055.

Effects of dietary anticarcinogens on rat gastrointestinal glutathione 
S-transferase theta 1-1 levels.

van Lieshout EM(1), Bedaf MM, Pieter M, Ekkel C, Nijhoff WA, Peters WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, St Radboud University Hospital, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Several naturally occurring food components or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) may reduce gastrointestinal cancer rates. Recently we have shown 
that dietary administration of such compounds enhanced the glutathione 
S-transferase (GST) enzyme activity and class alpha, mu and pi isoenzyme levels 
in the rat gastrointestinal tract. Elevation of the levels of GSTs, a family of 
biotransformation enzymes with many functions such as detoxification of 
carcinogens, might be one of the mechanisms that lead to cancer prevention. We 
therefore investigated whether the anticarcinogens alpha-angelicalactone, 
alpha-tocopherol, beta-carotene, coumarin, ellagic acid, flavone, 
indole-3-carbinol, d-limonene, oltipraz, phenethylisothiocyanate (PEITC) and the 
sulphoraphane analogue compound-30 affect gastrointestinal rGSTT1-1 protein 
levels in male Wistar rats. rGSTT1-1 protein levels were determined in cytosolic 
fractions of liver and oesophageal-, gastric-, small intestinal- and colonic 
mucosa by densitometrical analyses of western blots after immunodetection with 
an anti human GSTT1-1 monoclonal antibody, that cross-reacts with rGSTT1-1. In 
control Wistar rats, gastrointestinal rGSTT1-1 protein levels were highest in 
the liver and decreased in the order liver > stomach > colon > oesophagus > 
small intestine. Gastric rGSTT1-1 protein levels were enhanced by 
alpha-angelicalactone, alpha-tocopherol, coumarin, ellagic acid, oltipraz, PEITC 
and the sulphoraphane analogue compound-30. Oesophageal rGSTT1-1 protein levels 
were elevated by a-angelicalactone and coumarin, whereas colonic rGSTT1-1 
protein levels were elevated by coumarin. Ellagic acid, on the other hand, 
reduced hepatic rGSTT1-1 protein levels to 53% of the control. In conclusion, 
dietary anticarcinogens are capable of inducing rGSTT1-1 protein levels in the 
rat gastrointestinal tract, and are most pronounced in the stomach. Enhanced 
rGSTT1-1 protein levels might lead to an increase of enzyme activity and to a 
more efficient detoxification of carcinogens and thus could contribute to 
prevention of carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/19.11.2055
PMID: 9855024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
