---
pmid: '8896564'
title: Positional cloning of the Fanconi anaemia group A gene.
authors:
- Fanconi anaemia/Breast cancer consortium
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1196-324
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Positional cloning of the Fanconi anaemia group A gene.
**Authors:** Fanconi anaemia/Breast cancer consortium
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1196-324](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1196-324)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Nov;14(3):324-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1196-324.

Positional cloning of the Fanconi anaemia group A gene.

Fanconi anaemia/Breast cancer consortium.

Collaborators: Apostolou S, Whitmore SA, Crawford J, Lennon G, Sutherland GR, 
Callen DF, Ianzano L, Savino M, D'Apolito M, Notarangelo A, Memeo E, Piemontese 
MR, Zelante L, Savino A, Gibson RA, Tipping AJ, Morgan NV, Hassock S, Jansen S, 
de Ravel TJ, Van Berkel C, Pronk JC, Easton DF, Mathew CG, Levran O, Verlander 
PC, Batish SD, Erlich TE, Auerbach AD, Cleton-Jansen AM, Moerland EW, Cornelisse 
CJ, Doggett NA, Deaven LL, Moyzis RK.

Fanconi anaemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with 
progressive bone-marrow failure, a variety of congenital abnormalities, and 
predisposition to acute myeloid leukaemia. Cells from FA patients show increased 
sensitivity to bifunctional DNA crosslinking agents such as diepoxybutane and 
mitomycin C, with characteristic chromosome breakage. FA is genetically 
heterogeneous, at least five different complementation groups (FA-A to FA-E) 
having been described. The gene for group C (FAC) was cloned by functional 
complementation and mapped to chromosome 9q22.3 (refs 3, 5), but the genes for 
the other complementation groups have not yet been identified. The group A gene 
(FAA) has recently been mapped to chromosome 16q24.3 by linkage analysis, and 
accounts for 60-65% of FA cases. We narrowed the candidate region by linkage and 
allelic association analysis, and have isolated a gene that is mutated in FA-A 
patients. The gene encodes a protein of 1,455 amino acids that has no 
significant homology to any other known proteins, and may therefore represent a 
new class of genes associated with the prevention or repair of DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1196-324
PMID: 8896564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
