---
pmid: '20032460'
title: Inhibition of calcineurin-mediated endocytosis and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
  acid (AMPA) receptors prevents amyloid beta oligomer-induced synaptic disruption.
authors:
- Zhao WQ
- Santini F
- Breese R
- Ross D
- Zhang XD
- Stone DJ
- Ferrer M
- Townsend M
- Wolfe AL
- Seager MA
- Kinney GG
- Shughrue PJ
- Ray WJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2844209
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057182
---

# Inhibition of calcineurin-mediated endocytosis and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors prevents amyloid beta oligomer-induced synaptic disruption.
**Authors:** Zhao WQ, Santini F, Breese R, Ross D, Zhang XD, Stone DJ, Ferrer M, Townsend M, Wolfe AL, Seager MA, Kinney GG, Shughrue PJ, Ray WJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.057182](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.057182)
**PMC:** [PMC2844209](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2844209/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7619-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057182. Epub
2009  Dec 23.

Inhibition of calcineurin-mediated endocytosis and 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors 
prevents amyloid beta oligomer-induced synaptic disruption.

Zhao WQ(1), Santini F, Breese R, Ross D, Zhang XD, Stone DJ, Ferrer M, Townsend 
M, Wolfe AL, Seager MA, Kinney GG, Shughrue PJ, Ray WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, 
Pennsylvania 19486, USA. wei-qin_zhao@merck.com

Synaptic degeneration, including impairment of synaptic plasticity and loss of 
synapses, is an important feature of Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. Increasing 
evidence suggests that these degenerative synaptic changes are associated with 
an accumulation of soluble oligomeric assemblies of amyloid beta (Abeta) known 
as ADDLs. In primary hippocampal cultures ADDLs bind to a subpopulation of 
neurons. However the molecular basis of this cell type-selective interaction is 
not understood. Here, using siRNA screening technology, we identified 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor 
subunits and calcineurin as candidate genes potentially involved in ADDL-neuron 
interactions. Immunocolocalization experiments confirmed that ADDL binding 
occurs in dendritic spines that express surface AMPA receptors, particularly the 
calcium-impermeable type II AMPA receptor subunit (GluR2). Pharmacological 
removal of the surface AMPA receptors or inhibition of AMPA receptors with 
antagonists reduces ADDL binding. Furthermore, using co-immunoprecipitation and 
photoreactive amino acid cross-linking, we found that ADDLs interact 
preferentially with GluR2-containing complexes. We demonstrate that calcineurin 
mediates an endocytotic process that is responsible for the rapid 
internalization of bound ADDLs along with surface AMPA receptor subunits, which 
then both colocalize with cpg2, a molecule localized specifically at the 
postsynaptic endocytic zone of excitatory synapses that plays an important role 
in activity-dependent glutamate receptor endocytosis. Both AMPA receptor and 
calcineurin inhibitors prevent oligomer-induced surface AMPAR and spine loss. 
These results support a model of disease pathogenesis in which Abeta oligomers 
interact selectively with neurotransmission pathways at excitatory synapses, 
resulting in synaptic loss via facilitated endocytosis. Validation of this model 
in human disease would identify therapeutic targets for Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.057182
PMCID: PMC2844209
PMID: 20032460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
