---
pmid: '18854143'
title: An Elmo-like protein associated with myosin II restricts spurious F-actin events
  to coordinate phagocytosis and chemotaxis.
authors:
- Isik N
- Brzostowski JA
- Jin T
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Intramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# An Elmo-like protein associated with myosin II restricts spurious F-actin events to coordinate phagocytosis and chemotaxis.
**Authors:** Isik N, Brzostowski JA, Jin T
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.006)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2008 Oct;15(4):590-602. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.006.

An Elmo-like protein associated with myosin II restricts spurious F-actin events 
to coordinate phagocytosis and chemotaxis.

Isik N(1), Brzostowski JA, Jin T.

Author information:
(1)Chemotaxis Signal Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Twinbrook II Facility, 12331 Parklawn 
Drive, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Elmo proteins positively regulate actin polymerization during cell migration and 
phagocytosis through activation of the small G protein Rac. We identified an 
Elmo-like protein, ElmoA, in Dictyostelium discoideum that unexpectedly 
functions as a negative regulator of actin polymerization. Cells lacking ElmoA 
display an elevated rate of phagocytosis, increased pseudopod formation, and 
excessive F-actin localization within pseudopods. ElmoA associates with cortical 
actin and myosin II. TIRF microscopic observations of functional ElmoA-GFP 
reveal that a fraction of ElmoA localizes near the presumptive actin/myosin II 
cortex and the levels of ElmoA and myosin II negatively correlate with that of 
polymerizing F-actin. F-actin-regulated dynamic dispersions of ElmoA and myosin 
II are interdependent. Taken together, our data suggest that ElmoA modulates 
actin/myosin II at the cortex to prevent excessive F-actin polymerization around 
the cell periphery, thereby maintaining proper cell shape during phagocytosis 
and chemotaxis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.006
PMID: 18854143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
