---
pmid: '21855796'
title: The CDG1 kinase mediates brassinosteroid signal transduction from BRI1 receptor
  kinase to BSU1 phosphatase and GSK3-like kinase BIN2.
authors:
- Kim TW
- Guan S
- Burlingame AL
- Wang ZY
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3206214
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.037
---

# The CDG1 kinase mediates brassinosteroid signal transduction from BRI1 receptor kinase to BSU1 phosphatase and GSK3-like kinase BIN2.
**Authors:** Kim TW, Guan S, Burlingame AL, Wang ZY
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.037)
**PMC:** [PMC3206214](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3206214/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2011 Aug 19;43(4):561-71. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.037.

The CDG1 kinase mediates brassinosteroid signal transduction from BRI1 receptor 
kinase to BSU1 phosphatase and GSK3-like kinase BIN2.

Kim TW(1), Guan S, Burlingame AL, Wang ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

The brassinosteroid (BR) signaling pathway includes two receptor-like kinases 
(BRI1 and BAK1), a plasma membrane-associated kinase (BSK1), two phosphatases 
(BSU1 and PP2A), a GSK3-like kinase (BIN2), and two homologous transcription 
factors (BZR1 and BES1/BZR2). But the mechanisms of signal relay are not fully 
understood. Here, we show that a receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase named CDG1 
mediates signal transduction from BRI1 to BSU1. Transgenic experiments confirm 
that CDG1 and its homolog CDL1 positively regulate BR signaling and plant 
growth. Mass spectrometry analysis identified BRI1 phosphorylation sites in CDG1 
and CDG1 phosphorylation sites in BSU1. Mutations of these phosphorylation sites 
compromised the BR signaling functions. The results demonstrate that BRI1 
phosphorylates S234 to activate CDG1 kinase, and CDG1 in turn phosphorylates 
S764 to activate BSU1, which inactivates BIN2 by dephosphorylating Y200 of BIN2. 
This study thus demonstrates a complete phosphorylation/dephosphorylation 
cascade linking a steroid-activated receptor kinase to a GSK3-like kinase in 
plants.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.037
PMCID: PMC3206214
PMID: 21855796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Signal transduction mediated by membrane-bound receptor-like kinases (RLKs) is an important regulation mechanism for all cellular organisms, particularly for plants, which rely on signal transduction for development and adaptation to the environment. There are over 400 genes encoding RLKs in Arabidopsis and over 600 in rice ( Shiu et al., 2004 ). Studies of a small number of these RLKs demonstrated important functions in a wide range of processes, including hormone responses, development, cell-cell communication, and defense against pathogens ( De Smet et al., 2009 ; Tor et al., 2009 ). One of the best-studied RLK signaling pathways in plants is the BRI1 receptor kinase pathway, which transduces the brassinosteroid (BR) signal ( Kim and Wang, 2010 ).

BR is a steroidal hormone that regulates a wide range of developmental processes in plants ( Clouse and Sasse, 1998 ). BR-deficient and BR-insensitive mutants show pleiotropic defects including extreme dwarfism, male sterility, delayed senescence, and constitutive photomorphogenesis in the dark ( Li et al., 1996 ). In contrast to animal steroid receptors, which are nuclear transcription factors, the BR receptor BRI1 is one of the 230 members of the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLK) in Arabidopsis ( Li and Chory, 1997 ). BRI1 perceives BR through its extracellular domain and transduces the signal through its cytoplasmic kinase domain ( Kinoshita et al., 2005 ; Wang et al., 2001 ). In the absence of BR, BRI1 kinase is inactive, while BIN2, a GSK3-like kinase ( Li and Nam, 2002 ), phosphorylates and inactivates two homologous nuclear transcription factors called BZR1 and BZR2 (also named BES1) to repress BR-responsive gene expression ( Gampala et al., 2007 ; He et al., 2002 ; Vert and Chory, 2006 ; Wang et al., 2002 ; Yin et al., 2002 ). BR binding to BRI1’s extracellular domain activates its kinase activity by inducing association and transphosphorylation with the co-receptor BAK1, another LRR-RLK ( Li et al., 2002 ; Nam and Li, 2002 ; Wang and Chory, 2006 ; Wang et al., 2008 ). Activation of BRI1 also involves dissociation of BRI1 KINASE INHIBITOR 1 (BKI1) caused by tyrosine phosphorylation ( Jaillais et al., 2011 ; Wang and Chory, 2006 ). Activated BRI1 kinase initiates a signaling cascade that leads to inactivation of BIN2 and dephosphorylation of BZR1 and BZR2 by the protein phosphatase 2A ( Tang et al., 2011 ). Dephosphorylated BZR1 and BZR2 accumulate in the nucleus and regulate the expression of BR target genes ( He et al., 2005 ; Sun et al., 2010 ; Yin et al., 2005 ; Yu et al., 2011 ).

Signal transduction from BRI1 to BIN2 involves the BR-SIGNALING KINASE 1 (BSK1) ( Tang et al., 2008 ) and the BRI1 SUPPRESSOR 1 (BSU1) phosphatase ( Kim et al., 2009 ; Mora-Garcia et al., 2004 ), but the mechanisms of signal relay are not fully understood. BSK1 is a member of the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinase (RLCK) XII family ( Tang et al., 2008 ). RLCKs are homologous to transmembrane RLKs but contain no extracellular or transmembrane domains ( Shiu et al., 2004 ). BSK1 is localized at the plasma membrane and is phosphorylated at Ser230 by BRI1 upon BR treatment ( Tang et al., 2008 ). Ser230 phosphorylation increases BSK1 binding to BSU1 ( Kim et al., 2009 ; Tang et al., 2008 ). BSU1 inactivates BIN2 by dephosphorylating its Tyr200 residue, BR treatment enhances BSU1 dephosphorylation of BIN2, but the mechanism of BSU1 activation remains unclear ( Kim et al., 2009 ).

A previous study suggested that Constitutive Differential Growth1 (CDG1), a member of the RLCK VIIc family, is involved in activation of BR signaling ( Muto et al., 2004 ). The cdg1-D mutant, overexpressing CDG1 due to activation tagging mutagenesis, showed insensitivity to BR biosynthetic inhibitor brassinazole (BRZ) and altered expression of BR-responsive genes consistent with activation of the BR signaling pathway ( Muto et al., 2004 ). However, the biochemical function of CDG1 in BR signaling has not been studied.

In this study, we show that CDG1 and its homolog CDL1 mediate signal transduction from BRI1 to BSU1. CDG1 phosphorylates the Ser764 residue in BSU1’s phosphatase domain to increase BSU1’s ability to dephosphorylate Tyr200 residue of BIN2. CDG1 is phosphorylated by BRI1 at Ser44, Ser47, and Ser234, and mutations of these phosphorylation sites compromised CDG1’s ability to activate BR signaling in vivo. In vitro assays demonstrate that BSU1 and either CDG1 or BSK1 are the minimum components required for signal transduction from BRI1 to BIN2. Our results therefore establish a complete phosphorylation/dephosphorylation cascade that mediates the inactivation of a GSK3 kinase by a steroid-activated receptor kinase in plants ( Figure S1 ).

DISCUSSION

Combinations of genetic and proteomic studies have established the BR signaling pathway as one of the best understood signal transduction pathways in plants. In particular the BR signaling pathway serves as a model for understanding the large numbers of receptor kinase pathways in plants. In this study, we further complete this signaling pathway by showing the function of CDG1 in transducing BR signal from the BRI1 receptor kinase to the BSU1 phosphatase and the BIN2 kinase. Our results reveal mechanistic details of signaling between these components. Together with previous studies ( Kim and Wang, 2010 ; Tang et al., 2011 ), this study provides the BR signaling pathway with detailed mechanisms of each step of signal relay: BR binding to the extracellular domain of BRI1 induces dimerization between BRI1 and BAK1 and disassociation of BKI1, causing fully activation of the BRI1 kinase; BRI1 phosphorylates BSK1 at Ser230 or CDG1 at Ser234 to promote interaction with BSU1; CDG1 phosphorylates BSU1 at Ser764 to increase BSU1 binding to BIN2; BSU1 dephosphorylates BIN2 at Tyr200 to inactivate BIN2 and stop the phosphorylation of BZR1. In the mean time, PP2A directly interacts with and dephosphorylates phospho-BZR1 ( Figure S1 ) ( Tang et al., 2011 ). Dephosphorylated BZR1 translocates to the nucleus and regulates thousands of BR target genes ( Sun et al., 2010 ; Yu et al., 2011 ).
