---
pmid: '24211183'
title: Tumor necrosis factor receptor signaling in keratinocytes triggers interleukin-24-dependent
  psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice.
authors:
- Kumari S
- Bonnet MC
- Ulvmar MH
- Wolk K
- Karagianni N
- Witte E
- Uthoff-Hachenberg C
- Renauld JC
- Kollias G
- Toftgard R
- Sabat R
- Pasparakis M
- Haase I
journal: Immunity
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.009
---

# Tumor necrosis factor receptor signaling in keratinocytes triggers interleukin-24-dependent psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice.
**Authors:** Kumari S, Bonnet MC, Ulvmar MH, Wolk K, Karagianni N, Witte E, Uthoff-Hachenberg C, Renauld JC, Kollias G, Toftgard R, Sabat R, Pasparakis M, Haase I
**Journal:** Immunity (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.009)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):899-911. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.009. Epub 
2013 Nov 7.

Tumor necrosis factor receptor signaling in keratinocytes triggers 
interleukin-24-dependent psoriasis-like skin inflammation in mice.

Kumari S(1), Bonnet MC, Ulvmar MH, Wolk K, Karagianni N, Witte E, 
Uthoff-Hachenberg C, Renauld JC, Kollias G, Toftgard R, Sabat R, Pasparakis M, 
Haase I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Kerpener Strasse 62, 50931 
Cologne, Germany; Institute for Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), 
and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated 
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Zülpicher Str. 47a, 50674 Cologne, 
Germany.

Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory skin disease with a prevalence of 
about 2% in the Caucasian population. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) plays an 
essential role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis, but its mechanism of action 
remains poorly understood. Here we report that the development of psoriasis-like 
skin inflammation in mice with epidermis-specific inhibition of the 
transcription factor NF-κB was triggered by TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1)-dependent 
upregulation of interleukin-24 (IL-24) and activation of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling in keratinocytes. IL-24 was 
strongly expressed in human psoriatic epidermis, and pharmacological inhibition 
of NF-κB increased IL-24 expression in TNF-stimulated human primary 
keratinocytes, suggesting that this mechanism is relevant for human psoriasis. 
Therefore, our results expand current views on psoriasis pathogenesis by 
revealing a new keratinocyte-intrinsic mechanism that links TNFR1, NF-κB, ERK, 
IL-24, IL-22R1, and STAT3 signaling to disease initiation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.10.009
PMID: 24211183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
