---
pmid: '27618268'
title: Bub3-Bub1 Binding to Spc7/KNL1 Toggles the Spindle Checkpoint Switch by Licensing
  the Interaction of Bub1 with Mad1-Mad2.
authors:
- Mora-Santos MD
- Hervas-Aguilar A
- Sewart K
- Lancaster TC
- Meadows JC
- Millar JB
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.040
---

# Bub3-Bub1 Binding to Spc7/KNL1 Toggles the Spindle Checkpoint Switch by Licensing the Interaction of Bub1 with Mad1-Mad2.
**Authors:** Mora-Santos MD, Hervas-Aguilar A, Sewart K, Lancaster TC, Meadows JC, Millar JB
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.040)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2016 Oct 10;26(19):2642-2650. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.040. Epub 
2016 Sep 8.

Bub3-Bub1 Binding to Spc7/KNL1 Toggles the Spindle Checkpoint Switch by 
Licensing the Interaction of Bub1 with Mad1-Mad2.

Mora-Santos MD(1), Hervas-Aguilar A(1), Sewart K(2), Lancaster TC(1), Meadows 
JC(3), Millar JB(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of 
Warwick, Gibbet Hill, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences and Biocomplexity Institute, Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(3)Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of 
Warwick, Gibbet Hill, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK; Institute of Advanced Study, 
University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(4)Division of Biomedical Sciences, Warwick Medical School, University of 
Warwick, Gibbet Hill, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK. Electronic address: 
j.millar@warwick.ac.uk.

The spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) ensures that sister chromatids do not 
separate until all chromosomes are attached to spindle microtubules and 
bi-oriented. Spindle checkpoint proteins, including Mad1, Mad2, Mad3 (BubR1), 
Bub1, Bub3, and Mph1 (Mps1), are recruited to unattached and/or tensionless 
kinetochores. SAC activation catalyzes the conversion of soluble Mad2 (O-Mad2) 
into a form (C-Mad2) that binds Cdc20, BubR1, and Bub3 to form the mitotic 
checkpoint complex (MCC), a potent inhibitor of the anaphase-promoting complex 
(APC/C). SAC silencing de-represses Cdc20-APC/C activity allowing 
poly-ubiquitination of Securin and Cyclin B, leading to the dissolution of 
sister chromatids and anaphase onset [1]. Understanding how microtubule 
interaction at kinetochores influences the timing of anaphase requires an 
understanding of how spindle checkpoint protein interaction with the kinetochore 
influences spindle checkpoint signaling. We, and others, recently showed that 
Mph1 (Mps1) phosphorylates multiple conserved MELT motifs in the Spc7 
(Spc105/KNL1) protein to recruit Bub1, Bub3, and Mad3 (BubR1) to kinetochores 
[2-4]. In budding yeast, Mps1 phosphorylation of a central non-catalytic region 
of Bub1 promotes its association with the Mad1-Mad2 complex, although this 
association has not yet been detected in other organisms [5]. Here we report 
that multisite binding of Bub3 to the Spc7 MELT array toggles the spindle 
checkpoint switch by permitting Mph1 (Mps1)-dependent interaction of Bub1 with 
Mad1-Mad2.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.040
PMID: 27618268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
