---
pmid: '6302095'
title: Purification and characterization of the extracellular cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase
  of Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Noce T
- Okamoto K
- Takeuchi I
journal: J Biochem
year: '1983'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134175
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification and characterization of the extracellular cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase of Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Noce T, Okamoto K, Takeuchi I
**Journal:** J Biochem (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134175](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134175)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 1983 Jan;93(1):37-45. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134175.

Purification and characterization of the extracellular cyclic AMP 
phosphodiesterase of Dictyostelium discoideum.

Noce T, Okamoto K, Takeuchi I.

Extracellular phosphodiesterase for adenosine 3':5'-monophosphate [EC 3.1.4.17] 
was purified from the supernatant of aggregation phase culture of Dictyostelium 
discoideum, and two types (type I and type II) of the enzyme were found. The 
type I enzyme was not absorbed on DEAE-Sephacel at pH 8.5 and had an apparent 
molecular weight of about 67,000 daltons. In contrast, the type II enzyme was 
adsorbed on DEAE-Sephacel and had an apparent molecular weight of about 120,000 
daltons. The Km values of the two types were similar (2-4 microM). Upon SDS 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analyses, however, both types produced the 
same bands with molecular weights of 55,000 and 57,000, indicating that they are 
two different forms composed of common constituents. During the growth phase, 
the two types of the enzyme were present in culture supernatant in roughly equal 
amounts, but type II accumulated predominantly in the aggregation phase, 
suggesting that the ratio of activity of the two forms is under developmental 
control. Rabbit antiserum prepared against purified type II enzyme cross-reacted 
with type I as well as membrane-bound enzyme, indicating that the three classes 
of the enzyme possess some common sequence.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a134175
PMID: 6302095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
