---
pmid: '12356756'
title: BAP, a mammalian BiP-associated protein, is a nucleotide exchange factor that
  regulates the ATPase activity of BiP.
authors:
- Chung KT
- Shen Y
- Hendershot LM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M208377200
---

# BAP, a mammalian BiP-associated protein, is a nucleotide exchange factor that regulates the ATPase activity of BiP.
**Authors:** Chung KT, Shen Y, Hendershot LM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M208377200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M208377200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47557-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M208377200. Epub
2002  Sep 27.

BAP, a mammalian BiP-associated protein, is a nucleotide exchange factor that 
regulates the ATPase activity of BiP.

Chung KT(1), Shen Y, Hendershot LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

We identified a mammalian BiP-associated protein, BAP, using a yeast two-hybrid 
screen that shared low homology with yeast Sls1p/Sil1p and mammalian HspBP1, 
both of which regulate the ATPase activity of their Hsp70 partner. BAP encoded 
an approximately 54-kDa protein with an N-terminal endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
targeting sequence, two sites of N-linked glycosylation, and a C-terminal ER 
retention sequence. Immunofluorescence staining demonstrated that BAP 
co-localized with GRP94 in the endoplasmic reticulum. BAP was ubiquitously 
expressed but showed the highest levels of expression in secretory organ 
tissues, a pattern similar to that observed with BiP. BAP binding was affected 
by the conformation of the ATPase domain of BiP based on in vivo binding studies 
with BiP mutants. BAP stimulated the ATPase activity of BiP when added alone or 
together with the ER DnaJ protein, ERdj4, by promoting the release of ADP from 
BiP. Together, these data demonstrate that BAP serves as a nucleotide exchange 
factor for BiP and provide insights into the mechanisms that control protein 
folding in the mammalian ER.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M208377200
PMID: 12356756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
