---
pmid: '22334663'
title: Monoubiquitinated histone H2A destabilizes photolesion-containing nucleosomes
  with concomitant release of UV-damaged DNA-binding protein E3 ligase.
authors:
- Lan L
- Nakajima S
- Kapetanaki MG
- Hsieh CL
- Fagerburg M
- Thickman K
- Rodriguez-Collazo P
- Leuba SH
- Levine AS
- Rapić-Otrin V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3320950
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.307058
---

# Monoubiquitinated histone H2A destabilizes photolesion-containing nucleosomes with concomitant release of UV-damaged DNA-binding protein E3 ligase.
**Authors:** Lan L, Nakajima S, Kapetanaki MG, Hsieh CL, Fagerburg M, Thickman K, Rodriguez-Collazo P, Leuba SH, Levine AS, Rapić-Otrin V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.307058](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.307058)
**PMC:** [PMC3320950](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3320950/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 6;287(15):12036-49. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.307058. Epub 
2012 Feb 10.

Monoubiquitinated histone H2A destabilizes photolesion-containing nucleosomes 
with concomitant release of UV-damaged DNA-binding protein E3 ligase.

Lan L(1), Nakajima S, Kapetanaki MG, Hsieh CL, Fagerburg M, Thickman K, 
Rodriguez-Collazo P, Leuba SH, Levine AS, Rapić-Otrin V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

How the nucleotide excision repair (NER) machinery gains access to damaged 
chromatinized DNA templates and how the chromatin structure is modified to 
promote efficient repair of the non-transcribed genome remain poorly understood. 
The UV-damaged DNA-binding protein complex (UV-DDB, consisting of DDB1 and DDB2, 
the latter of which is mutated in xeroderma pigmentosum group E patients, is a 
substrate-recruiting module of the cullin 4B-based E3 ligase complex, 
DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2). We previously reported that the deficiency of UV-DDB E3 
ligases in ubiquitinating histone H2A at UV-damaged DNA sites in the xeroderma 
pigmentosum group E cells contributes to the faulty NER in these skin 
cancer-prone patients. Here, we reveal the mechanism by which monoubiquitination 
of specific H2A lysine residues alters nucleosomal dynamics and subsequently 
initiates NER. We show that DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2) E3 ligase specifically binds to 
mononucleosomes assembled with human recombinant histone octamers and 
nucleosome-positioning DNA containing cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers or 6-4 
photoproducts photolesions. We demonstrate functionally that ubiquitination of 
H2A Lys-119/Lys-120 is necessary for destabilization of nucleosomes and 
concomitant release of DDB1-CUL4B(DDB2) from photolesion-containing DNA. 
Nucleosomes in which these lysines are replaced with arginines are resistant to 
such structural changes, and arginine mutants prevent the eviction of H2A and 
dissociation of polyubiquitinated DDB2 from UV-damaged nucleosomes. The partial 
eviction of H3 from the nucleosomes is dependent on ubiquitinated H2A 
Lys-119/Lys-120. Our results provide mechanistic insight into how 
post-translational modification of H2A at the site of a photolesion initiates 
the repair process and directly affects the stability of the human genome.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.307058
PMCID: PMC3320950
PMID: 22334663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
