---
pmid: '22915762'
title: The unfolded protein response induces the angiogenic switch in human tumor
  cells through the PERK/ATF4 pathway.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Alam GN
- Ning Y
- Visioli F
- Dong Z
- Nör JE
- Polverini PJ
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3743425
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474
---

# The unfolded protein response induces the angiogenic switch in human tumor cells through the PERK/ATF4 pathway.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Alam GN, Ning Y, Visioli F, Dong Z, Nör JE, Polverini PJ
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474)
**PMC:** [PMC3743425](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3743425/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2012 Oct 15;72(20):5396-406. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474. 
Epub 2012 Aug 20.

The unfolded protein response induces the angiogenic switch in human tumor cells 
through the PERK/ATF4 pathway.

Wang Y(1), Alam GN, Ning Y, Visioli F, Dong Z, Nör JE, Polverini PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biologic and Materials Sciences, University of Michigan School 
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA.

Neovascularization is a limiting factor in tumor growth and progression. It is 
well known that changes in the tumor microenvironment, such as hypoxia and 
glucose deprivation (GD), can induce VEGF production. However, the mechanism 
linking GD to tumor growth and angiogenesis is unclear. We hypothesize that GD 
induces the angiogenic switch in tumors through activation of the unfolded 
protein response (UPR). We report that UPR activation in human tumors results in 
elevated expression of proangiogenic mediators and a concomitant decrease in 
angiogenesis inhibitors. cDNA microarray results showed that GD-induced UPR 
activation promoted upregulation of a number of proangiogenic mediators (VEGF, 
FGF-2, IL-6, etc.) and downregulation of several angiogenic inhibitors (THBS1, 
CXCL14, and CXCL10). In vitro studies revealed that partially blocking UPR 
signaling by silencing protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (PERK) or activating 
transcription factor 4 (ATF4) significantly reduced the production of 
angiogenesis mediators induced by GD. However, suppressing the alpha subunit of 
hypoxia-inducible factors had no effect on this process. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) confirmed binding of ATF4 to a regulatory site in the 
VEGF gene. In vivo results confirmed that knockdown of PERK in tumor cells slows 
down tumor growth and decreases tumor blood vessel density. Collectively, these 
results show that the PERK/ATF4 arm of UPR mediates the angiogenic switch and is 
a potential target for antiangiogenic cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0474
PMCID: PMC3743425
PMID: 22915762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest
