---
pmid: '16325578'
title: 'A nuclear function of beta-arrestin1 in GPCR signaling: regulation of histone
  acetylation and gene transcription.'
authors:
- Kang J
- Shi Y
- Xiang B
- Qu B
- Su W
- Zhu M
- Zhang M
- Bao G
- Wang F
- Zhang X
- Yang R
- Fan F
- Chen X
- Pei G
- Ma L
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.011
---

# A nuclear function of beta-arrestin1 in GPCR signaling: regulation of histone acetylation and gene transcription.
**Authors:** Kang J, Shi Y, Xiang B, Qu B, Su W, Zhu M, Zhang M, Bao G, Wang F, Zhang X, Yang R, Fan F, Chen X, Pei G, Ma L
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.011)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):833-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.011.

A nuclear function of beta-arrestin1 in GPCR signaling: regulation of histone 
acetylation and gene transcription.

Kang J(1), Shi Y, Xiang B, Qu B, Su W, Zhu M, Zhang M, Bao G, Wang F, Zhang X, 
Yang R, Fan F, Chen X, Pei G, Ma L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, The Graduate School, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2006 Feb 10;124(3):645.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Dec 2;123(5):755-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.11.010.

Chromatin modification is considered to be a fundamental mechanism of regulating 
gene expression to generate coordinated responses to environmental changes, 
however, whether it could be directly regulated by signals mediated by G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), the largest surface receptor family, is not 
known. Here, we show that stimulation of delta-opioid receptor, a member of the 
GPCR family, induces nuclear translocation of beta-arrestin 1 (betaarr1), which 
was previously known as a cytosolic regulator and scaffold of GPCR signaling. In 
response to receptor activation, betaarr1 translocates to the nucleus and is 
selectively enriched at specific promoters such as that of p27 and c-fos, where 
it facilitates the recruitment of histone acetyltransferase p300, resulting in 
enhanced local histone H4 acetylation and transcription of these genes. Our 
results reveal a novel function of betaarr1 as a cytoplasm-nucleus messenger in 
GPCR signaling and elucidate an epigenetic mechanism for direct GPCR signaling 
from cell membrane to the nucleus through signal-dependent histone modification.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.09.011
PMID: 16325578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
