---
pmid: '16034420'
title: Structural basis of family-wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn-5.
authors:
- Eathiraj S
- Pan X
- Ritacco C
- Lambright DG
journal: Nature
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1360218
doi: 10.1038/nature03798
---

# Structural basis of family-wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn-5.
**Authors:** Eathiraj S, Pan X, Ritacco C, Lambright DG
**Journal:** Nature (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature03798](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03798)
**PMC:** [PMC1360218](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1360218/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2005 Jul 21;436(7049):415-9. doi: 10.1038/nature03798.

Structural basis of family-wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn-5.

Eathiraj S(1), Pan X, Ritacco C, Lambright DG.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, 
Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Rab GTPases regulate all stages of membrane trafficking, including vesicle 
budding, cargo sorting, transport, tethering and fusion. In the inactive 
(GDP-bound) conformation, accessory factors facilitate the targeting of Rab 
GTPases to intracellular compartments. After nucleotide exchange to the active 
(GTP-bound) conformation, Rab GTPases interact with functionally diverse 
effectors including lipid kinases, motor proteins and tethering complexes. How 
effectors distinguish between homologous Rab GTPases represents an unresolved 
problem with respect to the specificity of vesicular trafficking. Using a 
structural proteomic approach, we have determined the specificity and structural 
basis underlying the interaction of the multivalent effector rabenosyn-5 with 
the Rab family. The results demonstrate that even the structurally similar 
effector domains in rabenosyn-5 can achieve highly selective recognition of 
distinct subsets of Rab GTPases exclusively through interactions with the switch 
and interswitch regions. The observed specificity is determined at a family-wide 
level by structural diversity in the active conformation, which governs the 
spatial disposition of critical conserved recognition determinants, and by a 
small number of both positive and negative sequence determinants that allow 
further discrimination between Rab GTPases with similar switch conformations.

DOI: 10.1038/nature03798
PMCID: PMC1360218
PMID: 16034420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement. The authors 
declare that they have no competing financial interests.
