---
pmid: '8621634'
title: Perlecan and basement membrane-chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (bamacan) are
  two basement membrane chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycans in the Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm
  tumor matrix.
authors:
- Couchman JR
- Kapoor R
- Sthanam M
- Wu RR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9595
---

# Perlecan and basement membrane-chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (bamacan) are two basement membrane chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycans in the Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor matrix.
**Authors:** Couchman JR, Kapoor R, Sthanam M, Wu RR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.16.9595](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.16.9595)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 19;271(16):9595-602. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9595.

Perlecan and basement membrane-chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (bamacan) are 
two basement membrane chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycans in the 
Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor matrix.

Couchman JR(1), Kapoor R, Sthanam M, Wu RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294.

The presence of proteoglycans bearing galactosaminoglycan chains has been 
reported, but none has been identified previously in the matrix of the 
Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumor, which is a source of several basement membrane 
components. This tumor matrix contains perlecan, a large, low buoyant density 
heparan sulfate proteoglycan, widespread in many basement membranes and 
connective tissues. We now identify two distinct proteoglycan species from this 
tumor source, which are substituted with galactosaminoglycans and which show 
basement membrane localization by immunohistochemistry. One species is perlecan 
but, in addition to being present as a heparan sulfate proteoglycan, it is also 
present as a hybrid molecule, with dermatan sulfate chains. A minor population 
of perlecan apparently lacks heparan sulfate chains totally, and some of this is 
substituted with chondroitin sulfate. The second species is immunologically 
related to basement membrane-chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan (BM-CSPG) and 
bears chondroitin sulfate chains. No BM-CSPG was detectable which was 
substituted with heparan sulfate chains. A combination of immunological and 
molecular approaches, including cDNA cloning, showed that perlecan and BM-CSPG 
are distinct in core protein structure. Both are, however, basement membrane 
components, although there are tissue-specific differences in their 
distribution.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9595
PMID: 8621634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
