---
pmid: '17377532'
title: Foxp3 controls regulatory T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1.
authors:
- Ono M
- Yaguchi H
- Ohkura N
- Kitabayashi I
- Nagamura Y
- Nomura T
- Miyachi Y
- Tsukada T
- Sakaguchi S
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05673
---

# Foxp3 controls regulatory T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1.
**Authors:** Ono M, Yaguchi H, Ohkura N, Kitabayashi I, Nagamura Y, Nomura T, Miyachi Y, Tsukada T, Sakaguchi S
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05673](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05673)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Apr 5;446(7136):685-9. doi: 10.1038/nature05673. Epub 2007 Mar
21.

Foxp3 controls regulatory T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1.

Ono M(1), Yaguchi H, Ohkura N, Kitabayashi I, Nagamura Y, Nomura T, Miyachi Y, 
Tsukada T, Sakaguchi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Naturally arising CD25+CD4+ regulatory T cells (T(R) cells) are engaged in the 
maintenance of immunological self-tolerance and immune homeostasis by 
suppressing aberrant or excessive immune responses, such as autoimmune disease 
and allergy. T(R) cells specifically express the transcription factor Foxp3, a 
key regulator of T(R)-cell development and function. Ectopic expression of Foxp3 
in conventional T cells is indeed sufficient to confer suppressive activity, 
repress the production of cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and 
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and upregulate T(R)-cell-associated molecules such 
as CD25, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4, and glucocorticoid-induced 
TNF-receptor-family-related protein. However, the method by which Foxp3 controls 
these molecular events has yet to be explained. Here we show that the 
transcription factor AML1 (acute myeloid leukaemia 1)/Runx1 (Runt-related 
transcription factor 1), which is crucially required for normal haematopoiesis 
including thymic T-cell development, activates IL-2 and IFN-gamma gene 
expression in conventional CD4+ T cells through binding to their respective 
promoters. In natural T(R) cells, Foxp3 interacts physically with AML1. Several 
lines of evidence support a model in which the interaction suppresses IL-2 and 
IFN-gamma production, upregulates T(R)-cell-associated molecules, and exerts 
suppressive activity. This transcriptional control of T(R)-cell function by an 
interaction between Foxp3 and AML1 can be exploited to control physiological and 
pathological T-cell-mediated immune responses.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05673
PMID: 17377532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
