---
pmid: '24068951'
title: The prefoldin complex regulates chromatin dynamics during transcription elongation.
authors:
- Millán-Zambrano G
- Rodríguez-Gil A
- Peñate X
- de Miguel-Jiménez L
- Morillo-Huesca M
- Krogan N
- Chávez S
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3777993
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003776
---

# The prefoldin complex regulates chromatin dynamics during transcription elongation.
**Authors:** Millán-Zambrano G, Rodríguez-Gil A, Peñate X, de Miguel-Jiménez L, Morillo-Huesca M, Krogan N, Chávez S
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1003776](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003776)
**PMC:** [PMC3777993](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3777993/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003776. Epub 2013
Sep  19.

The prefoldin complex regulates chromatin dynamics during transcription 
elongation.

Millán-Zambrano G(1), Rodríguez-Gil A, Peñate X, de Miguel-Jiménez L, 
Morillo-Huesca M, Krogan N, Chávez S.

Author information:
(1)Departmento de Genética, Universidad de Sevilla, and Instituto de Biomedicina 
de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, 
Seville, Spain.

Transcriptional elongation requires the concerted action of several factors that 
allow RNA polymerase II to advance through chromatin in a highly processive 
manner. In order to identify novel elongation factors, we performed systematic 
yeast genetic screening based on the GLAM (Gene Length-dependent Accumulation of 
mRNA) assay, which is used to detect defects in the expression of long 
transcription units. Apart from well-known transcription elongation factors, we 
identified mutants in the prefoldin complex subunits, which were among those 
that caused the most dramatic phenotype. We found that prefoldin, so far 
involved in the cytoplasmic co-translational assembly of protein complexes, is 
also present in the nucleus and that a subset of its subunits are recruited to 
chromatin in a transcription-dependent manner. Prefoldin influences RNA 
polymerase II the elongation rate in vivo and plays an especially important role 
in the transcription elongation of long genes and those whose promoter regions 
contain a canonical TATA box. Finally, we found a specific functional link 
between prefoldin and histone dynamics after nucleosome remodeling, which is 
consistent with the extensive network of genetic interactions between this 
factor and the machinery regulating chromatin function. This study establishes 
the involvement of prefoldin in transcription elongation, and supports a role 
for this complex in cotranscriptional histone eviction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003776
PMCID: PMC3777993
PMID: 24068951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
