---
pmid: '19800048'
title: OFD1 is mutated in X-linked Joubert syndrome and interacts with LCA5-encoded
  lebercilin.
authors:
- Coene KL
- Roepman R
- Doherty D
- Afroze B
- Kroes HY
- Letteboer SJ
- Ngu LH
- Budny B
- van Wijk E
- Gorden NT
- Azhimi M
- Thauvin-Robinet C
- Veltman JA
- Boink M
- Kleefstra T
- Cremers FP
- van Bokhoven H
- de Brouwer AP
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2756557
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.002
---

# OFD1 is mutated in X-linked Joubert syndrome and interacts with LCA5-encoded lebercilin.
**Authors:** Coene KL, Roepman R, Doherty D, Afroze B, Kroes HY, Letteboer SJ, Ngu LH, Budny B, van Wijk E, Gorden NT, Azhimi M, Thauvin-Robinet C, Veltman JA, Boink M, Kleefstra T, Cremers FP, van Bokhoven H, de Brouwer AP
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.002)
**PMC:** [PMC2756557](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2756557/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;85(4):465-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.002.

OFD1 is mutated in X-linked Joubert syndrome and interacts with LCA5-encoded 
lebercilin.

Coene KL(1), Roepman R, Doherty D, Afroze B, Kroes HY, Letteboer SJ, Ngu LH, 
Budny B, van Wijk E, Gorden NT, Azhimi M, Thauvin-Robinet C, Veltman JA, Boink 
M, Kleefstra T, Cremers FP, van Bokhoven H, de Brouwer AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.

We ascertained a multi-generation Malaysian family with Joubert syndrome (JS). 
The presence of asymptomatic obligate carrier females suggested an X-linked 
recessive inheritance pattern. Affected males presented with mental retardation 
accompanied by postaxial polydactyly and retinitis pigmentosa. Brain MRIs showed 
the presence of a "molar tooth sign," which classifies this syndrome as classic 
JS with retinal involvement. Linkage analysis showed linkage to Xpter-Xp22.2 and 
a maximum LOD score of 2.06 for marker DXS8022. Mutation analysis revealed a 
frameshift mutation, p.K948NfsX8, in exon 21 of OFD1. In an isolated male with 
JS, a second frameshift mutation, p.E923KfsX3, in the same exon was identified. 
OFD1 has previously been associated with oral-facial-digital type 1 (OFD1) 
syndrome, a male-lethal X-linked dominant condition, and with X-linked recessive 
Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 2 (SGBS2). In a yeast two-hybrid screen of a 
retinal cDNA library, we identified OFD1 as an interacting partner of the 
LCA5-encoded ciliary protein lebercilin. We show that X-linked recessive 
mutations in OFD1 reduce, but do not eliminate, the interaction with lebercilin, 
whereas X-linked dominant OFD1 mutations completely abolish binding to 
lebercilin. In addition, recessive mutations in OFD1 did not affect the 
pericentriolar localization of the recombinant protein in hTERT-RPE1 cells, 
whereas this localization was lost for dominant mutations. These findings offer 
a molecular explanation for the phenotypic spectrum observed for OFD1 mutations; 
this spectrum now includes OFD1 syndrome, SGBS2, and JS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.09.002
PMCID: PMC2756557
PMID: 19800048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
