---
pmid: '12750328'
title: Mechanosensory inputs influence Caenorhabditis elegans pharyngeal activity
  via ivermectin sensitivity genes.
authors:
- Keane J
- Avery L
journal: Genetics
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1462566
doi: 10.1093/genetics/164.1.153
---

# Mechanosensory inputs influence Caenorhabditis elegans pharyngeal activity via ivermectin sensitivity genes.
**Authors:** Keane J, Avery L
**Journal:** Genetics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/164.1.153](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/164.1.153)
**PMC:** [PMC1462566](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1462566/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2003 May;164(1):153-62. doi: 10.1093/genetics/164.1.153.

Mechanosensory inputs influence Caenorhabditis elegans pharyngeal activity via 
ivermectin sensitivity genes.

Keane J(1), Avery L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA. j.keane@sussex.ac.uk

Mechanical stimulation induces opposite behavioral responses in the adult and 
dauer pharynx. Tail tap of adults inhibits pharyngeal pumping via a pathway 
involving the innexin gene unc-7 and components of the glutamatergic pathway 
encoded by the genes avr-14 and avr-15. Tail tap of dauers stimulates pumping 
through a mechanism involving G alpha o and G alpha q. The nematocidal drug 
ivermectin is believed to kill worms by opening a glutamate-gated chloride 
channel (AVR-15) on pharyngeal muscle, causing complete pumping inhibition. 
However, ivermectin can also inhibit pumping in the absence of this channel. We 
propose that one of the ways ivermectin could prevent pumping, in the absence of 
the AVR-15 ivermectin-binding channel on pharynx muscle, is to target AVR-14 and 
AVR-15, which are expressed in the inhibitory pathway linking mechanosensation 
and pumping activity.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/164.1.153
PMCID: PMC1462566
PMID: 12750328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Mechanical stimulation induces opposite behavioral responses in the adult and dauer pharynx. Tail tap of adults inhibits pharyngeal pumping via a pathway involving the innexin gene unc-7 and components of the glutamatergic pathway encoded by the genes avr-14 and avr-15. Tail tap of dauers stimulates pumping through a mechanism involving G alpha o and G alpha q. The nematocidal drug ivermectin is believed to kill worms by opening a glutamate-gated chloride channel (AVR-15) on pharyngeal muscle, causing complete pumping inhibition. However, ivermectin can also inhibit pumping in the absence of this channel. We propose that one of the ways ivermectin could prevent pumping, in the absence of the AVR-15 ivermectin-binding channel on pharynx muscle, is to target AVR-14 and AVR-15, which are expressed in the inhibitory pathway linking mechanosensation and pumping activity.
