---
pmid: '13130484'
title: Heterogeneity among patients with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
  periodic syndrome phenotypes.
authors:
- Aganna E
- Hammond L
- Hawkins PN
- Aldea A
- McKee SA
- van Amstel HK
- Mischung C
- Kusuhara K
- Saulsbury FT
- Lachmann HJ
- Bybee A
- McDermott EM
- La Regina M
- Arostegui JI
- Campistol JM
- Worthington S
- High KP
- Molloy MG
- Baker N
- Bidwell JL
- Castañer JL
- Whiteford ML
- Janssens-Korpola PL
- Manna R
- Powell RJ
- Woo P
- Solis P
- Minden K
- Frenkel J
- Yagüe J
- Mirakian RM
- Hitman GA
- McDermott MF
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/art.11215
---

# Heterogeneity among patients with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome phenotypes.
**Authors:** Aganna E, Hammond L, Hawkins PN, Aldea A, McKee SA, van Amstel HK, Mischung C, Kusuhara K, Saulsbury FT, Lachmann HJ, Bybee A, McDermott EM, La Regina M, Arostegui JI, Campistol JM, Worthington S, High KP, Molloy MG, Baker N, Bidwell JL, Castañer JL, Whiteford ML, Janssens-Korpola PL, Manna R, Powell RJ, Woo P, Solis P, Minden K, Frenkel J, Yagüe J, Mirakian RM, Hitman GA, McDermott MF
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.11215](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.11215)

## Abstract

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2003 Sep;48(9):2632-44. doi: 10.1002/art.11215.

Heterogeneity among patients with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated 
periodic syndrome phenotypes.

Aganna E(1), Hammond L, Hawkins PN, Aldea A, McKee SA, van Amstel HK, Mischung 
C, Kusuhara K, Saulsbury FT, Lachmann HJ, Bybee A, McDermott EM, La Regina M, 
Arostegui JI, Campistol JM, Worthington S, High KP, Molloy MG, Baker N, Bidwell 
JL, Castañer JL, Whiteford ML, Janssens-Korpola PL, Manna R, Powell RJ, Woo P, 
Solis P, Minden K, Frenkel J, Yagüe J, Mirakian RM, Hitman GA, McDermott MF.

Author information:
(1)Barts and London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of tumor necrosis factor 
receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) among outpatients presenting with 
recurrent fevers and clinical features consistent with TRAPS.
METHODS: Mutational screening was performed in affected members of 18 families 
in which multiple members had symptoms compatible with TRAPS and in 176 
consecutive subjects with sporadic (nonfamilial) "TRAPS-like" symptoms. Plasma 
concentrations of soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily 1A 
(sTNFRSF1A) were measured, and fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis was 
used to measure TNFRSF1A shedding from monocytes.
RESULTS: Eight novel and 3 previously reported TNFRSF1A missense mutations were 
identified, including an amino acid deletion (Delta D42) in a Northern Irish 
family and a C70S mutation in a Japanese family, both reported for the first 
time. Only 3 TNFRSF1A variants were found in patients with sporadic TRAPS (4 of 
176 patients). Evidence for nonallelic heterogeneity in TRAPS-like conditions 
was found: 3 members of the "prototype familial Hibernian fever" family did not 
possess C33Y, present in 9 other affected members. Plasma sTNFRSF1A levels were 
low in TRAPS patients in whom renal amyloidosis had not developed, but also in 
mutation-negative symptomatic subjects in 4 families, and in 14 patients (8%) 
with sporadic TRAPS. Reduced shedding of TNFRSF1A from monocytes was 
demonstrated in vitro in patients with the T50M and T50K variants, but not in 
those with other variants.
CONCLUSION: The presence of TNFRSF1A shedding defects and low sTNFRSF1A levels 
in 3 families without a TNFRSF1A mutation indicates that the genetic basis among 
patients with "TRAPS-like" features is heterogeneous. TNFRSF1A mutations are not 
commonly associated with nonfamilial recurrent fevers of unknown etiology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.11215
PMID: 13130484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
