---
pmid: '8601308'
title: 'Tetrahymena histone acetyltransferase A: a homolog to yeast Gcn5p linking
  histone acetylation to gene activation.'
authors:
- Brownell JE
- Zhou J
- Ranalli T
- Kobayashi R
- Edmondson DG
- Roth SY
- Allis CD
journal: Cell
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81063-6
---

# Tetrahymena histone acetyltransferase A: a homolog to yeast Gcn5p linking histone acetylation to gene activation.
**Authors:** Brownell JE, Zhou J, Ranalli T, Kobayashi R, Edmondson DG, Roth SY, Allis CD
**Journal:** Cell (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81063-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81063-6)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1996 Mar 22;84(6):843-51. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81063-6.

Tetrahymena histone acetyltransferase A: a homolog to yeast Gcn5p linking 
histone acetylation to gene activation.

Brownell JE(1), Zhou J, Ranalli T, Kobayashi R, Edmondson DG, Roth SY, Allis CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, New York, 14627, USA.

We report the cloning of a transcription-associated histone acetyltransferase 
type A(HAT A). This Tetrahymena enzyme is strikingly homologous to the yeast 
protein Gcn5, a putative transcriptional adaptor, and we demonstrate that 
recombinant Gcn5p possesses HAT activity. Both the ciliate enzyme and Gcn5p 
contain potential active site residues found in other acetyltransferases and a 
highly conserved bromodomain. The presence of this domain in nuclear A-type 
HATs, but not in cytoplasmic B-type HATs, suggests a mechanism whereby HAT A is 
directed to chromatin to facilitate transcriptional activation. These findings 
shed light on the biochemical function of the evolutionarily conserved Gcn5p-Ada 
complex, directly linking histone acetylation to gene activation, and indicate 
that histone acetylation is a targeted phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81063-6
PMID: 8601308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
