---
pmid: '12392578'
title: Galpha3 and protein kinase A represent cross-talking pathways for gene expression
  in Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Brandon MA
- Mahadeo DC
- Podgorski GJ
journal: Dev Growth Differ
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-169x.2002.00658.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Galpha3 and protein kinase A represent cross-talking pathways for gene expression in Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Brandon MA, Mahadeo DC, Podgorski GJ
**Journal:** Dev Growth Differ (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-169x.2002.00658.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-169x.2002.00658.x)

## Abstract

1. Dev Growth Differ. 2002 Oct;44(5):457-65. doi:
10.1046/j.1440-169x.2002.00658.x.

Galpha3 and protein kinase A represent cross-talking pathways for gene 
expression in Dictyostelium discoideum.

Brandon MA(1), Mahadeo DC, Podgorski GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Campus Box 8007, Idaho State University, 
Pocatello, ID 83209, USA. branmaur@isu.edu

Heterotrimeric G proteins and protein kinase A (PKA) are regulators of 
development in Dictyostelium discoideum. It has been reported that disruption of 
the Dictyostelium Galpha3 gene (galpha3-) blocks development and expression of 
several early development genes, characteristics that are reminiscent of mutants 
lacking the catalytic subunit of PKA (pkac-). The hypothesis that Galpha3 and 
PKA signaling pathways may interact to control developmental gene expression was 
tested by comparing the regulation of seven genes expressed early in development 
in the wild-type and in galpha3- and pkac- mutants, and comparing PKA activity 
in the wild-type and in a galpha3- mutant. The expression patterns of six genes 
were affected similarly by the Galpha3 and PKA mutations, while the expression 
of only one gene, the cAMP receptor 1 (cAR1), differed between the mutants. PKA 
activity, measured by phosphorylation of the PKA-specific substrate Kemptide, 
was higher in galpha3- cells than in wild-type cells, suggesting that Galpha3 
normally exerts an inhibitory effect on PKA activity. Although some early 
development genes appear to require both Galpha3 and PKA for expression, the 
differing response of cAR1 expression and the inhibitory effect of Galpha3 on 
PKA activity suggest that Galpha3 and PKA are members of interacting pathways 
controlling gene expression early in development.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-169x.2002.00658.x
PMID: 12392578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
