---
pmid: '11387212'
title: The adaptor molecule Disabled-2 links the transforming growth factor beta receptors
  to the Smad pathway.
authors:
- Hocevar BA
- Smine A
- Xu XX
- Howe PH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC125498
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.11.2789
---

# The adaptor molecule Disabled-2 links the transforming growth factor beta receptors to the Smad pathway.
**Authors:** Hocevar BA, Smine A, Xu XX, Howe PH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.11.2789](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.11.2789)
**PMC:** [PMC125498](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC125498/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Jun 1;20(11):2789-801. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.11.2789.

The adaptor molecule Disabled-2 links the transforming growth factor beta 
receptors to the Smad pathway.

Hocevar BA(1), Smine A, Xu XX, Howe PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Using a genetic complementation approach we have identified disabled-2 (Dab2), a 
structural homolog of the Dab1 adaptor molecule, as a critical link between the 
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) receptors and the Smad family of 
proteins. Expression of wild-type Dab2 in a TGFbeta-signaling mutant restores 
TGFbeta-mediated Smad2 phosphorylation, Smad translocation to the nucleus and 
Smad-dependent transcriptional responses. TGFbeta stimulation triggers a 
transient increase in association of Dab2 with Smad2 and Smad3, which is 
mediated by a direct interaction between the N-terminal phosphotyrosine binding 
domain of Dab2 and the MH2 domain of Smad2. Dab2 associates with both the type I 
and type II TGFbeta receptors in vivo, suggesting that Dab2 is part of a 
multiprotein signaling complex. Together, these data indicate that Dab2 is an 
essential component of the TGFbeta signaling pathway, aiding in transmission of 
TGFbeta signaling from the TGFbeta receptors to the Smad family of 
transcriptional activators.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.11.2789
PMCID: PMC125498
PMID: 11387212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
