---
pmid: '23307615'
title: A critical role for Sox9 in notch-induced astrogliogenesis and stem cell maintenance.
authors:
- Martini S
- Bernoth K
- Main H
- Ortega GD
- Lendahl U
- Just U
- Schwanbeck R
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/stem.1320
---

# A critical role for Sox9 in notch-induced astrogliogenesis and stem cell maintenance.
**Authors:** Martini S, Bernoth K, Main H, Ortega GD, Lendahl U, Just U, Schwanbeck R
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.1320](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.1320)

## Abstract

1. Stem Cells. 2013 Apr;31(4):741-51. doi: 10.1002/stem.1320.

A critical role for Sox9 in notch-induced astrogliogenesis and stem cell 
maintenance.

Martini S(1), Bernoth K, Main H, Ortega GD, Lendahl U, Just U, Schwanbeck R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Christian-Albrechts-University 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Notch signaling is a key regulator of cell-fate decisions and is essential for 
proper neuroectodermal development. There, it favors the formation of ectoderm, 
promotes maintenance of neural stem cells, inhibits differentiation into 
neurons, and commits neural progenitors to a glial fate. In this report, we 
explore downstream effects of Notch important for astroglial differentiation. 
Transient activation of Notch1 during early stages of neuroectodermal 
differentiation of embryonic stem cells resulted in an increase of neural stem 
cells, a reduction in neurons, an induction of astroglial cell differentiation, 
and an induction of neural crest (NC) development. Transient or continuous 
activation of Notch1 during neuroectodermal differentiation led to upregulation 
of Sox9 expression. Knockdown of the Notch1-induced Sox9 expression reversed 
Notch1-induced astroglial cell differentiation, increase in neural stem cells, 
and the decrease in neurons, whereas the Notch1 effects on NC development were 
hardly affected by knockdown of Sox9 expression. These findings reveal a 
critical role for Notch-mediated upregulation of Sox9 in a select set of neural 
lineage determination steps controlled by Notch.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.1320
PMID: 23307615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
