---
pmid: '18468999'
title: Regulation of FE65 nuclear translocation and function by amyloid beta-protein
  precursor in osmotically stressed cells.
authors:
- Nakaya T
- Kawai T
- Suzuki T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801827200
---

# Regulation of FE65 nuclear translocation and function by amyloid beta-protein precursor in osmotically stressed cells.
**Authors:** Nakaya T, Kawai T, Suzuki T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M801827200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M801827200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):19119-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801827200. Epub
2008  May 9.

Regulation of FE65 nuclear translocation and function by amyloid beta-protein 
precursor in osmotically stressed cells.

Nakaya T(1), Kawai T, Suzuki T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Kita-12 Nishi-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

FE65, a neural adaptor protein, interacts with amyloid beta-protein precursor 
(APP) and is known to regulate amyloid beta generation from APP. FE65 also 
associates with nuclear proteins; however, its physiological function in the 
nucleus remains unclear. A fixed population of cytoplasmic FE65 is tethered to 
membranes by binding APP. This membrane-tethered FE65 is liberated from 
membranes by APP phosphorylation, which is facilitated by a stress-activated 
protein kinase in sorbitol-treated cells. Here we show that liberated FE65, 
which is distinct from "virgin" FE65 in the cytoplasm, translocates into the 
nucleus and accumulates in the nuclear matrix forming a patched structure. 
Targeting of FE65 into the nuclear matrix was suppressed by the APP 
intracellular domain fragment, which is generated by consecutive cleavages of 
APP. Thus, nuclear translocation of FE65 is under the regulation of APP. In the 
nucleus, FE65 induced gammaH2AX, which plays an important role in DNA repair as 
a cellular response by stress-damaged cells. These observations suggest that 
APP-regulated FE65 plays an important role in the early stress response of cells 
and that FE65 deregulated from APP induces apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M801827200
PMID: 18468999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
