---
pmid: '11844112'
title: Entopically additive expression of GLABRA2 alters the frequency and spacing
  of trichome initiation.
authors:
- Ohashi Y
- Oka A
- Ruberti I
- Morelli G
- Aoyama T
journal: Plant J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01214.x
---

# Entopically additive expression of GLABRA2 alters the frequency and spacing of trichome initiation.
**Authors:** Ohashi Y, Oka A, Ruberti I, Morelli G, Aoyama T
**Journal:** Plant J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01214.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01214.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2002 Feb;29(3):359-69. doi: 10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01214.x.

Entopically additive expression of GLABRA2 alters the frequency and spacing of 
trichome initiation.

Ohashi Y(1), Oka A, Ruberti I, Morelli G, Aoyama T.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, 
Japan.

GLABRA2 (GL2)/ATHB-10 encodes a homeodomain protein that belongs to the 
homeodomain-leucine zipper family. Mutant studies have revealed that this gene 
is involved in trichome, root-hair and seed-coat development. We used reverse 
genetics to investigate the role of GL2 in trichome development. A transgene 
consisting of a GL2-coding fragment preceded by the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S 
promoter (35S::GL2) did not complement defects in the gl2-1 mutant. In the 
wild-type genetic background, 35S::GL2 caused gl2-mutant-like and scarcely 
viable phenotypes, suggesting that ectopic overexpression of GL2 interrupts 
endogenous GL2 function in trichome development and is toxic to plants. On the 
other hand, another GL2 transgene containing the GL2 promoter (pGL2::GL2) 
complemented the gl2-1 mutation. Entopically additive expression of GL2 by 
introduction of pGL2::GL2 in the wild-type genetic background noticably 
increased the number of trichomes and induced production of adjacent trichomes. 
Consistent with this result, gl2-1/+ heterozygous leaves, whose GL2 expression 
was expected to decrease, had fewer trichomes than +/+ leaves. These results 
indicate that GL2 quantitatively regulates the frequency of trichome initiation 
and is involved in determining trichome spacing.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0960-7412.2001.01214.x
PMID: 11844112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
