---
pmid: '17443186'
title: Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting complex drives spindle checkpoint
  inactivation.
authors:
- Reddy SK
- Rape M
- Margansky WA
- Kirschner MW
journal: Nature
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05734
---

# Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting complex drives spindle checkpoint inactivation.
**Authors:** Reddy SK, Rape M, Margansky WA, Kirschner MW
**Journal:** Nature (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05734](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05734)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2007 Apr 19;446(7138):921-5. doi: 10.1038/nature05734.

Ubiquitination by the anaphase-promoting complex drives spindle checkpoint 
inactivation.

Reddy SK(1), Rape M, Margansky WA, Kirschner MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Apr 19;446(7138):868-9. doi: 10.1038/446868a.

Eukaryotic cells rely on a surveillance mechanism known as the spindle 
checkpoint to ensure accurate chromosome segregation. The spindle checkpoint 
prevents sister chromatids from separating until all kinetochores achieve 
bipolar attachments to the mitotic spindle. Checkpoint proteins tightly inhibit 
the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), a ubiquitin ligase required for chromosome 
segregation and progression to anaphase. Unattached kinetochores promote the 
binding of checkpoint proteins Mad2 and BubR1 to the APC-activator Cdc20, 
rendering it unable to activate APC. Once all kinetochores are properly 
attached, however, cells inactivate the checkpoint within minutes, allowing for 
the rapid and synchronous segregation of chromosomes. How cells switch from 
strong APC inhibition before kinetochore attachment to rapid APC activation once 
attachment is complete remains a mystery. Here we show that checkpoint 
inactivation is an energy-consuming process involving APC-dependent 
multi-ubiquitination. Multi-ubiquitination by APC leads to the dissociation of 
Mad2 and BubR1 from Cdc20, a process that is reversed by a Cdc20-directed 
de-ubiquitinating enzyme. The mutual regulation between checkpoint proteins and 
APC leaves the cell poised for rapid checkpoint inactivation and ensures that 
chromosome segregation promptly follows the completion of kinetochore 
attachment. In addition, our results suggest a mechanistic basis for how cancer 
cells can have a compromised spindle checkpoint without corresponding mutations 
in checkpoint genes.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05734
PMID: 17443186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
