---
pmid: '9178006'
title: Mechanism of activation of the Caenorhabditis elegans ras homologue let-60
  by a novel, temperature-sensitive, gain-of-function mutation.
authors:
- Eisenmann DM
- Kim SK
journal: Genetics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1207997
doi: 10.1093/genetics/146.2.553
---

# Mechanism of activation of the Caenorhabditis elegans ras homologue let-60 by a novel, temperature-sensitive, gain-of-function mutation.
**Authors:** Eisenmann DM, Kim SK
**Journal:** Genetics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/146.2.553](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/146.2.553)
**PMC:** [PMC1207997](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1207997/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1997 Jun;146(2):553-65. doi: 10.1093/genetics/146.2.553.

Mechanism of activation of the Caenorhabditis elegans ras homologue let-60 by a 
novel, temperature-sensitive, gain-of-function mutation.

Eisenmann DM(1), Kim SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University Medical Center, 
California 94305-5427, USA.

The Caenorhabditis elegans let-60 gene encodes a Ras protein that mediates 
induction of the hermaphrodite vulva. To better understand how mutations 
constitutively activate Ras and cause unregulated cell division, we have 
characterized ga89, a temperature-sensitive, gain-of-function mutation in let-60 
ras. At 25 degrees, ga89 increases let-60 activity resulting in a multivulva 
phenotype. At 15 degrees, ga89 decreases let-60 activity resulting in a 
vulvaless phenotype in let-60(ga89)/Df animals. The ga89 mutation causes a 
leucine (L) to phenylalanine (F) substitution at amino acid 19, a residue 
conserved in all Ras proteins. We introduced the L19F change into human H-Ras 
protein and found that the in vitro GTPase activity of H-Ras became 
temperature-dependent. Genetic experiments suggest that LET-60 (L19F) interacts 
with GAP and GNEF, since mutations that decrease GAP and GNEF activity affect 
the multivulva phenotype of let-60(ga89) animals. These results suggest that the 
L19F mutation primarily affects the intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis by Ras, and 
that this effect may be sufficient to account for the activated-Ras phenotype 
caused by let-60(ga89). Our results suggest that a mutation in a human ras gene 
analogous to ga89 might contribute to oncogenic transformation.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/146.2.553
PMCID: PMC1207997
PMID: 9178006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
