---
pmid: '7556891'
title: Regulation of Dictyostelium early development genes in signal transduction
  mutants.
authors:
- Wu L
- Hansen D
- Franke J
- Kessin RH
- Podgorski GJ
journal: Dev Biol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.1995.1267
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of Dictyostelium early development genes in signal transduction mutants.
**Authors:** Wu L, Hansen D, Franke J, Kessin RH, Podgorski GJ
**Journal:** Dev Biol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.1995.1267](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1995.1267)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 1995 Sep;171(1):149-58. doi: 10.1006/dbio.1995.1267.

Regulation of Dictyostelium early development genes in signal transduction 
mutants.

Wu L(1), Hansen D, Franke J, Kessin RH, Podgorski GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The secreted cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) and its glycoprotein 
inhibitor (PDI) are among the first genes expressed when Dictyostelium amoebae 
begin their development. We used a series of mutants with defects in signal 
transduction to ask whether cAMP receptors 1 and 3, G alpha2, G beta, adenylyl 
cyclase (ACA), or the protein kinase A catalytic subunit (PKAcat) are required 
for the initial appearance or later regulation of the PDE and the PDI 
transcripts. The PDE gene produces a 1.9-kb transcript during vegetative growth 
and then a 2.4-kb transcript during the early hours of development. Regulation 
of the 2.4-kb transcript in CAR1, G alpha2, G beta, and ACA mutants is similar 
to that of isogenic parental strains, although its level is reduced in strains 
that carry the CAR1 mutation. CAR1/CAR3 double mutants also produce less PDE 
transcript, but the PDE gene remains inducible by cAMP. The PKAcat mutant 
produces the 2.4-kb PDE transcript, but in this mutant the vegetative transcript 
is retained in development. CAR1 and CAR3 are not required for transcription of 
the PDI gene, but deleting CAR1 leads to overproduction of the PDI transcript. 
Induction or repression of the PDI gene does not require G alpha2, G beta, or 
ACA. PKAcat is required for synthesis of the PDI transcript. The results suggest 
a two-stage regulation of these early genes through a G alpha2/G 
beta-independent mechanism and an absolute dependence of PDI on the PKAcat.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.1995.1267
PMID: 7556891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
