---
pmid: '19056867'
title: Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary exosomes.
authors:
- Gonzales PA
- Pisitkun T
- Hoffert JD
- Tchapyjnikov D
- Star RA
- Kleta R
- Wang NS
- Knepper MA
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2637050
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008040406
---

# Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary exosomes.
**Authors:** Gonzales PA, Pisitkun T, Hoffert JD, Tchapyjnikov D, Star RA, Kleta R, Wang NS, Knepper MA
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2008040406](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2008040406)
**PMC:** [PMC2637050](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2637050/)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Feb;20(2):363-79. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008040406. Epub
2008  Dec 3.

Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary exosomes.

Gonzales PA(1), Pisitkun T, Hoffert JD, Tchapyjnikov D, Star RA, Kleta R, Wang 
NS, Knepper MA.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Normal human urine contains large numbers of exosomes, which are 40- to 100-nm 
vesicles that originate as the internal vesicles in multivesicular bodies from 
every renal epithelial cell type facing the urinary space. Here, we used 
LC-MS/MS to profile the proteome of human urinary exosomes. Overall, the 
analysis identified 1132 proteins unambiguously, including 177 that are 
represented on the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database of 
disease-related genes, suggesting that exosome analysis is a potential approach 
to discover urinary biomarkers. We extended the proteomic analysis to 
phosphoproteomic profiling using neutral loss scanning, and this yielded 
multiple novel phosphorylation sites, including serine-811 in the 
thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl co-transporter, NCC. To demonstrate the potential use 
of exosome analysis to identify a genetic renal disease, we carried out 
immunoblotting of exosomes from urine samples of patients with a clinical 
diagnosis of Bartter syndrome type I, showing an absence of the 
sodium-potassium-chloride co-transporter 2, NKCC2. The proteomic data are 
publicly accessible at http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lkem/exosome/.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2008040406
PMCID: PMC2637050
PMID: 19056867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Normal human urine contains large numbers of exosomes, which are 40- to 100-nm vesicles that originate as the internal vesicles in multivesicular bodies from every renal epithelial cell type facing the urinary space. Here, we used LC-MS/MS to profile the proteome of human urinary exosomes. Overall, the analysis identified 1132 proteins unambiguously, including 177 that are represented on the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database of disease-related genes, suggesting that exosome analysis is a potential approach to discover urinary biomarkers. We extended the proteomic analysis to phosphoproteomic profiling using neutral loss scanning, and this yielded multiple novel phosphorylation sites, including serine-811 in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl co-transporter, NCC. To demonstrate the potential use of exosome analysis to identify a genetic renal disease, we carried out immunoblotting of exosomes from urine samples of patients with a clinical diagnosis of Bartter syndrome type I, showing an absence of the sodium-potassium-chloride co-transporter 2, NKCC2. The proteomic data are publicly accessible at http://dir.nhlbi.nih.gov/papers/lkem/exosome/ .
