---
pmid: '17170702'
title: Cytoplasmic destruction of p53 by the endoplasmic reticulum-resident ubiquitin
  ligase 'Synoviolin'.
authors:
- Yamasaki S
- Yagishita N
- Sasaki T
- Nakazawa M
- Kato Y
- Yamadera T
- Bae E
- Toriyama S
- Ikeda R
- Zhang L
- Fujitani K
- Yoo E
- Tsuchimochi K
- Ohta T
- Araya N
- Fujita H
- Aratani S
- Eguchi K
- Komiya S
- Maruyama I
- Higashi N
- Sato M
- Senoo H
- Ochi T
- Yokoyama S
- Amano T
- Kim J
- Gay S
- Fukamizu A
- Nishioka K
- Tanaka K
- Nakajima T
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1782373
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601490
---

# Cytoplasmic destruction of p53 by the endoplasmic reticulum-resident ubiquitin ligase 'Synoviolin'.
**Authors:** Yamasaki S, Yagishita N, Sasaki T, Nakazawa M, Kato Y, Yamadera T, Bae E, Toriyama S, Ikeda R, Zhang L, Fujitani K, Yoo E, Tsuchimochi K, Ohta T, Araya N, Fujita H, Aratani S, Eguchi K, Komiya S, Maruyama I, Higashi N, Sato M, Senoo H, Ochi T, Yokoyama S, Amano T, Kim J, Gay S, Fukamizu A, Nishioka K, Tanaka K, Nakajima T
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601490](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601490)
**PMC:** [PMC1782373](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1782373/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jan 10;26(1):113-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601490. Epub 2006 Dec
 14.

Cytoplasmic destruction of p53 by the endoplasmic reticulum-resident ubiquitin 
ligase 'Synoviolin'.

Yamasaki S(1), Yagishita N, Sasaki T, Nakazawa M, Kato Y, Yamadera T, Bae E, 
Toriyama S, Ikeda R, Zhang L, Fujitani K, Yoo E, Tsuchimochi K, Ohta T, Araya N, 
Fujita H, Aratani S, Eguchi K, Komiya S, Maruyama I, Higashi N, Sato M, Senoo H, 
Ochi T, Yokoyama S, Amano T, Kim J, Gay S, Fukamizu A, Nishioka K, Tanaka K, 
Nakajima T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Science, Institute of Medical Science, St Marianna 
University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

Synoviolin, also called HRD1, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and is implicated in 
endoplasmic reticulum -associated degradation. In mammals, Synoviolin plays 
crucial roles in various physiological and pathological processes, including 
embryogenesis and the pathogenesis of arthropathy. However, little is known 
about the molecular mechanisms of Synoviolin in these actions. To clarify these 
issues, we analyzed the profile of protein expression in synoviolin-null cells. 
Here, we report that Synoviolin targets tumor suppressor gene p53 for 
ubiquitination. Synoviolin sequestrated and metabolized p53 in the cytoplasm and 
negatively regulated its cellular level and biological functions, including 
transcription, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. Furthermore, these p53 
regulatory functions of Synoviolin were irrelevant to other E3 ubiquitin ligases 
for p53, such as MDM2, Pirh2 and Cop1, which form autoregulatory feedback loops. 
Our results provide novel insights into p53 signaling mediated by Synoviolin.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601490
PMCID: PMC1782373
PMID: 17170702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Synoviolin, also called HRD1, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase and is implicated in endoplasmic reticulum -associated degradation. In mammals, Synoviolin plays crucial roles in various physiological and pathological processes, including embryogenesis and the pathogenesis of arthropathy. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms of Synoviolin in these actions. To clarify these issues, we analyzed the profile of protein expression in synoviolin -null cells. Here, we report that Synoviolin targets tumor suppressor gene p53 for ubiquitination. Synoviolin sequestrated and metabolized p53 in the cytoplasm and negatively regulated its cellular level and biological functions, including transcription, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. Furthermore, these p53 regulatory functions of Synoviolin were irrelevant to other E3 ubiquitin ligases for p53, such as MDM2, Pirh2 and Cop1, which form autoregulatory feedback loops. Our results provide novel insights into p53 signaling mediated by Synoviolin.

Introduction

The ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) consists of a small polypeptide ubiquitin, a framework of enzymes that mediates the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to proteolytic substrates and the 26S proteasome that digests the modified proteins into peptides. The formation of ubiquitin conjugates requires the successive action of three classes of enzymes. This process is first activated by an E1 (activating enzyme) in an ATP-dependent manner, forming a high-energy thioester bond between ubiquitin and an E1, and the activated ubiquitin is then transferred to an E2 (conjugating enzyme), forming a similar thioester linkage between ubiquitin and E2, and then E3 ubiquitin ligase transfers ubiquitin to the target proteins. Through repeated reactions of this cycle, a polyubiquitin chain is formed on the target proteins, which is recognized by the 26S proteasome for ultimate degradation ( Hershko and Ciechanover, 1998 ; Pickart, 2001 ). In the UPS pathway, the E3 ubiquitin ligases play critical roles in the selection of target proteins for degradation, because each distinct E3 ubiquitin ligase usually binds a protein substrate with a degree of selectivity for ubiquitination in a temporally and spatially regulated fashion.

Synoviolin, a representative of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident E3 ubiquitin ligases, is a mammalian homolog of Hrd1p/Der3p that “substrates” misfolded carboxypeptide yscY (CPY * ) ( Bordallo et al , 1998 ) and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGR), a key enzyme of the mevalonate pathway in yeast ( Shearer and Hampton, 2004 , 2005 ). We cloned Synoviolin from rheumatoid synovial cells (RSCs) and described that Synoviolin is highly expressed in synoviocytes of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) ( Amano et al , 2003 ). In that report, we demonstrated that overexpression of Synoviolin in transgenic mice leads to advanced arthropathy caused by reduced apoptosis of synoviocytes. On the other hand, synoviolin + /− mice showed resistance to the development of arthritis owing to enhanced apoptosis of synovial cells. These results indicate that Synoviolin is a novel causative factor for arthropathy based on its anti-apoptotic effects. In another study, we reported that all mice fetuses lacking synoviolin ( Syno −/− ) died in utero around E13.5 ( Yagishita et al , 2005 ), although Hrd1p/Del3p, a yeast ortholog of Synoviolin, was described as non-essential for survival. Syno −/− were anemic owing to enhanced apoptosis of fetal liver cells ( Yagishita et al , 2005 ). It is surprising that an ER-associated degradation (ERAD)-associated E3 ubiquitin ligase, Synoviolin, is involved in cell hyperplasia of dividing cells via its anti-apoptotic effect. In this regard, like RSCs, the anti-apoptotic effect of Synoviolin was observed even for synoviolin expressed ectopically in NIH3T3 cells, which resulted in enhanced cell overgrowth in these cells ( Tsuchimochi et al , 2005 ). These results were confirmed also in the Drosophila fly ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). An important question remains unanswered at this stage. What is the mechanism of Synoviolin-induced cell overgrowth? The present study was designed to identify the substrates for Synoviolin that may be involved in cell growth.

Discussion

We provide concrete evidence for the first time of the functional relationship between Synoviolin and p53. As a target for Synoviolin, p53 is evidently a non-ERAD substrate. In this regard, Doa10p, the RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase, is known not only to be involved exclusively in removing ER proteins in the ERAD, but also to eliminate cytoplasmic targets, especially the soluble transcriptional factor Matα2, which translocates into the nucleus similar to p53 ( Swanson et al , 2001 ; Laney and Hochstrasser, 2003 ). Thus, our finding can be viewed within the same framework of yeast though in higher eukaryotes. In the meantime, it was proposed that the ERAD in yeast is composed of two distinct surveillance mechanisms, that is, the folded state of luminal domains and the cytosolic domains are monitored by ERAD-luminal (ERAD-L) and ERAD-cytosolic (ERAD-C) pathways, respectively ( Vashist and Ng, 2004 ; Nishikawa et al , 2005 ). Hrd1p is recognized as an ERAD-L ligase; however, this classification is not applicable to Synoviolin as a human homolog of yeast Hrd1, because Synoviolin can target both ERAD-L substrate and cytoplasmic p53 (ERAD-C substrate). Therefore, we propose the novel regulatory system of Synoviolin as a different classification of the ERAD-L/C pathway.

Maintenance of homeostasis is an important cellular function, and cells are equipped with various processes to maintain their conditions. Transcriptional alteration mediated by p53 results in a variety of cell fate changes, including growth arrest and apoptosis ( Vousden and Lu, 2002 ; Meek, 2004 ). Normally, the cell maintains low levels of p53 through rapid protein degradation via the UPS by the function of ubiquitin ligases. In contrast, under genotoxic stress conditions, stabilization of p53 is promoted and the diffusely distributed p53 translocates to the nucleus owing to growth inhibition and apoptosis by its transcriptional activity. Thus, adjusting the level and nuclear localization of p53 are two essential processes for cells in order to maintain the physiological state. Although p53 mutations have been documented in more than half of all human tumors ( Hollstein et al , 1999 ), it is also known that tumor cells retain WT p53. In this regard, functional inactivation of WT p53 by abnormal cytoplasmic sequestration is frequently observed in many tumor types ( Moll et al , 1992 , 1996 ; Schlamp et al , 1997 ). The RING finger protein Parc is considered to act as a cytoplasmic anchoring molecule of p53, but this clone does not have a p53 ubiquitination activity ( Nikolaev et al , 2003 ). On the other hand, our present findings demonstrated that Synoviolin not only anchors p53 in the cytoplasm, but also ubiquitinates it, and thus differs from Parc ( Figure 4 ). Moreover, Synoviolin diverges from other ligases for p53; each of the three ubiquitin ligases for p53 (MDM2, Pirh2 and Cop1) forms an autoregulatory negative feedback loop, resulting in lower p53 activity upon its expression, but these three ligases are target for the p53 transcriptional pathway ( Dornan et al , 2004 ; Leng et al , 2003 ), whereas the expression of Synoviolin is not regulated by p53 ( Figure 5F ). Indeed, the synoviolin promoter region does not have a p53 target sequence, whereas it contains the ER stress responsive element ( Tsuchimochi et al , 2005 ) and responds to the stress ( Figure 5F ). The reason for the multiple post-translational steps for p53 is the enormous importance of this molecule in maintaining cellular homeostasis. p53 is negatively regulated by various ubiquitin ligases, such as MDM2, MdmX, HAUSP, ARF, COP1, Pirh2 and ARF-BP1 ( Brooks and Gu, 2006 ), and it is assumed that each molecule has its specific roles in p53 control. Among them, Synoviolin is also a unique regulator of p53 because of its independency from other ligases and transcriptional regulation by p53, ER localization and canonical function in ERAD.

In the present study, we demonstrated that Synoviolin participates in genotoxic stress-mediated p53 signaling, and its to participation in the ER stress-induced apoptosis is also well known ( Bordallo et al , 1998 ; Kaneko et al , 2002 ; Kikkert et al , 2004 ; Yagishita et al , 2005 ). Therefore, Synoviolin seems to regulate two distinct apoptotic pathways and the ubiquitination of p53 by Synoviolin may be another target for crosstalk between them. Another linkage between ER stress and p53 pathway is also implicated by our finding that UPR markers are increased in cells with synoviolin knockdown (data not shown). Two reports described a crosstalk of p53- and ER stress- induced apoptosis pathways, that is, ER stress antagonizes p53-mediated apoptosis through the cytoplasmic localization of p53 due to phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) ( Qu et al , 2004 ), and p53 destabilization utilized the cooperative action of MDM2 and GSK-3β in ER-stressed cells ( Pluquet et al , 2005 ). In this regard, it is important to note that UPR activation upon Synoviolin knockdown in RKO cells may be related to ER stress with impaired ERAD system. Since Synoviolin null cells show upregulation of p53, it is possible that the effect of p53 stabilization by Synoviolin knockdown exceeds the p53 destabilization effect of UPR induced by Synoviolin knockdown. This hypothesis may be supported by the finding that synoviolin siRNA treatment seemed to restore the expression of p53 at least in part, which was suppressed by ER stress ( Figure 5F ). The regulatory action of Synoviolin on p53 under ER stress is obviously more complex, because ER stress also induces Synoviolin expression. Further studies are necessary to determine the physiological regulatory role of Synoviolin in p53 expression under ER stress conditions.

The function of p53 in patients with RA is still controversial ( Firestein et al , 1997 ; Reme et al , 1998 ; Inazuka et al , 2000 ; Muller-Ladner and Nishioka, 2000 ; Sun and Cheung, 2002 ). Mice lacking p53 do not develop spontaneous arthropathy but have severe collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) ( Yamanishi et al , 2002 ; Simelyte et al , 2005 ). As we reported previously, overexpression of Synoviolin resulted in spontaneous arthropathy and its deficiency resulted in resistance to CIA in mice ( Amano et al , 2003 ). Therefore, we assumed that the severity of arthritis could be determined by the Synoviolin–p53 control pathway and that the onset of spontaneous arthropathy may be caused by p53-independent pathway in these models. The influence of these relationships on arthritis is currently being examined in our laboratories, using synoviolin and p53 double null mutant mice. We hope that our research could uncover new pathogenic mechanisms of RA. Furthermore, since p53 is an important tumor suppressor gene, we believe that Synoviolin could be a useful therapeutic target for not only RA but also cancer based on its cytological and biochemical features, i.e., cytoplasmic localization and enzymatic activity ( Hopkins and Groom, 2002 ).

In conclusion, we demonstrated that Synoviolin acts as an ERAD E3 ubiquitin ligase that controls cellular p53 and thus opens, a new concept for proliferative disorders such as RA and cancer.
