---
pmid: '20805509'
title: CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CEBPD)-mediated nuclear import
  of FANCD2 by IPO4 augments cellular response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Wang J
- Sarkar TR
- Zhou M
- Sharan S
- Ritt DA
- Veenstra TD
- Morrison DK
- Huang AM
- Sterneck E
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2941265
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1002603107
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CEBPD)-mediated nuclear import of FANCD2 by IPO4 augments cellular response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Wang J, Sarkar TR, Zhou M, Sharan S, Ritt DA, Veenstra TD, Morrison DK, Huang AM, Sterneck E
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1002603107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002603107)
**PMC:** [PMC2941265](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2941265/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 14;107(37):16131-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1002603107. Epub 2010 Aug 30.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta (C/EBPdelta, CEBPD)-mediated nuclear import 
of FANCD2 by IPO4 augments cellular response to DNA damage.

Wang J(1), Sarkar TR, Zhou M, Sharan S, Ritt DA, Veenstra TD, Morrison DK, Huang 
AM, Sterneck E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute at Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Maintenance of genomic integrity is an essential cellular function. We 
previously reported that the transcription factor and tumor suppressor 
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein δ (C/EBPδ, CEBPD; also known as "NFIL-6β") 
promotes genomic stability. However, the molecular mechanism was not known. 
Here, we show that C/EBPδ is a DNA damage-induced gene, which supports survival 
of mouse bone marrow cells, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF), human fibroblasts, 
and breast tumor cells in response to the DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C 
(MMC). Using gene knockout, protein depletion, and overexpression studies, we 
found that C/EBPδ promotes monoubiquitination of the Fanconi anemia 
complementation group D2 protein (FANCD2), which is necessary for its function 
in replication-associated DNA repair. C/EBPδ interacts with FANCD2 and importin 
4 (IPO4, also known as "Imp4" and "RanBP4") via separate domains, mediating 
FANCD2-IPO4 association and augmenting nuclear import of FANCD2, a prerequisite 
for its monoubiquitination. This study identifies a transcription-independent 
activity of C/EBPδ in the DNA damage response that may in part underlie its 
tumor suppressor function. Furthermore, we report a function of IPO4 and nuclear 
import in the Fanconi anemia pathway of DNA repair.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1002603107
PMCID: PMC2941265
PMID: 20805509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Maintenance of genomic integrity is an essential cellular function. We previously reported that the transcription factor and tumor suppressor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein δ (C/EBPδ, CEBPD; also known as “NFIL-6β”) promotes genomic stability. However, the molecular mechanism was not known. Here, we show that C/EBPδ is a DNA damage-induced gene, which supports survival of mouse bone marrow cells, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEF), human fibroblasts, and breast tumor cells in response to the DNA cross-linking agent mitomycin C (MMC). Using gene knockout, protein depletion, and overexpression studies, we found that C/EBPδ promotes monoubiquitination of the Fanconi anemia complementation group D2 protein (FANCD2), which is necessary for its function in replication-associated DNA repair. C/EBPδ interacts with FANCD2 and importin 4 (IPO4, also known as “Imp4” and “RanBP4”) via separate domains, mediating FANCD2–IPO4 association and augmenting nuclear import of FANCD2, a prerequisite for its monoubiquitination. This study identifies a transcription-independent activity of C/EBPδ in the DNA damage response that may in part underlie its tumor suppressor function. Furthermore, we report a function of IPO4 and nuclear import in the Fanconi anemia pathway of DNA repair.

Discussion

In this study we identified a function of the transcription factor C/EBPδ and the nuclear import factor IPO4 in the DNA damage response. C/EBPδ mediates interaction of the DNA-repair protein FANCD2 with IPO4 and as a result facilitates nuclear import of FANCD2, which is essential for the FA DNA-repair pathway. This activity of C/EBPδ is independent of its functions as a transcription factor. Using silencing strategies or cells deficient in either FANCD2 or C/EBPδ and through the overexpression of WT C/EBPδ or mutants that cannot interact with either IPO4 or FANCD2, we show that both C/EBPδ and IPO4 play a significant role in nuclear import of FANCD2 and cell survival in response to MMC. The interaction of C/EBPδ with FANCD2 and IPO4 explains in part its role in cell survival in response to DNA damage by cross-linking agents. Furthermore, this study identifies IPO4 and nuclear import as players in the FA DNA damage-response pathway.

This study, together with two recent reports ( 25 , 31 ), underscores a multifaceted impact of C/EBPδ on the DNA damage response. By promoting cyclin D1 degradation ( 25 ), C/EBPδ may augment growth arrest to allow DNA repair to proceed. Furthermore, C/EBPδ induces superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) expression, which reduces reactive oxygen species and supports cell survival in response to cisplatin compounds ( 31 ). These, and possibly other, activities of C/EBPδ also may contribute to cell survival in response to MMC. However, our data showing that C/EBPδ-augmented cell survival requires its FANCD2 interaction domain and the presence of endogenous FANCD2 strongly suggest that interaction with FANCD2 plays a significant part in the role of C/EBPδ in the MMC response. However, C/EBPδ-null cells display only a mild FA phenotype, consistent with nuclear FANCD2-L still being observed in C/EBPδ null cells, albeit at reduced levels.

FA is a cancer-susceptibility syndrome ( 5 ). Interestingly, a very recent immunohistochemical study showed that a significant proportion of malignant breast tumors had lost expression of nuclear FANCD2 but retained cytoplasmic expression, whereas benign lesions retained both nuclear and cytoplasmic staining ( 32 ). These observations are consistent with FANCD2 nuclear import serving as a tumor-suppressing mechanism. Hence, the functional interaction of C/EBPδ with FANCD2 may be part of its tumor suppressor activity and its role in maintaining genomic stability.

FANCD2 is a large protein that requires an active nuclear import mechanism to participate in DNA repair. How FANCD2 is transported to the nucleus has been unknown to date. Using several relevant software programs, we were not able to identify an NLS in FANCD2 itself. Therefore, FANCD2 association with IPO4 is achieved through an adaptor mechanism using the transcription factor C/EBPδ. Interestingly, TNF-α signaling was reported to promote nuclear translocation of FANCD2 in HEK293 cells ( 33 ). Because C/EBPδ expression can be induced by TNF-α ( 10 ), it may play a role in this pathway also, although the physiological significance is unknown. We also could speculate that FANCD2-C/EBPδ complexes may serve functions other than nuclear import of FANCD2. One of the most prominent features of FANCD2 is its localization to sites of DNA damage, which with FANCD2 staining can be visualized as discrete nuclear foci in cells with DNA lesions ( 34 ). We were unable to produce evidence of significant colocalization of C/EBPδ with FANCD2 foci ( Fig. S6 ). However, because other C/EBP factors have been shown to associate tightly with chromatin, and because C/EBPδ, among C/EBP family proteins, has the lowest stringency for DNA sequence recognition to bind DNA ( 35 , 36 ), it is conceivable that C/EBPδ may shuttle FANCD2 to the chromatin but not remain associated within DNA damage foci.

IPO4 is a monomeric import receptor that also plays a role in ribosomal RNA processing ( 37 ). Only a few proteins are known to be substrates of IPO4 ( 30 , 38 – 40 ). Interestingly, one study suggests that the IPO4 ortholog Imp4 of Schistosoma mansoni, Escherichia coli , and yeast promotes cell survival in response to alkylating agents ( 41 ). IPO4 has an RNA-binding domain ( 37 ) and therefore also may bind single-stranded DNA. Because prokaryotes do not have nuclear membranes, one can speculate that IPO4 may have a direct role in DNA-repair pathways that potentially could extend to its association with FANCD2 and precede the evolution of its function as a nuclear import protein.

IPO4 depletion efficiently reduced nuclear FANCD2 even in the absence of DNA damage, demonstrating that IPO4 is responsible for translocation of a significant fraction of FANCD2 to the nucleus. However, silencing of C/EBPδ or IPO4 did not completely block FANCD2 nuclear translocation. Most likely, FANCD2 also may use other adaptor proteins and importin molecules to enter the nucleus. The interaction of ectopic C/EBPδ with FANCD2 and IPO4 in cell lysates was not modulated by MMC, indicating that C/EBPδ can bind both proteins even in the absence of activated DNA damage-response pathways. However, the in situ DuoLink assay and cell fractionations revealed that nuclear translocation of FANCD2 is stimulated by MMC in some cell types, such as PD20-D2 and MDA-MB-468. This stimulation may be, in part, the result of MMC-induced C/EBPδ expression. However, the active nuclear import process also may be stimulated by DNA damage-induced signals, although the association of C/EBPδ, IPO4, and FANCD2 is independent of such signals. In any case, the nuclear import function described here is a prerequisite for FANCD2 monoubiquitination and for any subsequent functional relevance of FANCD2-C/EBPδ-IPO4 complexes in the nucleus. This study revealed nuclear import of FANCD2 as a regulated step in the DNA damage response. Furthermore, we identified C/EBPδ and IPO4 as two molecules that play important roles in the nuclear import of FANCD2.
