---
pmid: '23886946'
title: Furry promotes acetylation of microtubules in the mitotic spindle by inhibition
  of SIRT2 tubulin deacetylase.
authors:
- Nagai T
- Ikeda M
- Chiba S
- Kanno S
- Mizuno K
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.127209
---

# Furry promotes acetylation of microtubules in the mitotic spindle by inhibition of SIRT2 tubulin deacetylase.
**Authors:** Nagai T, Ikeda M, Chiba S, Kanno S, Mizuno K
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.127209](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.127209)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2013 Oct 1;126(Pt 19):4369-80. doi: 10.1242/jcs.127209. Epub 2013 
Jul 25.

Furry promotes acetylation of microtubules in the mitotic spindle by inhibition 
of SIRT2 tubulin deacetylase.

Nagai T(1), Ikeda M, Chiba S, Kanno S, Mizuno K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan.

The structure and function of microtubules (MTs) are regulated by 
post-translational modifications of tubulin subunits, such as acetylation of the 
Lys40 residue of α-tubulin. Regulation of the organization and dynamics of MTs 
is essential for the precise formation of the mitotic spindle. Spindle MTs are 
highly acetylated, but the mechanism regulating this acetylation is largely 
unknown. Furry (Fry) is an evolutionarily conserved protein that binds to MTs 
and colocalizes with acetylated MTs in the mitotic spindle. In this study, we 
examined the role of Fry in the acetylation of MTs in the mitotic spindle. 
Depletion of Fry significantly reduced the level of MT acetylation in the 
mitotic spindle. Expression of the N-terminal fragment of Fry induced 
hyperacetylation of MTs in both mitotic and interphase cells. These results 
indicate that Fry promotes MT acetylation in the mitotic spindle. We also found 
that Fry binds to the tubulin deacetylase SIRT2, preferentially in mitotic 
cells. Cell-free experiments revealed that the N-terminal region of Fry is the 
domain responsible for binding to and inhibiting the tubulin-deacetylase 
activity of SIRT2. AGK2, a specific inhibitor of SIRT2, increased the level of 
MT acetylation in the mitotic spindle, indicating that SIRT2 is involved in the 
deacetylation of spindle MTs. Furthermore, AGK2 reversed the decrease in MT 
acetylation induced by Fry depletion. In summary, these results suggest that Fry 
plays a crucial role in promoting the level of MT acetylation in the mitotic 
spindle by inhibiting the tubulin-deacetylase activity of SIRT2.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.127209
PMID: 23886946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
