---
pmid: '22632967'
title: Cyclin F-mediated degradation of ribonucleotide reductase M2 controls genome
  integrity and DNA repair.
authors:
- D'Angiolella V
- Donato V
- Forrester FM
- Jeong YT
- Pellacani C
- Kudo Y
- Saraf A
- Florens L
- Washburn MP
- Pagano M
journal: Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3616325
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.043
---

# Cyclin F-mediated degradation of ribonucleotide reductase M2 controls genome integrity and DNA repair.
**Authors:** D'Angiolella V, Donato V, Forrester FM, Jeong YT, Pellacani C, Kudo Y, Saraf A, Florens L, Washburn MP, Pagano M
**Journal:** Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.043](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.043)
**PMC:** [PMC3616325](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3616325/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2012 May 25;149(5):1023-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.043.

Cyclin F-mediated degradation of ribonucleotide reductase M2 controls genome 
integrity and DNA repair.

D'Angiolella V(1), Donato V, Forrester FM, Jeong YT, Pellacani C, Kudo Y, Saraf 
A, Florens L, Washburn MP, Pagano M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of 
Medicine, 522 First Avenue, SRB 1107, New York, NY 10016, USA.

F-box proteins are the substrate binding subunits of SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box 
protein) ubiquitin ligase complexes. Using affinity purifications and mass 
spectrometry, we identified RRM2 (the ribonucleotide reductase family member 2) 
as an interactor of the F-box protein cyclin F. Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) 
catalyzes the conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs), 
which are necessary for both replicative and repair DNA synthesis. We found 
that, during G2, following CDK-mediated phosphorylation of Thr33, RRM2 is 
degraded via SCF(cyclin F) to maintain balanced dNTP pools and genome stability. 
After DNA damage, cyclin F is downregulated in an ATR-dependent manner to allow 
accumulation of RRM2. Defective elimination of cyclin F delays DNA repair and 
sensitizes cells to DNA damage, a phenotype that is reverted by expressing a 
nondegradable RRM2 mutant. In summary, we have identified a biochemical pathway 
that controls the abundance of dNTPs and ensures efficient DNA repair in 
response to genotoxic stress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.043
PMCID: PMC3616325
PMID: 22632967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
