---
pmid: '22138302'
title: Preferential interactions between ApoE-containing lipoproteins and Aβ revealed
  by a detection method that combines size exclusion chromatography with non-reducing
  gel-shift.
authors:
- LaDu MJ
- Munson GW
- Jungbauer L
- Getz GS
- Reardon CA
- Tai LM
- Yu C
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3273043
doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.11.005
---

# Preferential interactions between ApoE-containing lipoproteins and Aβ revealed by a detection method that combines size exclusion chromatography with non-reducing gel-shift.
**Authors:** LaDu MJ, Munson GW, Jungbauer L, Getz GS, Reardon CA, Tai LM, Yu C
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.11.005)
**PMC:** [PMC3273043](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3273043/)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1821(2):295-302. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.11.005. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Preferential interactions between ApoE-containing lipoproteins and Aβ revealed 
by a detection method that combines size exclusion chromatography with 
non-reducing gel-shift.

LaDu MJ(1), Munson GW, Jungbauer L, Getz GS, Reardon CA, Tai LM, Yu C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA. mladu@uic.edu

The association between apolipoprotein E (apoE) and amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) may 
significantly impact the function of both proteins, thus affecting the etiology 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, apoE/Aβ interactions remain fundamentally 
defined by the stringency of the detection method. Here we use size exclusion 
chromatography (SEC) as a non-stringent approach to the detection of apoE/Aβ 
interactions in solution, specifically apoE and both endogenous and exogenous Aβ 
from plasma, CSF and astrocyte conditioned media. By SEC analysis, Aβ 
association with plasma and CNS lipoproteins is apoE-dependent. While endogenous 
Aβ elutes to specific human plasma lipoproteins distinct from those containing 
apoE, it is the apoE-containing lipoproteins that absorb excess amounts of 
exogenous Aβ40. In human CSF, apoE, endogenous Aβ and phospholipid elute in an 
almost identical profile, as do apoE, exogenous Aβ and phospholipid from 
astrocyte conditioned media. Combining SEC fractionation with subsequent 
analysis for SDS-stable apoE/Aβ complex reveals that apoE-containing astrocyte 
lipoproteins exhibit the most robust interactions with Aβ. Thus, standardization 
of the methods for detecting apoE/Aβ complex is necessary to determine its 
functional significance in the neuropathology characteristic of AD. Importantly, 
a systematic understanding of the role of apoE-containing plasma and CNS 
lipoproteins in Aβ homeostasis could potentially contribute to identifying a 
plasma biomarker currently over-looked because it has multiple components.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2011.11.005
PMCID: PMC3273043
PMID: 22138302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
