---
pmid: '11160897'
title: Enhanced activity of adenine-DNA glycosylase (Myh) by apurinic/apyrimidinic
  endonuclease (Ape1) in mammalian base excision repair of an A/GO mismatch.
authors:
- Yang H
- Clendenin WM
- Wong D
- Demple B
- Slupska MM
- Chiang JH
- Miller JH
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC30391
doi: 10.1093/nar/29.3.743
---

# Enhanced activity of adenine-DNA glycosylase (Myh) by apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease (Ape1) in mammalian base excision repair of an A/GO mismatch.
**Authors:** Yang H, Clendenin WM, Wong D, Demple B, Slupska MM, Chiang JH, Miller JH
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/29.3.743](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/29.3.743)
**PMC:** [PMC30391](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC30391/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Feb 1;29(3):743-52. doi: 10.1093/nar/29.3.743.

Enhanced activity of adenine-DNA glycosylase (Myh) by apurinic/apyrimidinic 
endonuclease (Ape1) in mammalian base excision repair of an A/GO mismatch.

Yang H(1), Clendenin WM, Wong D, Demple B, Slupska MM, Chiang JH, Miller JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics and the Molecular Biology 
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA and Department 
of Cancer Cell Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Adenine-DNA glycosylase MutY of Escherichia coli catalyzes the cleavage of 
adenine when mismatched with 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (GO), an oxidatively 
damaged base. The biological outcome is the prevention of C/G-->A/T 
transversions. The molecular mechanism of base excision repair (BER) of A/GO in 
mammals is not well understood. In this study we report stimulation of mammalian 
adenine-DNA glycosylase activity by apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonuclease 
using murine homolog of MutY (Myh) and human AP endonuclease (Ape1), which 
shares 94% amino acid identity with its murine homolog Apex. After removal of 
adenine by the Myh glycosylase activity, intact AP DNA remains due to lack of an 
efficient Myh AP lyase activity. The study of wild-type Ape1 and its catalytic 
mutant H309N demonstrates that Ape1 catalytic activity is required for formation 
of cleaved AP DNA. It also appears that Ape1 stimulates Myh glycosylase activity 
by increasing formation of the Myh-DNA complex. This stimulation is independent 
of the catalytic activity of Ape1. Consequently, Ape1 preserves the Myh 
preference for A/GO over A/G and improves overall glycosylase efficiency. Our 
study suggests that protein-protein interactions may occur in vivo to achieve 
efficient BER of A/GO.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/29.3.743
PMCID: PMC30391
PMID: 11160897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
