---
pmid: '28581497'
title: The extracellular matrix protein agrin promotes heart regeneration in mice.
authors:
- Bassat E
- Mutlak YE
- Genzelinakh A
- Shadrin IY
- Baruch Umansky K
- Yifa O
- Kain D
- Rajchman D
- Leach J
- Riabov Bassat D
- Udi Y
- Sarig R
- Sagi I
- Martin JF
- Bursac N
- Cohen S
- Tzahor E
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5769930
doi: 10.1038/nature22978
---

# The extracellular matrix protein agrin promotes heart regeneration in mice.
**Authors:** Bassat E, Mutlak YE, Genzelinakh A, Shadrin IY, Baruch Umansky K, Yifa O, Kain D, Rajchman D, Leach J, Riabov Bassat D, Udi Y, Sarig R, Sagi I, Martin JF, Bursac N, Cohen S, Tzahor E
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature22978](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22978)
**PMC:** [PMC5769930](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5769930/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2017 Jul 13;547(7662):179-184. doi: 10.1038/nature22978. Epub 2017 Jun
 5.

The extracellular matrix protein agrin promotes heart regeneration in mice.

Bassat E(1), Mutlak YE(2), Genzelinakh A(1), Shadrin IY(3), Baruch Umansky K(1), 
Yifa O(1), Kain D(1), Rajchman D(1), Leach J(4), Riabov Bassat D(5), Udi Y(5), 
Sarig R(1), Sagi I(5), Martin JF(4), Bursac N(3), Cohen S(2), Tzahor E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.
(4)Baylor College of Medicine and The Texas Heart Institute, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2017 Jul 10;42(1):7-8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2017.06.017.

The adult mammalian heart is non-regenerative owing to the post-mitotic nature 
of cardiomyocytes. The neonatal mouse heart can regenerate, but only during the 
first week of life. Here we show that changes in the composition of the 
extracellular matrix during this week can affect cardiomyocyte growth and 
differentiation in mice. We identify agrin, a component of neonatal 
extracellular matrix, as required for the full regenerative capacity of neonatal 
mouse hearts. In vitro, recombinant agrin promotes the division of 
cardiomyocytes that are derived from mouse and human induced pluripotent stem 
cells through a mechanism that involves the disassembly of the 
dystrophin-glycoprotein complex, and Yap- and ERK-mediated signalling. In vivo, 
a single administration of agrin promotes cardiac regeneration in adult mice 
after myocardial infarction, although the degree of cardiomyocyte proliferation 
observed in this model suggests that there are additional therapeutic 
mechanisms. Together, our results uncover a new inducer of mammalian heart 
regeneration and highlight fundamental roles of the extracellular matrix in 
cardiac repair.

DOI: 10.1038/nature22978
PMCID: PMC5769930
PMID: 28581497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
