---
pmid: '14702351'
title: C-terminal and heparin-binding domains of collagenic tail subunit are both
  essential for anchoring acetylcholinesterase at the synapse.
authors:
- Kimbell LM
- Ohno K
- Engel AG
- Rotundo RL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305462200
---

# C-terminal and heparin-binding domains of collagenic tail subunit are both essential for anchoring acetylcholinesterase at the synapse.
**Authors:** Kimbell LM, Ohno K, Engel AG, Rotundo RL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M305462200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M305462200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 19;279(12):10997-1005. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M305462200. Epub
 2003 Dec 31.

C-terminal and heparin-binding domains of collagenic tail subunit are both 
essential for anchoring acetylcholinesterase at the synapse.

Kimbell LM(1), Ohno K, Engel AG, Rotundo RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy and Neuroscience Program, University 
of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

The collagen-tailed form of acetylcholinesterase (A(12)-AChE) appears to be 
localized at the neuromuscular junction in association with the transmembrane 
dystroglycan complex through binding of its collagenic tail (ColQ) to the 
proteoglycan perlecan. The heparan sulfate binding domains (HSBD) of ColQ are 
thought to be involved in anchoring ColQ to the synaptic basal lamina. The 
C-terminal domain (CTD) of ColQ is also likely involved, but there has been no 
direct evidence. Mutations in COLQ cause endplate AChE deficiency in humans. 
Nine previously reported and three novel mutations are in CTD of ColQ, and most 
CTD mutations do not abrogate formation of A(12)-AChE in transfected COS cells. 
Patient endplates, however, are devoid of AChE, suggesting that CTD mutations 
affect anchoring of ColQ to the synaptic basal lamina. Based on our observations 
that purified AChE can be transplanted to the heterologous frog neuromuscular 
junction, we tested insertion competence of nine naturally occurring CTD mutants 
and two artificial HSBD mutants. Wild-type human A(12)-AChE inserted into the 
frog neuromuscular junction, whereas six CTD mutants and two HSBD mutants did 
not. Our studies establish that the CTD mutations indeed compromise anchoring of 
ColQ and that both HSBD and CTD are essential for anchoring ColQ to the synaptic 
basal lamina.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M305462200
PMID: 14702351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
