---
pmid: '30030519'
title: Structure of the intact 14-subunit human cytochrome c oxidase.
authors:
- Zong S
- Wu M
- Gu J
- Liu T
- Guo R
- Yang M
journal: Cell Res
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6170408
doi: 10.1038/s41422-018-0071-1
---

# Structure of the intact 14-subunit human cytochrome c oxidase.
**Authors:** Zong S, Wu M, Gu J, Liu T, Guo R, Yang M
**Journal:** Cell Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41422-018-0071-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-018-0071-1)
**PMC:** [PMC6170408](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6170408/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2018 Oct;28(10):1026-1034. doi: 10.1038/s41422-018-0071-1. Epub 2018
 Jul 20.

Structure of the intact 14-subunit human cytochrome c oxidase.

Zong S(#)(1), Wu M(#)(1), Gu J(#)(1), Liu T(#)(1), Guo R(1), Yang M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Tsinghua-Peking 
Joint Center for Life Sciences, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for 
Structural Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
100084, China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Protein Science, Tsinghua-Peking 
Joint Center for Life Sciences, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for 
Structural Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
100084, China. maojunyang@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430030, China. maojunyang@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Respiration is one of the most basic features of living organisms, and the 
electron transport chain complexes are probably the most complicated protein 
system in mitochondria. Complex-IV is the terminal enzyme of the electron 
transport chain, existing either as randomly scattered complexes or as a 
component of supercomplexes. NDUFA4 was previously assumed as a subunit of 
complex-I, but recent biochemical data suggested it may be a subunit of 
complex-IV. However, no structural evidence supporting this notion was available 
till now. Here we obtained the 3.3 Å resolution structure of complex-IV derived 
from the human supercomplex I1III2IV1 and assigned the NDUFA4 subunit into 
complex-IV. Intriguingly, NDUFA4 lies exactly at the dimeric interface observed 
in previously reported crystal structures of complex-IV homodimer which would 
preclude complex-IV dimerization. Combining previous structural and 
biochemical data shown by us and other groups, we propose that the intact 
complex-IV is a monomer containing 14 subunits.

DOI: 10.1038/s41422-018-0071-1
PMCID: PMC6170408
PMID: 30030519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

## Full Text

Abstract

Respiration is one of the most basic features of living organisms, and the electron transport chain complexes are probably the most complicated protein system in mitochondria. Complex-IV is the terminal enzyme of the electron transport chain, existing either as randomly scattered complexes or as a component of supercomplexes. NDUFA4 was previously assumed as a subunit of complex-I, but recent biochemical data suggested it may be a subunit of complex-IV. However, no structural evidence supporting this notion was available till now. Here we obtained the 3.3 Å resolution structure of complex-IV derived from the human supercomplex I 1 III 2 IV 1 and assigned the NDUFA4 subunit into complex-IV. Intriguingly, NDUFA4 lies exactly at the dimeric interface observed in previously reported crystal structures of complex-IV homodimer which would preclude complex-IV dimerization. Combining previous structural and biochemical data shown by us and other groups, we propose that the intact complex-IV is a monomer containing 14 subunits.

Introduction

Mitochondria are critical to many cellular activities. Respiration is the central function of mitochondria, and is exquisitely regulated in multiple ways in response to varying cell conditions. 1 – 3 The assembly of respiratory chain complexes, Complex I–IV (CI, NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase; CII, succinate:ubiquinone oxidoreductase; CIII, cytochrome bc 1 complex; and CIV, cytochrome c oxidase) into supercomplexes (I 1 III 2 IV 1–2 , III 2 IV 1–2 ) or even a megacomplex (I 2 III 2 IV 2 ) is a critical form of respiration regulation. 3 – 10 Many lines of evidence show that the formation of higher-order complexes can structurally stabilize the individual complexes, 11 – 15 raise the efficiency of electron transfer, 16 – 22 and significantly reduce the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). 23 – 25 Functional studies in vivo also confirmed the validity of these higher-order assemblies in living cells. Several recently acquired structures of supercomplex I 1 III 2 IV 1 (SCI 1 III 2 IV 1 ) and megacomplex I 2 III 2 IV 2 provided exciting insights into the function and mechanism of these huge machines and led to several interesting hypotheses. 4 , 6 , 9 , 10 All these structures, especially that of the megacomplex, 10 indicated the existence of Q-pool and the close spatial proximity of the binding sites of cytochrome c in CIII and CIV, although no protein subunits were shown to directly form a physical channel that can assist CoQ and cytochrome c transport.

CIV is the terminal oxidase of the electron transport chain in mitochondria. 26 – 29 It accepts electrons from cytochrome c to reduce the oxygen to water and meanwhile pumps two protons from the matrix side to the intermembrane space (IMS). 30 – 32 Previous studies suggested that the mammalian CIV consists of 13 distinct subunits, along with three copper II ions, one magnesium ion, one zinc ion, two heme A molecules, and several phospholipid molecules. 33 – 35 Current opinions point out that CIV exists in two states under physiological conditions, either being assembled into supercomplexes or freely scattered on mitochondrial inner membrane. 36 NDUFA4 was originally considered as a subunit of Complex-I 37 but was proposed to belong to Complex-IV recently. 38 However, the precise location of NDUFA4 in CIV remains unknown, and thus this notion still lacks structural support. In the present study, with the 3.3 Å density map of human CIV, for the first time, we obtained the entire CIV structure containing 14 subunits, which includes the extra subunit NDUFA4. In all the previous crystal structures, CIV is assembled to form a homodimer with each protomer containing 13 subunits, while in all supercomplex structures CIV exists as a monomer. Here, we found NDUFA4 is incorporated into CIV and binds exactly to the dimeric interface in the crystal structures of CIV dimer, indicating that NDUFA4 actually hampered the formation of CIV dimer. Structural analyses indicated that the CIV homodimer with each protomer containing 13 subunits was obtained because of the usage of strong detergent cholic acid for crystallization which expelled NDUFA4 from the supercomplexes. Therefore, CIV should be a 14-subunit monomer instead of a homodimer with each protomer containing 13 subunits which is described by the previous 37 X-ray crystal structures (Supplementary information, Table S1 ).

Conclusion

In conclusion, we purified SCI 1 III 2 IV 1 from cultured human cells, collected cryo-EM data and performed 3D reconstruction to get the high-quality 3.3 Å CIV density map with sub-region refinement. Assignment of the 14th subunit, NDUFA4, in the monomeric CIV not only confirms that NDUFA4 is a bona fide subunit of CIV, but also provides a straightforward explanation for why CIV is a monomer. Unconventionally, we assigned the NDUFA4 subunit into the CIV structure for the first time, and discovered that the binding site of NDUFA4 lies exactly at the dimeric interface of the previously reported CIV crystal structure. After comparing previous structural data with our CIV monomer structure, we found the stronger cholic acid salt used in crystallization buffer replaced the CDL molecule, which might be important for NDUFA4 stabilization, in our structure. Although we cannot fully exclude the possibility that the CIV could form a dimer in vivo, our data clearly demonstrate that the dimerization state in the crystal structures is suspectable. Our 14-subunit CIV monomer is consistent with the previous biochemical data showing the CIV monomer 45 and 2D-crystal studies in lipid bilayer. 46 The previous functional studies of CIV that based on the crystal structures of CIV homodimer may have to be revisited. Since our CIV structure is a part of SCI 1 III 2 IV 1 , which is in a more native state, we propose that the intact monomeric complex-IV contains 14 subunits including NDUFA4.
