---
pmid: '19922767'
title: GAS6/Mer axis regulates the homing and survival of the E2A/PBX1-positive B-cell
  precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the bone marrow niche.
authors:
- Shiozawa Y
- Pedersen EA
- Taichman RS
journal: Exp Hematol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2815170
doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.002
---

# GAS6/Mer axis regulates the homing and survival of the E2A/PBX1-positive B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the bone marrow niche.
**Authors:** Shiozawa Y, Pedersen EA, Taichman RS
**Journal:** Exp Hematol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.002)
**PMC:** [PMC2815170](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2815170/)

## Abstract

1. Exp Hematol. 2010 Feb;38(2):132-40. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.002. Epub
2009  Nov 14.

GAS6/Mer axis regulates the homing and survival of the E2A/PBX1-positive B-cell 
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the bone marrow niche.

Shiozawa Y(1), Pedersen EA, Taichman RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School 
of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Despite improvements in current combinational chemotherapy regimens, 
the prognosis of the (1;19)(q23;p13) translocation (E2A/PBX1)-positive B-cell 
precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is poor in pediatric leukemia 
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we examined the roles of growth 
arrest-specific-6 (GAS6)/Mer axis in the interactions between E2A/PBX1-positive 
B-cell precursor ALL cells and the osteoblastic niche in the bone marrow.
RESULTS: Data show that primary human osteoblasts secrete GAS6 in response to 
the Mer-overexpressed E2A/PBX1-positive ALL cells through mitogen-activated 
protein kinase signaling pathway and that leukemia cells migrate toward GAS6 
using pathways activated by Mer. Importantly, GAS6 supports survival and 
prevents apoptosis from chemotherapy of E2A/PBX1-positive ALL cells by inducing 
dormancy.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that GAS6/Mer axis regulates homing and survival 
of the E2A/PBX1-positive B-cell precursor ALL in the bone marrow niche.

Copyright 2010 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.11.002
PMCID: PMC2815170
PMID: 19922767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
