---
pmid: '15965977'
title: Characterization of a human rhomboid homolog, p100hRho/RHBDF1, which interacts
  with TGF-alpha family ligands.
authors:
- Nakagawa T
- Guichard A
- Castro CP
- Xiao Y
- Rizen M
- Zhang HZ
- Hu D
- Bang A
- Helms J
- Bier E
- Derynck R
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20450
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of a human rhomboid homolog, p100hRho/RHBDF1, which interacts with TGF-alpha family ligands.
**Authors:** Nakagawa T, Guichard A, Castro CP, Xiao Y, Rizen M, Zhang HZ, Hu D, Bang A, Helms J, Bier E, Derynck R
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvdy.20450](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.20450)

## Abstract

1. Dev Dyn. 2005 Aug;233(4):1315-31. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.20450.

Characterization of a human rhomboid homolog, p100hRho/RHBDF1, which interacts 
with TGF-alpha family ligands.

Nakagawa T(1), Guichard A, Castro CP, Xiao Y, Rizen M, Zhang HZ, Hu D, Bang A, 
Helms J, Bier E, Derynck R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, Program in Cell Biology, University of 
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0512, USA.

The activity of the TGF-alpha-like ligand Spitz in Drosophila depends on 
Rhomboid, a seven-transmembrane spanning protein that resides in the Golgi and 
acts as a serine protease to cleave Spitz, thereby releasing the soluble ligand. 
Several rhomboids in Drosophila have been implicated in the processing of 
TGF-alpha-like ligands, and consequent EGF receptor activation. The larger 
number of TGF-alpha-like ligands in vertebrates raises the possibility that they 
too might be subject to regulation by rhomboid-like proteins. We present the 
cDNA cloning and polypeptide sequence of an atypically long human rhomboid, 
which, based on the absence of critical residues for serine protease activity, 
is not predicted to act as a serine protease. We examined its tissue 
distribution, in comparison with TGF-alpha and the TGF-alpha-related protein 
HB-EGF, and the EGF/TGF-alpha receptor, in mouse embryo. This rhomboid, named 
p100(hRho) or RHBDF1, is a seven-transmembrane protein with a long N-terminal 
cytoplasmic extension that comprises half of the polypeptide sequence, and is 
found in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, but not on the cell surface. It is 
expressed as two forms with different lengths, forms dimers and interacts with 
TGF-alpha ligands through a luminal interaction with the EGF core ectodomain. 
Finally, we evaluated the function of p100(hRho)/RHBDF1 in Drosophila, 
demonstrating that the short, but not the full-length form has functional 
activity. The characterization of this protein extends our understanding of the 
rhomboid family of regulatory proteins.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/dvdy.20450
PMID: 15965977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
