---
pmid: '10518932'
title: The nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) of yeast functions in the
  targeting process of ribosomes to the ER membrane.
authors:
- Wiedmann B
- Prehn S
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01118-7
---

# The nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) of yeast functions in the targeting process of ribosomes to the ER membrane.
**Authors:** Wiedmann B, Prehn S
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01118-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01118-7)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1999 Sep 10;458(1):51-4. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01118-7.

The nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC) of yeast functions in the 
targeting process of ribosomes to the ER membrane.

Wiedmann B(1), Prehn S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. 
brigitte.wiedmann@charite.de

We study here the binding of ribosomes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
membrane and its dependence on nascent polypeptide-associated complex (NAC). For 
this, we use an in vitro translation system in combination with isolated 
microsomes. Importantly, all components in the system are derived from a single 
source, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Ribosome nascent chains (RNCs) of the two 
naturally occurring invertase species (secreted or cytosolic) were prepared in 
wild-type, delta alpha NAC or delta alpha beta 1 beta 3 NAC translation lysates 
and tested for binding to the corresponding microsomal membranes. We provide 
evidence that NAC prevents binding of RNCs without a signal sequence to yeast 
membranes. In the absence of NAC, signal-less RNCs are able to bind to ER 
membranes. However, following puromycin treatment, only very few nascent chains 
translocate into the lumen, as detected by glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01118-7
PMID: 10518932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
