---
pmid: '19144319'
title: The phagosomal proteome in interferon-gamma-activated macrophages.
authors:
- Trost M
- English L
- Lemieux S
- Courcelles M
- Desjardins M
- Thibault P
journal: Immunity
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.006
---

# The phagosomal proteome in interferon-gamma-activated macrophages.
**Authors:** Trost M, English L, Lemieux S, Courcelles M, Desjardins M, Thibault P
**Journal:** Immunity (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.006)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 2009 Jan 16;30(1):143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.006.

The phagosomal proteome in interferon-gamma-activated macrophages.

Trost M(1), English L, Lemieux S, Courcelles M, Desjardins M, Thibault P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Université de Montréal, Succ 
Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The ability of macrophages to clear pathogens and elicit a sustained immune 
response is regulated by various cytokines, including interferon-gamma 
(IFN-gamma). To investigate the molecular mechanisms by which IFN-gamma 
modulates phagosome functions, we profiled the changes in composition, 
abundance, and phosphorylation of phagosome proteins in resting and activated 
macrophages by using quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics approaches. We 
identified 2415 phagosome proteins together with 2975 unique phosphorylation 
sites with a high level of sensitivity. Using network analyses, we determined 
that IFN-gamma delays phagosomal acquisition of lysosomal hydrolases and 
peptidases for the gain of antigen presentation. Furthermore, this gain in 
antigen presentation is dependent on phagosomal networks of the actin 
cytoskeleton and vesicle-trafficking proteins, as well as Src kinases and 
calpain proteases. Major histocompatibility complex class I antigen-presentation 
assays validated the molecular participation of these networks in the enhanced 
capacity of IFN-gamma-activated macrophages to crosspresent exogenous antigens 
to CD8(+) T cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.11.006
PMID: 19144319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
