---
pmid: '22584060'
title: Dimeric structure of transmembrane domain of amyloid precursor protein in micellar
  environment.
authors:
- Nadezhdin KD
- Bocharova OV
- Bocharov EV
- Arseniev AS
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.062
---

# Dimeric structure of transmembrane domain of amyloid precursor protein in micellar environment.
**Authors:** Nadezhdin KD, Bocharova OV, Bocharov EV, Arseniev AS
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.062)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2012 Jun 12;586(12):1687-92. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.062.
Epub  2012 May 11.

Dimeric structure of transmembrane domain of amyloid precursor protein in 
micellar environment.

Nadezhdin KD(1), Bocharova OV, Bocharov EV, Arseniev AS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Structural Biology, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic 
Chemistry RAS, Str. Miklukho-Maklaya 16/10, Moscow 117997, Russian Federation.

Some pathogenic mutations associated with Alzheimer's disease are thought to 
affect structural-dynamic properties and the lateral dimerization of amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) in neuron membrane. Dimeric structure of APP 
transmembrane fragment Gln(686)-Lys(726) was determined in membrane-mimicking 
dodecylphosphocholine micelles using high-resolution NMR spectroscopy. The APP 
membrane-spanning α-helix Lys(699)-Lys(724) self-associates in a left-handed 
parallel dimer through extended heptad repeat motif 
I(702)X(3)M(706)X(2)G(709)X(3)A(713)X(2)I(716)X(3)I(720)X(2)I(723), whereas the 
juxtamembrane region Gln(686)-Val(695) constitutes the nascent helix, also 
sensing the dimerization. The dimerization mechanism of APP transmembrane domain 
has been described at atomic resolution for the first time and is important for 
understanding molecular events of APP sequential proteolytical cleavage 
resulting in amyloid-β peptide.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.062
PMID: 22584060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
