---
pmid: '10625546'
title: Targets of TGF-beta signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans dauer formation.
authors:
- Inoue T
- Thomas JH
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.1999.9545
---

# Targets of TGF-beta signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans dauer formation.
**Authors:** Inoue T, Thomas JH
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.1999.9545](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.1999.9545)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 1;217(1):192-204. doi: 10.1006/dbio.1999.9545.

Targets of TGF-beta signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans dauer formation.

Inoue T(1), Thomas JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195, 
USA.

Caenorhabditis elegans dauer formation is controlled by multiple environmental 
factors. The chemosensory neuron ASI regulates dauer formation by secretion of 
DAF-7/TGF-beta, but the molecular targets of the DAF-7 ligand are incompletely 
defined and the cellular targets are unknown. We genetically characterized and 
cloned a putative transducer of DAF-7 signaling called daf-14 and found that it 
encodes a Smad protein. DAF-14 Smad has a highly unusual structure completely 
lacking the N-terminal domain found in all other Smad proteins known to date. 
daf-14 genetically interacts with daf-8, which encodes another Smad, and the 
interaction suggests partial functional redundancy between these two Smad 
proteins. We also studied the cellular targets of DAF-7 signaling by studying 
the sites of action of daf-14 and daf-4, the putative receptor for DAF-7. 
daf-14::gfp is expressed in multiple tissues that are remodeled during dauer 
formation. However, analysis of mosaics generated by free duplication loss and 
tissue-specific expression constructs indicate cell-nonautonomous function of 
daf-4, arguing against direct DAF-7 signaling to tissues throughout the animal. 
Instead, these experiments suggest the nervous system as a target of DAF-7 
signaling and that the nervous system in turn regulates dauer formation by other 
tissues.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.1999.9545
PMID: 10625546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
