---
pmid: '11032815'
title: Glycogen synthase kinase-3 enhances nuclear export of a Dictyostelium STAT
  protein.
authors:
- Ginger RS
- Dalton EC
- Ryves WJ
- Fukuzawa M
- Williams JG
- Harwood AJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC314011
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.20.5483
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Glycogen synthase kinase-3 enhances nuclear export of a Dictyostelium STAT protein.
**Authors:** Ginger RS, Dalton EC, Ryves WJ, Fukuzawa M, Williams JG, Harwood AJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.20.5483](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.20.5483)
**PMC:** [PMC314011](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC314011/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Oct 16;19(20):5483-91. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.20.5483.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 enhances nuclear export of a Dictyostelium STAT 
protein.

Ginger RS(1), Dalton EC, Ryves WJ, Fukuzawa M, Williams JG, Harwood AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, 
Dow Street, Dundee, UK.

Extracellular cAMP stimulates the rapid tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear 
translocation of the DICTYOSTELIUM: STAT protein Dd-STATa. Here we show that it 
also induces serine phosphorylation by GskA, a homologue of glycogen synthase 
kinase-3 (GSK-3). Tyrosine phosphorylation occurs within 10 s of stimulation, 
whereas serine phosphorylation takes 5 min, matching the kinetics observed for 
the cAMP regulation of GskA. Phosphorylation by GskA enhances nuclear export of 
Dd-STATa. The phosphorylated region, however, is not itself a nuclear export 
signal and we identify a region elsewhere in the protein that mediates nuclear 
export. These results suggest a biphasic regulation of Dd-STATa, in which 
extracellular cAMP initially directs nuclear import and then, via GskA, promotes 
its subsequent export. It also raises the possibility of an analogous regulation 
of STAT nuclear export in higher eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.20.5483
PMCID: PMC314011
PMID: 11032815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Extracellular cAMP stimulates the rapid tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the Dictyostelium STAT protein Dd-STATa. Here we show that it also induces serine phosphorylation by GskA, a homologue of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3). Tyrosine phosphorylation occurs within 10 s of stimulation, whereas serine phosphorylation takes 5 min, matching the kinetics observed for the cAMP regulation of GskA. Phosphorylation by GskA enhances nuclear export of Dd-STATa. The phosphorylated region, however, is not itself a nuclear export signal and we identify a region elsewhere in the protein that mediates nuclear export. These results suggest a biphasic regulation of Dd-STATa, in which extracellular cAMP initially directs nuclear import and then, via GskA, promotes its subsequent export. It also raises the possibility of an analogous regulation of STAT nuclear export in higher eukaryotes.

Introduction

The STAT proteins were discovered as transducers of the cellular response to cytokines (reviewed by Ihle and Kerr, 1995 ; Schindler and Darnell, 1995 ). They contain a DNA-binding domain, an SH2 domain, a tyrosine phosphorylation site and most contain a transcriptional activation domain at their C-terminus. When a cytokine binds to its receptor, an associated Janus kinase (JAK) is activated and phosphorylates STAT on a tyrosine residue. This leads to dimerization through binding of the phosphotyrosine on one STAT molecule to the SH2 domain of the other. STAT signalling pathways are also found in other organisms. The Drosophila genes hopscotch and marelle encode JAK and STAT homologues, respectively ( Binari and Perrimon, 1994 ). They are required for blood cell development and control segmentation, imaginal disc cell proliferation and polarity in the developing eye ( Harrison et al., 1995 ; Strutt and Strutt, 1999 ). A STAT protein homologue has been cloned from the non-metazoan organism Dictyostelium ( Kawata et al., 1997 ). This protein, Dd-STATa, is homologous to metazoan STAT proteins, possessing an SH2 domain, a tyrosine phosphorylation site and a DNA-binding domain. Dd-STATa does not, however, contain a transcriptional activation domain at its C-terminus and it is known to act as a repressor of transcription ( Mohanty et al., 1999 ).

All growing and developing Dictyostelium cells appear to contain a small amount of Dd-STATa in their nuclei, the only apparent exception being mature spore cells ( Araki et al., 1998 ). However, during development some cells come to exhibit a strong nuclear enrichment. This is most apparent between 6 and 10 h development, when Dictyostelium cells undergo the transition from unicellular amoebae to a multicellular aggregate (the mound). Immediately after formation of the mound >95% of cells show strong nuclear staining with anti-Dd-STATa antibodies. Consistent with these observations, tyrosine phosphorylation of Dd-STATa increases over the same time scale and is rapidly stimulated by extracellular cAMP: the central regulatory signal for aggregation.

After 12 h development a tip appears on top of the mound and this coordinates later development. The tip extends upwards and the mound reshapes into a tall finger-like column of cells, which under some environmental conditions can topple over to form a freely motile slug. There is a dramatic fall in the number of cells showing nuclear enrichment of Dd-STATa during tip formation, so that in the slug only ∼15% have strong Dd-STATa nuclear localization and these are present in the slug tip. The ultimate product of Dictyostelium development is the fruiting body, which consists of a spore head, a stalk and a basal disc. Fruiting body formation (culmination) is blocked in mutants that lack Dd-STATa protein ( Mohanty et al., 1999 ). Dd-STATa null mutants also exhibit abnormal expression of the ecmB gene. In the wild type, strong expression of ecmB is seen at culmination in cells as they enter the stalk tube ( Williams et al., 1989 ). In a Dd-STATa mutant, ecmB is prematurely and ectopically expressed in pre-stalk cells before they enter the stalk tube ( Mohanty et al., 1999 ).

The Dictyostelium homologue of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), GskA, is also required for the correct pattern of gene expression during development. GSK-3 is a highly conserved protein kinase found in all eukaryotic groups and regulates a wide range of cellular processes, ranging from intermediate metabolism and gene expression to cytoskeletal integrity ( Plyte et al., 1992 ). Genetic studies suggest that GSK-3 family members play a crucial role during development. The Drosophila homologue of GSK-3, Shaggy (encoded by the gene sgg ), is required for establishing segment polarity, cell specification and correct patterning of the zygotic neuroectoderm ( Ruel et al., 1993 ; Siegfried et al., 1994 ; Cadigan and Nusse, 1997 ). GskA is required to establish the correct pattern of cell types in the Dictyostelium mound ( Harwood et al., 1995 ) and its activity increases at this stage of development. GskA activity is stimulated by extracellular cAMP, through a process that is mediated by the cAMP receptor carC and the tyrosine kinase ZAK-1 ( Kim et al., 1999 ; Plyte et al., 1999 ).

Among the targets of mammalian GSK-3 are a number of transcription factors and GSK-3 phosphorylation has different effects on each of them. Phosphorylation of c-jun interferes with its binding to DNA and hence represses c-jun-directed transcription ( Boyle et al ., 1991 ). Conversely, GSK-3 phosphorylation of CREB activates gene transcription ( Fiol et al ., 1994 ). GSK-3 phosphorylation of the lymphoid cell transcription factor NF-ATc causes enhanced nuclear exit ( Beals et al ., 1997 ). An enhanced rate of nuclear export is also observed when GSK-3 phosphorylates cyclin D1 ( Diehl et al ., 1998 ). STAT proteins are also targets of serine/threonine protein kinases ( Wen and Darnell, 1997 ). Phosphorylation by MAP kinase regulates nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity of STAT1a and STAT3 ( Stephens et al ., 1998 ). The STAT5a and 5b proteins also contain phosphoserine, but this phosphorylation is independent of MAP kinase activity and the identity of the cognate kinase is not yet known. In this paper we identify a GskA phosphorylation site in Dd-STATa and show that this modification enhances export of Dd-STATa from the nucleus. This demonstrates both a novel GSK-3 interaction and a new mechanism of STAT regulation.
