---
pmid: '17283331'
title: Death-effector domain-containing protein DEDD is an inhibitor of mitotic Cdk1/cyclin
  B1.
authors:
- Arai S
- Miyake K
- Voit R
- Nemoto S
- Wakeland EK
- Grummt I
- Miyazaki T
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1793902
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0611167104
---

# Death-effector domain-containing protein DEDD is an inhibitor of mitotic Cdk1/cyclin B1.
**Authors:** Arai S, Miyake K, Voit R, Nemoto S, Wakeland EK, Grummt I, Miyazaki T
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0611167104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0611167104)
**PMC:** [PMC1793902](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1793902/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 13;104(7):2289-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0611167104. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Death-effector domain-containing protein DEDD is an inhibitor of mitotic 
Cdk1/cyclin B1.

Arai S(1), Miyake K, Voit R, Nemoto S, Wakeland EK, Grummt I, Miyazaki T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Biomedicine for Pathogenesis, Center for Disease 
Biology and Integrative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1, Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Accumulating evidence has shown that many molecules, including some 
cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) and cyclins, as well as the death-effector 
domain (DED)-containing FADD, function for both apoptosis and cell cycle. Here 
we identified that DEDD, which also possesses the DED domain, acts as a novel 
inhibitor of the mitotic Cdk1/cyclin B1 complex. DEDD associates with mitotic 
Cdk1/cyclin B1 complexes via direct binding to cyclin B1 and reduces their 
function. In agreement, kinase activity of nuclear Cdk1/cyclin B1 in DEDD-null 
(DEDD-/-) embryonic fibroblasts is increased compared with that in DEDD+/+ 
cells, which results in accelerated mitotic progression, thus exhibiting a 
shortened G2/M stage. Interestingly, DEDD-/- cells also demonstrated decreased 
G1 duration, which perhaps enhanced the overall reduction in rRNA amounts and 
cell volume, primarily caused by the rapid termination of rRNA synthesis before 
cell division. Likewise, DEDD-/- mice show decreased body and organ weights 
relative to DEDD+/+ mice. Thus, DEDD is an impeder of cell mitosis, and its 
absence critically influences cell and body size via modulation of rRNA 
synthesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0611167104
PMCID: PMC1793902
PMID: 17283331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
