---
pmid: '3017958'
title: Structure, expression, and evolution of a heat shock gene locus in Caenorhabditis
  elegans that is flanked by repetitive elements.
authors:
- Jones D
- Russnak RH
- Kay RJ
- Candido EP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
---

# Structure, expression, and evolution of a heat shock gene locus in Caenorhabditis elegans that is flanked by repetitive elements.
**Authors:** Jones D, Russnak RH, Kay RJ, Candido EP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1986)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1986 Sep 15;261(26):12006-15.

Structure, expression, and evolution of a heat shock gene locus in 
Caenorhabditis elegans that is flanked by repetitive elements.

Jones D, Russnak RH, Kay RJ, Candido EP.

A locus containing two hsp16 genes in Caenorhabditis elegans has been 
characterized by DNA sequencing. Each gene encodes a 16-kDa polypeptide which is 
expressed following heat induction. The two genes, designated hsp16-2 and 
hsp16-41, are arranged in divergent orientations, and each contains a single 
intron of 46 and 58 base pairs, respectively. Although both gene transcripts are 
spliced efficiently in vivo, hsp16-41 corresponds to a previously isolated cDNA 
which contains an unspliced intron sequence. The 5'-noncoding regions of both 
genes contain TATA boxes preceded 18 or 19 nucleotides upstream by a heat shock 
regulatory sequence. The 3'-noncoding regions contain polyadenylation signals 
(AATAAA) either downstream (hsp16-2) or immediately adjacent (hsp16-41) to a 
sequence capable of forming a hairpin. This pair of hsp16 genes is flanked by 
three copies of an approximately 200-bp dispersed repetitive element (two copies 
on one side and a single one on the other side of the locus) which occurs in at 
least 70 copies throughout the C. elegans genome, and has been designated 
CeRep-16. Together with data described previously (Russnak, R. H., and Candido, 
E. P. M. (1985) Mol. Cell. Biol. 5, 1268-1278), the results presented here 
define a family of four distinct, related small heat shock protein genes. These 
are arranged in divergently transcribed pairs at two loci. The hsp16-48/41 genes 
code for one class of HSP16, 143-amino acid residues long, while the hsp16-1/2 
genes encode the other class, which is 2 amino acid residues longer. Thus each 
locus codes for the two major types of HSP16. The two loci differ in a number of 
respects, including the presence of a tandem inverted duplication of two heat 
shock protein genes at one locus, and of repetitive elements at the other. 
Sequence comparisons allow us to propose a scheme for the evolution of the four 
genes and reveal conserved features of noncoding regions which may be involved 
in the regulation of their transcription, RNA processing, or translation. Using 
locus-specific hybridization probes, we have found that the genes at locus 
hsp16-2/41 are expressed at levels approximately 20-40-fold higher than those at 
locus hsp16-1/48.

PMID: 3017958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
