---
pmid: '16033761'
title: BACE is degraded via the lysosomal pathway.
authors:
- Koh YH
- von Arnim CA
- Hyman BT
- Tanzi RE
- Tesco G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506199200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# BACE is degraded via the lysosomal pathway.
**Authors:** Koh YH, von Arnim CA, Hyman BT, Tanzi RE, Tesco G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M506199200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M506199200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 16;280(37):32499-504. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M506199200. Epub 
2005 Jul 20.

BACE is degraded via the lysosomal pathway.

Koh YH(1), von Arnim CA, Hyman BT, Tanzi RE, Tesco G.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, 02129, USA.

Amyloid plaques are formed by aggregates of amyloid-beta-peptide, a 37-43-amino 
acid fragment (primarily Abeta(40) and Abeta(42)) generated by proteolytic 
processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by beta- and gamma-secretases. 
A type I transmembrane aspartyl protease, BACE (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme), 
has been identified to be the beta-secretase. BACE is targeted through the 
secretory pathway to the plasma membrane where it can be internalized to 
endosomes. The carboxyl terminus of BACE contains a di-leucine-based signal for 
sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes. In this study, we 
set out to determine whether BACE is degraded by the lysosomal pathway and 
whether the di-leucine motif is necessary for targeting BACE to the lysosomes. 
Here we show that lysosomal inhibitors, chloroquine and NH(4)Cl, lead to 
accumulation of endogenous and ectopically expressed BACE in a variety of cell 
types, including primary neurons. Furthermore, the inhibition of lysosomal 
hydrolases results in the redistribution and accumulation of BACE in the late 
endosomal/lysosomal compartments (lysosome-associated membrane protein 2 
(LAMP2)-positive). In contrast, the BACE-LL/AA mutant, in which Leu(499) and 
Leu(500) in the COOH-terminal sequence (DDISLLK) were replaced by alanines, only 
partially co-localized with LAMP2-positive compartments following inhibition of 
lysosomal hydrolases. Collectively, our data indicate that BACE is transported 
to the late endosomal/lysosomal compartments where it is degraded via the 
lysosomal pathway and that the di-leucine motif plays a role in sorting BACE to 
lysosomes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M506199200
PMID: 16033761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
