---
pmid: '12239217'
title: Conserved residues in the putative catalytic triad of human bile acid Coenzyme
  A:amino acid N-acyltransferase.
authors:
- Sfakianos MK
- Wilson L
- Sakalian M
- Falany CN
- Barnes S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207463200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Conserved residues in the putative catalytic triad of human bile acid Coenzyme A:amino acid N-acyltransferase.
**Authors:** Sfakianos MK, Wilson L, Sakalian M, Falany CN, Barnes S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M207463200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M207463200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47270-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M207463200. Epub
2002  Sep 17.

Conserved residues in the putative catalytic triad of human bile acid Coenzyme 
A:amino acid N-acyltransferase.

Sfakianos MK(1), Wilson L, Sakalian M, Falany CN, Barnes S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Human bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (hBAT), an enzyme catalyzing 
the conjugation of bile acids with the amino acids glycine or taurine has 
significant sequence homology with dienelactone hydrolases and other alpha/beta 
hydrolases. These enzymes have a conserved catalytic triad that maps onto the 
mammalian BATs at residues Cys-235, Asp-328, and His-362 of the human sequence, 
albeit that the hydrolases contain a serine instead of a cysteine. In the 
present study, the function of the putative catalytic triad of hBAT was examined 
by chemical modification with the cysteine alkylating reagent N-ethylmaleimide 
(NEM) and by site-directed mutagenesis of the triad residues followed by 
enzymology studies of mutant and wild-type hBATs. Treatment with NEM caused 
inactivation of wild-type hBAT. However, preincubation of wild-type hBAT with 
the substrate cholyl-CoA before NEM treatment prevented loss of 
N-acyltransferase activity. Substitution of His-362 or Asp-328 with alanine 
results in inactivation of hBAT. Although substitution of Cys-235 with serine 
generated an hBAT mutant with lower N-acyltransferase activity, it substantially 
increased the bile acid-CoA thioesterase activity compared with wild type. In 
summary, data from this study support the existence of an essential catalytic 
triad within hBAT consisting of Cys-235, His-362, and Asp-328 with Cys-235 
serving as the probable nucleophile and thus the site of covalent attachment of 
the bile acid molecule.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M207463200
PMID: 12239217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
