---
pmid: '22342726'
title: Impaired fatty acid oxidation in a Drosophila model of mitochondrial trifunctional
  protein (MTP) deficiency.
authors:
- Kishita Y
- Tsuda M
- Aigaki T
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.026
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Impaired fatty acid oxidation in a Drosophila model of mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency.
**Authors:** Kishita Y, Tsuda M, Aigaki T
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.026)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 9;419(2):344-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.026. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Impaired fatty acid oxidation in a Drosophila model of mitochondrial 
trifunctional protein (MTP) deficiency.

Kishita Y(1), Tsuda M, Aigaki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 
Minami-osawa, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0397, Japan.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP), which consists of the MTPα and MTPβ 
subunits, catalyzes long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation. MTP deficiency in humans 
results in Reye-like syndrome. Here, we generated Drosophila models of MTP 
deficiency by targeting two genes encoding Drosophila homologs of human MTPα and 
MTPβ, respectively. Both Mtpα(KO) and Mtpβ(KO) flies were viable, but 
demonstrated reduced lifespan, defective locomotor activity, and reduced 
fecundity represented by the number of eggs laid by the females. The phenotypes 
of Mtpα(KO) flies were generally more striking than those of Mtpβ(KO) flies. 
Mtpα(KO) flies were hypersensitive to fasting, and retained lipid droplets in 
their fat body cells as in non-fasting conditions. The amount of triglyceride 
was also unchanged upon fasting in Mtpα(KO) flies, suggesting that lipid 
mobilization was disrupted. Finally, we showed that both Mtpα(KO) and Mtpβ(KO) 
flies accumulated acylcarnitine and hydroxyacylcarnitine, diagnostic markers of 
MTP deficiencies in humans. Our results indicated that both Mtpα(KO) and 
Mtpβ(KO) flies were impaired in long-chain fatty acid β-oxidation. These flies 
should be useful as a model system to investigate the molecular pathogenesis of 
MTP deficiency.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.026
PMID: 22342726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
