---
pmid: '25747990'
title: Characterization of the enzymatic and structural properties of human D-aspartate
  oxidase and comparison with those of the rat and mouse enzymes.
authors:
- Katane M
- Kawata T
- Nakayama K
- Saitoh Y
- Kaneko Y
- Matsuda S
- Saitoh Y
- Miyamoto T
- Sekine M
- Homma H
journal: Biol Pharm Bull
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1248/bpb.b14-00690
---

# Characterization of the enzymatic and structural properties of human D-aspartate oxidase and comparison with those of the rat and mouse enzymes.
**Authors:** Katane M, Kawata T, Nakayama K, Saitoh Y, Kaneko Y, Matsuda S, Saitoh Y, Miyamoto T, Sekine M, Homma H
**Journal:** Biol Pharm Bull (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1248/bpb.b14-00690](https://doi.org/10.1248/bpb.b14-00690)

## Abstract

1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38(2):298-305. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b14-00690.

Characterization of the enzymatic and structural properties of human D-aspartate 
oxidase and comparison with those of the rat and mouse enzymes.

Katane M(1), Kawata T, Nakayama K, Saitoh Y, Kaneko Y, Matsuda S, Saitoh Y, 
Miyamoto T, Sekine M, Homma H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kitasato University.

D-Aspartate (D-Asp), a free D-amino acid found in mammals, plays crucial roles 
in the neuroendocrine, endocrine, and central nervous systems. Recent studies 
have implicated D-Asp in the pathophysiology of infertility and N-methyl-D-Asp 
receptor-related diseases. D-Asp oxidase (DDO), a degradative enzyme that is 
stereospecific for acidic D-amino acids, is the sole catabolic enzyme acting on 
D-Asp in mammals. Human DDO is considered an attractive therapeutic target, and 
DDO inhibitors may be potential lead compounds for the development of new drugs 
against the aforementioned diseases. However, human DDO has not been 
characterized in detail and, although preclinical studies using experimental 
rodents are prerequisites for evaluating the in vivo effects of potential 
inhibitors, the existence of species-specific differences in the properties of 
human and rodent DDOs is still unclear. Here, the enzymatic activity and 
characteristics of purified recombinant human DDO were analyzed in detail. The 
kinetic and inhibitor-binding properties of this enzyme were also compared with 
those of purified recombinant rat and mouse DDOs. In addition, structural models 
of human, rat, and mouse DDOs were generated and compared. It was found that the 
differences among these DDO proteins occur in regions that appear involved in 
migration of the substrate/product in and out of the active site. In summary, 
detailed characterization of human DDO was performed and provides useful 
insights into the use of rats and mice as experimental models for evaluating the 
in vivo effects of DDO inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b14-00690
PMID: 25747990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
