---
pmid: '14701728'
title: BASP1 is a transcriptional cosuppressor for the Wilms' tumor suppressor protein
  WT1.
authors:
- Carpenter B
- Hill KJ
- Charalambous M
- Wagner KJ
- Lahiri D
- James DI
- Andersen JS
- Schumacher V
- Royer-Pokora B
- Mann M
- Ward A
- Roberts SG
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC343806
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.2.537-549.2004
---

# BASP1 is a transcriptional cosuppressor for the Wilms' tumor suppressor protein WT1.
**Authors:** Carpenter B, Hill KJ, Charalambous M, Wagner KJ, Lahiri D, James DI, Andersen JS, Schumacher V, Royer-Pokora B, Mann M, Ward A, Roberts SG
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.2.537-549.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.2.537-549.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC343806](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC343806/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):537-49. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.2.537-549.2004.

BASP1 is a transcriptional cosuppressor for the Wilms' tumor suppressor protein 
WT1.

Carpenter B(1), Hill KJ, Charalambous M, Wagner KJ, Lahiri D, James DI, Andersen 
JS, Schumacher V, Royer-Pokora B, Mann M, Ward A, Roberts SG.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, G.186 Stopford 
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

The Wilms' tumor suppressor protein WT1 is a transcriptional regulator that 
plays a key role in the development of the kidneys. The transcriptional 
activation domain of WT1 is subject to regulation by a suppression region within 
the N terminus of WT1. Using a functional assay, we provide direct evidence that 
this requires a transcriptional cosuppressor, which we identify as brain acid 
soluble protein 1 (BASP1). WT1 and BASP1 associate within the nuclei of cells 
that naturally express both proteins. BASP1 can confer WT1 cosuppressor activity 
in transfection assays, and elimination of endogenous BASP1 expression augments 
transcriptional activation by WT1. BASP1 is present in the developing nephron 
structures of the embryonic kidney and, coincident with that of WT1, its 
expression is restricted to the highly specialized podocyte cells of the adult 
kidney. Taken together, our results show that BASP1 is a WT1-associated factor 
that can regulate WT1 transcriptional activity.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.2.537-549.2004
PMCID: PMC343806
PMID: 14701728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
