---
pmid: '15082764'
title: Epidermal growth factor receptor stimulation activates the RNA binding protein
  CUG-BP1 and increases expression of C/EBPbeta-LIP in mammary epithelial cells.
authors:
- Baldwin BR
- Timchenko NA
- Zahnow CA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC387752
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.9.3682-3691.2004
---

# Epidermal growth factor receptor stimulation activates the RNA binding protein CUG-BP1 and increases expression of C/EBPbeta-LIP in mammary epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Baldwin BR, Timchenko NA, Zahnow CA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.9.3682-3691.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.9.3682-3691.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC387752](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC387752/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 May;24(9):3682-91. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.9.3682-3691.2004.

Epidermal growth factor receptor stimulation activates the RNA binding protein 
CUG-BP1 and increases expression of C/EBPbeta-LIP in mammary epithelial cells.

Baldwin BR(1), Timchenko NA, Zahnow CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at 
Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBP beta) is a 
key regulator of growth and differentiation in many tissues. C/EBP beta is 
expressed as several distinct protein isoforms (LAP1, LAP2, and LIP) whose 
expression is regulated by alternative translational initiation at downstream 
AUG start sites. The dominant-negative LIP isoform is predominantly expressed 
during proliferative cellular responses and is associated with aggressive 
tumors. In this study, we investigated a mechanism by which the LIP isoform is 
translationally regulated in mammary epithelial cells. We have demonstrated that 
LIP expression is increased in response to activation of the epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway and that the increased expression of 
LIP is regulated in part by an RNA binding protein referred to as CUG repeat 
binding protein (CUG-BP1). Our data demonstrate that EGFR signaling results in 
the phosphorylation of CUG-BP1 and this leads to an increase in the binding of 
CUG-BP1 to C/EBP beta mRNA and elevated expression of the LIP isoform. 
Phosphorylation is necessary for the binding activity of CUG-BP1 and the 
consequent increase in LIP expression, as determined by binding assays and a 
cell free, transcription-coupled translation system. CUG-BP1 is thus a 
previously unidentified downstream target of EGFR signaling and represents a new 
translational regulator of LIP expression in human mammary epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.9.3682-3691.2004
PMCID: PMC387752
PMID: 15082764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer binding protein β (C/EBPβ) is a key regulator of growth and differentiation in many tissues. C/EBPβ is expressed as several distinct protein isoforms (LAP1, LAP2, and LIP) whose expression is regulated by alternative translational initiation at downstream AUG start sites. The dominant-negative LIP isoform is predominantly expressed during proliferative cellular responses and is associated with aggressive tumors. In this study, we investigated a mechanism by which the LIP isoform is translationally regulated in mammary epithelial cells. We have demonstrated that LIP expression is increased in response to activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway and that the increased expression of LIP is regulated in part by an RNA binding protein referred to as CUG repeat binding protein (CUG-BP1). Our data demonstrate that EGFR signaling results in the phosphorylation of CUG-BP1 and this leads to an increase in the binding of CUG-BP1 to C/EBPβ mRNA and elevated expression of the LIP isoform. Phosphorylation is necessary for the binding activity of CUG-BP1 and the consequent increase in LIP expression, as determined by binding assays and a cell free, transcription-coupled translation system. CUG-BP1 is thus a previously unidentified downstream target of EGFR signaling and represents a new translational regulator of LIP expression in human mammary epithelial cells.

DISCUSSION

Although EGFR is a target of small-molecule inhibitors in cancer treatment therapies, much is unknown about the downstream molecular members of this signaling pathway in breast cancer. We have identified two novel downstream targets of EGFR signaling in mammary epithelial cells: the transcription factor C/EBPβ-LIP and the RNA binding protein CUG-BP1. Our study has demonstrated in breast epithelial cells that activation of the EGFR signaling cascade results in an increase in the expression levels of the LIP isoform. Our data show that C/EBPβ mRNA levels are unaffected by EGF stimulation and suggest that the increase in LIP expression is controlled posttranscriptionally and is due in part to the interaction of CUG-BP1 with C/EBPβ mRNA. The lack of C/EBPβ transcriptional regulation observed in our study is consistent with other gene expression studies that have not found changes in C/EBPβ mRNA in response to ErbB receptor activation or breast cancer ( 1 , 37 ). We have also determined that regulation of the EGFR pathway leads to changes in the phosphorylation status and activity of CUG-BP1, which might be mediated in part by p44/42 MAPK. Our data suggest that phosphorylation of CUG-BP1 is critical for its activity. Dephosphorylation of CUG-BP1 abolishes the binding to C/EBPβ mRNA and results in decreased translation of LIP.

Translational control of mRNA is a crucial step in gene expression that permits cells to quickly regulate levels of specific proteins during cell fate decisions. EGF stimulation often results in small changes in global protein synthesis, but specific mRNAs can show a dramatic increase in translation. Although many of these mRNAs remain to be identified, they usually contain specific cis -regulatory elements such as uAUGs and associated uORFs that facilitate translational control ( 19 ). While these cis elements are found in a small percentage of all vertebrate mRNAs, they are conspicuous in two-thirds of oncogenes and growth-controlling genes (such as that which encodes C/EBPβ), reflecting the importance of translational control in cell growth and cancer ( 19 ).
