---
pmid: '18218628'
title: Post-transcriptional regulation of neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 by the
  neuronal RNA-binding proteins ELAV.
authors:
- Ratti A
- Fallini C
- Colombrita C
- Pascale A
- Laforenza U
- Quattrone A
- Silani V
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706082200
---

# Post-transcriptional regulation of neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 by the neuronal RNA-binding proteins ELAV.
**Authors:** Ratti A, Fallini C, Colombrita C, Pascale A, Laforenza U, Quattrone A, Silani V
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M706082200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M706082200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 21;283(12):7531-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706082200. Epub
2008  Jan 24.

Post-transcriptional regulation of neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 by the 
neuronal RNA-binding proteins ELAV.

Ratti A(1), Fallini C, Colombrita C, Pascale A, Laforenza U, Quattrone A, Silani 
V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Dino Ferrari Centre, University of Milan 
Medical School, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 20095 Cusano, Milan, Italy. 
antonia.ratti@unimi.it

Alternative splicing of pre-mRNAs plays an important role in generating 
biological and functional diversity. Neuro-oncological ventral antigen 1 (Nova1) 
is a neuron-specific splicing factor that controls the alternative processing of 
a wide array of mRNAs important for synaptic activity. It is essential for the 
proper development of the mammalian motor system and for the survival of 
motoneurons. Because Nova1 gene contains putative regulatory AU-rich elements 
(ARE) in its highly conserved 3'-untranslated region, we investigated whether 
its expression is regulated by post-transcriptional mechanisms mediated by 
ARE-binding proteins. Among these, the neuronal ELAV (nELAV) factors are 
interesting candidates, because their RNA binding activity is necessary for 
neuronal differentiation and maintenance. By analysis of ribonucleoprotein 
complexes in vivo and in vitro we demonstrated that the Nova1 mRNA is a novel 
target of the nELAV proteins. We defined the nELAV binding site by functional 
experiments with luciferase reporter gene and Nova1 3'-untranslated region 
deletion sequences. Gene silencing and overexpression of the nELAV member HuD in 
motoneuronal NSC34 cells indicate that Nova1 mRNA stability and translation are 
positively and strongly controlled by the nELAV proteins. In addition, nELAV 
phosphorylation by a PKC-dependent pathway induces the recruitment of Nova1 mRNA 
to polysomes. Noteworthy, we found that nELAV proteins are also able to modulate 
Nova1 splicing activity on its target genes. Our data indicate nELAV proteins as 
the first factors affecting the expression and activity of the neuronal splicing 
regulator Nova1 and, consequently, as major candidates for the physiological 
modulation of Nova1-dependent processing of pre-mRNAs in neurons.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M706082200
PMID: 18218628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
