---
pmid: '19724054'
title: 'The water channel aquaporin-1 partitions into exosomes during reticulocyte
  maturation: implication for the regulation of cell volume.'
authors:
- Blanc L
- Liu J
- Vidal M
- Chasis JA
- An X
- Mohandas N
journal: Blood
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2773486
doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-230086
---

# The water channel aquaporin-1 partitions into exosomes during reticulocyte maturation: implication for the regulation of cell volume.
**Authors:** Blanc L, Liu J, Vidal M, Chasis JA, An X, Mohandas N
**Journal:** Blood (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2009-06-230086](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2009-06-230086)
**PMC:** [PMC2773486](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2773486/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2009 Oct 29;114(18):3928-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-230086. Epub
2009  Sep 1.

The water channel aquaporin-1 partitions into exosomes during reticulocyte 
maturation: implication for the regulation of cell volume.

Blanc L(1), Liu J, Vidal M, Chasis JA, An X, Mohandas N.

Author information:
(1)Red Cell Physiology Laboratory, New York Blood Center, New York, NY 10065, 
USA. lblanc@nybloodcenter.org

Aquaporin-1 (AQP-1), the universal water channel, is responsible for rapid 
response of cell volume to changes in plasma tonicity. In the membrane of the 
red cell the concentration of the protein is tightly controlled. Here, we show 
that AQP-1 is partially lost during in vitro maturation of mouse reticulocytes 
and that it is associated with exosomes, released throughout this process. AQP-1 
in young reticulocytes localizes to the plasma membrane and also in endosomal 
compartments and exosomes, formed both in vitro and in vivo. During maturation a 
part of the total pool of AQP-1 is differentially sorted and released via the 
exosomal pathway. A proteasome inhibitor, MG132, suppresses secretion of AQP-1, 
implying that ubiquitination is a sorting signal for its release. We further 
show that modulation of medium tonicity in vitro regulates the secretion of 
AQP-1, thus showing that extracellular osmotic conditions can drive sorting of 
selected proteins by the exosomal pathway. These results lead us to suggest that 
AQP-1 sorting into exosomes may be the mechanism by which the reticulocyte 
adapts to environmental changes during its maturation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-230086
PMCID: PMC2773486
PMID: 19724054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
