---
pmid: '18299575'
title: Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins alters the morphology and function of
  motile cilia in airway epithelia.
authors:
- Shah AS
- Farmen SL
- Moninger TO
- Businga TR
- Andrews MP
- Bugge K
- Searby CC
- Nishimura D
- Brogden KA
- Kline JN
- Sheffield VC
- Welsh MJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2265193
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0712327105
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins alters the morphology and function of motile cilia in airway epithelia.
**Authors:** Shah AS, Farmen SL, Moninger TO, Businga TR, Andrews MP, Bugge K, Searby CC, Nishimura D, Brogden KA, Kline JN, Sheffield VC, Welsh MJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0712327105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0712327105)
**PMC:** [PMC2265193](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2265193/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 4;105(9):3380-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0712327105. Epub 2008 Feb 25.

Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins alters the morphology and function of 
motile cilia in airway epithelia.

Shah AS(1), Farmen SL, Moninger TO, Businga TR, Andrews MP, Bugge K, Searby CC, 
Nishimura D, Brogden KA, Kline JN, Sheffield VC, Welsh MJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Mutations in a group of genes that contribute to ciliary function cause 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). Most studies of BBS have focused on primary, 
sensory cilia. Here, we asked whether loss of BBS proteins would also affect 
motile cilia lining the respiratory tract. We found that BBS genes were 
expressed in human airway epithelia, and BBS2 and BBS4 localized to cellular 
structures associated with motile cilia. Although BBS proteins were not required 
for ciliogenesis, their loss caused structural defects in a fraction of cilia 
covering mouse airway epithelia. The most common abnormality was bulges filled 
with vesicles near the tips of cilia. We discovered this same misshapen 
appearance in airway cilia from Bbs1, Bbs2, Bbs4, and Bbs6 mutant mice. The 
structural abnormalities were accompanied by functional defects; ciliary beat 
frequency was reduced in Bbs mutant mice. Previous reports suggested BBS might 
increase the incidence of asthma. However, compared with wild-type controls, 
neither airway hyperresponsiveness nor inflammation increased in Bbs2(-/-) or 
Bbs4(-/-) mice immunized with ovalbumin. Instead, these animals were partially 
protected from airway hyperresponsiveness. These results emphasize the role of 
BBS proteins in both the structure and function of motile cilia. They also 
invite additional scrutiny of motile cilia dysfunction in patients with this 
disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0712327105
PMCID: PMC2265193
PMID: 18299575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in a group of genes that contribute to ciliary function cause Bardet–Biedl syndrome (BBS). Most studies of BBS have focused on primary, sensory cilia. Here, we asked whether loss of BBS proteins would also affect motile cilia lining the respiratory tract. We found that BBS genes were expressed in human airway epithelia, and BBS2 and BBS4 localized to cellular structures associated with motile cilia. Although BBS proteins were not required for ciliogenesis, their loss caused structural defects in a fraction of cilia covering mouse airway epithelia. The most common abnormality was bulges filled with vesicles near the tips of cilia. We discovered this same misshapen appearance in airway cilia from Bbs1 , Bbs2 , Bbs4 , and Bbs6 mutant mice. The structural abnormalities were accompanied by functional defects; ciliary beat frequency was reduced in Bbs mutant mice. Previous reports suggested BBS might increase the incidence of asthma. However, compared with wild-type controls, neither airway hyperresponsiveness nor inflammation increased in Bbs 2 −/− or Bbs 4 −/− mice immunized with ovalbumin. Instead, these animals were partially protected from airway hyperresponsiveness. These results emphasize the role of BBS proteins in both the structure and function of motile cilia. They also invite additional scrutiny of motile cilia dysfunction in patients with this disease.

Discussion

Previous studies indicated that BBS proteins localize to primary cilia ( 4 , 14 – 16 ). Our results show that airway epithelia, which are covered with motile cilia, express multiple BBS genes and at least two BBS proteins (BBS2 and BBS4) localize to cellular structures associated with motile cilia. We discovered a role for BBS proteins in motile cilia when we found structural ciliary defects in the airway epithelia of Bbs mutant mice. Motile cilia displayed the same misshapen appearance irrespective of whether Bbs1 , Bbs2 , Bbs4 , or Bbs6 were mutated. This result parallels the biochemical observation that the BBSome comprises each of these proteins ( 4 ).

Clearly, the BBS proteins we studied were neither required to initiate motile ciliogenesis nor to assemble motile cilia. Instead, we speculate that they are involved in maintaining motile cilia. This suggestion is consistent with our impression that morphological deformities increased as epithelia aged in culture. It also agrees with the phenotype in BBS patients and mice where cilia form, but progressively deteriorate; an example is the photoreceptor cells that show progressive destruction over time ( 31 , 32 ). The presence of motile cilia in Bbs airway epithelia contrasts with the absence of flagella in sperm from Bbs mice ( 9 – 12 ). The reason for the difference is not clear. However, flagella and motile cilia like those in airways do show some differences ( 33 ). Moreover, cilium-to-cilium and cell-to-cell heterogeneity in the structural abnormalities suggest that loss of BBS proteins may have subtle effects. In addition, some of the morphological variation might be due to differences in ciliary growth and turnover rates, so that not all of the cilia exhibit morphological defects at any given time.

The most striking abnormality in Bbs cilia was the ciliary bulges filled with vesicles. Although the mechanisms producing these changes are unknown, a defect in retrograde intraflagellar transport (IFT) may be responsible. Such a mechanism would be consistent with our finding that Bbs mutants left the central microtubule organization intact, that cilia formation was largely unaffected, and that bulges occurred most commonly at the tip of cilia. Moreover, external morphological abnormalities similar to those we describe result from mutations that alter the retrograde motor protein complex, including D1bLIC , the dynein light intermediate chain in Chlamydomonas , and Dnchc2 lln , a retrograde IFT motor subunit in mice ( 34 , 35 ). Impaired retrograde transport of melanosomes has also been described in zebrafish upon knockdown of BBS proteins ( 13 ). An alternative explanation is that Bbs mutations might cause a loss of cargo from the IFT complex or abnormal cargo loading. It has been proposed that BBS proteins facilitate cargo loading at the basal body or ciliary transition zone and/or stabilize IFT-cargo interactions ( 15 , 36 ). In these cases, instability of the IFT–cargo complex might lead to premature dissociation and protein buildup in the cilium. Even a small defect, magnified over time, could generate the ciliary abnormalities.

The origin of the vesicles in ciliary bulges is puzzling, especially because they are not observed in normal motile cilia. There are several possibilities. IFT proteins show homology to coat protein I and clathrin coat proteins ( 37 , 38 ). Given this similarity, if IFT proteins build up in the Bbs cilium because of defective retrograde transport or IFT–cargo instability, they might initiate the formation of vesicles there. An alternative source of the vesicles might be from the cytoplasm. Earlier studies showed that vesicles carry transmembrane proteins from the Golgi complex to the cilium ( 38 , 39 ). In addition, BBSome-associated proteins regulate Rab8, which is involved in vesicle targeting ( 4 ). Perhaps a defect in the function of the BBSome or an associated protein allows vesicles to enter the cilium.

Although previous reports suggested that patients with BBS may have an increased incidence of asthma ( 2 , 3 ), the Bbs2 −/− and Bbs4 −/− mice displayed neither increased airway hyperresponsiveness nor substantial increases in inflammatory cytokines or cells in the ovalbumin challenge model. There are several potential explanations. First, species differences may be responsible; BBS might increase the risk for asthma in humans but not in mice. Although the ovalbumin sensitization model is widely used in asthma research, it is not identical to human asthma ( 40 ). Second, perhaps loss of BBS does predispose to “asthma” in mice, but the tests we used were not sufficiently sensitive to detect it. Third, asthma might be associated with only a subset of BBS genotypes. Although the clinical phenotype shares many features across genotypes, precedence for variability is the observation that Bbs4 −/− and Bbs6 −/− mice have hypertension, whereas Bbs2 −/− mice do not (ref. 10 and V.C.S., unpublished data). Fourth, because asthma is a common disease, it is possible that patients with BBS have no greater risk than the general population. Of note, pulmonary function and an in-depth validation of the asthma diagnosis have not been reported in BBS. It also seems possible that BBS caused some other pulmonary dysfunction that produced symptoms that were misinterpreted as asthma.

Our data indicate that loss of BBS2 and BBS4 partially protected mice from airway hyperresponsiveness. We speculate that this protection may have resulted from loss of a sensory function associated with either primary or motile cilia. Moreover, either airway epithelial cells or some other cells may have been responsible. Further exploration of the underlying mechanisms may provide insight into airway hyperresponsiveness and/or asthma.

In addition to the structural abnormalities, we found that Bbs mutations produced a functional defect, ciliary beat frequency decrease. Perhaps the misshapen cilia physically interfered with normal beating. Alternatively, loss of BBS proteins might have altered the molecular mechanism of movement in normal appearing cilia. Yet despite the reduction, mucociliary transport remained unimpaired. It seems most likely that the decrease in beat frequency was too small to significantly impact mucociliary transport. Alternatively, it is possible that our assay was not sufficiently sensitive to detect a reduction. Although it is well known that defective cilia can inhibit mucociliary transport and cause chronic airway infections and bronchiectasis ( 17 , 19 ), our data are consistent with the lack of this type of lung disease in patients with BBS. It is, however, interesting that cyst-like structures within the ciliary shaft have been reported in patients with severe idiopathic bronchiectasis ( 41 ). The authors proposed that those abnormalities might cause disease, although another report suggested that the defects could be secondary to chronic airway inflammation ( 42 ). In either case, it would be interesting to know the relationship of those abnormalities to the vesicular structures we observed in cilia. In addition, it remains possible that simultaneously disrupting multiple BBS genes would cause more severe phenotypes.

Although most reports on BBS have focused on primary cilia, our results underscore the importance of BBS proteins in both the structure and function of motile cilia. Thus, motile cilia may be a valuable model for elucidating the molecular mechanisms involved in BBS. Moreover, additional scrutiny of the consequences of motile cilia dysfunction may be of value for patients with this disease.

Materials and Methods

For a detailed description of the materials and methods, please see SI Text .
