---
pmid: '31402170'
title: Endothelin receptor-A mediates degradation of the glomerular endothelial surface
  layer via pathologic crosstalk between activated podocytes and glomerular endothelial
  cells.
authors:
- Ebefors K
- Wiener RJ
- Yu L
- Azeloglu EU
- Yi Z
- Jia F
- Zhang W
- Baron MH
- He JC
- Haraldsson B
- Daehn I
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7200072
doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.007
---

# Endothelin receptor-A mediates degradation of the glomerular endothelial surface layer via pathologic crosstalk between activated podocytes and glomerular endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Ebefors K, Wiener RJ, Yu L, Azeloglu EU, Yi Z, Jia F, Zhang W, Baron MH, He JC, Haraldsson B, Daehn I
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.007)
**PMC:** [PMC7200072](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7200072/)

## Abstract

1. Kidney Int. 2019 Oct;96(4):957-970. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.007. Epub 2019
 May 22.

Endothelin receptor-A mediates degradation of the glomerular endothelial surface 
layer via pathologic crosstalk between activated podocytes and glomerular 
endothelial cells.

Ebefors K(1), Wiener RJ(2), Yu L(2), Azeloglu EU(2), Yi Z(2), Jia F(2), Zhang 
W(2), Baron MH(3), He JC(2), Haraldsson B(1), Daehn I(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Physiology, University of 
Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(3)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York; Department of Cell, 
Developmental, and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York; Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(4)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Electronic address: ilse.daenhn@mssm.edu.

Emerging evidence of crosstalk between glomerular cells in pathological settings 
provides opportunities for novel therapeutic discovery. Here we investigated 
underlying mechanisms of early events leading to filtration barrier defects of 
podocyte and glomerular endothelial cell crosstalk in the mouse models of 
primary podocytopathy (podocyte specific transforming growth factor-β receptor 1 
signaling activation) or Adriamycin nephropathy. We found that glomerular 
endothelial surface layer degradation and albuminuria preceded podocyte foot 
process effacement. These abnormalities were prevented by endothelin receptor-A 
antagonism and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species scavenging. Additional 
studies confirmed increased heparanase and hyaluronoglucosaminidase gene 
expression in glomerular endothelial cells in response to podocyte-released 
factors and to endothelin-1. Atomic force microscopy measurements showed a 
significant reduction in the endothelial surface layer by endothelin-1 and 
podocyte-released factors, which could be prevented by endothelin receptor-A but 
not endothelin receptor-B antagonism. Thus, our studies provide evidence of 
early crosstalk between activated podocytes and glomerular endothelial cells 
resulting in loss of endothelial surface layer, glomerular endothelial cell 
injury and albuminuria. Hence, activation of endothelin-1-endothelin receptor-A 
and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species contribute to the pathogenesis of 
primary podocytopathies in experimental focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

Copyright © 2019 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.05.007
PMCID: PMC7200072
PMID: 31402170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures B.H. is at present paid employee of 
Novartis and holds an unpaid professorship at the University of Gothenburg. The 
author has declared no other conflict of interest exists. K.E., R.W., E.A., 
Z.Y., W.Z., F.J., L.Y. C.H. and I.D. have no conflicts of interests.
