---
pmid: '23624935'
title: BRCA1 is a negative modulator of the PRC2 complex.
authors:
- Wang L
- Zeng X
- Chen S
- Ding L
- Zhong J
- Zhao JC
- Wang L
- Sarver A
- Koller A
- Zhi J
- Ma Y
- Yu J
- Chen J
- Huang H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3671259
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.95
---

# BRCA1 is a negative modulator of the PRC2 complex.
**Authors:** Wang L, Zeng X, Chen S, Ding L, Zhong J, Zhao JC, Wang L, Sarver A, Koller A, Zhi J, Ma Y, Yu J, Chen J, Huang H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2013.95](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.95)
**PMC:** [PMC3671259](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3671259/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 May 29;32(11):1584-97. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.95. Epub 2013 Apr 
26.

BRCA1 is a negative modulator of the PRC2 complex.

Wang L(1), Zeng X, Chen S, Ding L, Zhong J, Zhao JC, Wang L, Sarver A, Koller A, 
Zhi J, Ma Y, Yu J, Chen J, Huang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

The Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is important for maintenance of stem 
cell pluripotency and suppression of cell differentiation by promoting histone 
H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and transcriptional repression of 
differentiation genes. Here we show that the tumour-suppressor protein BRCA1 
interacts with the Polycomb protein EZH2 in mouse embryonic stem (ES) and human 
breast cancer cells. The BRCA1-binding region in EZH2 overlaps with the 
noncoding RNA (ncRNA)-binding domain, and BRCA1 expression inhibits the binding 
of EZH2 to the HOTAIR ncRNA. Decreased expression of BRCA1 causes genome-wide 
EZH2 re-targeting and elevates H3K27me3 levels at PRC2 target loci in both mouse 
ES and human breast cancer cells. BRCA1 deficiency blocks ES cell 
differentiation and enhances breast cancer migration and invasion in an 
EZH2-dependent manner. These results reveal that BRCA1 is a key negative 
modulator of PRC2 and that loss of BRCA1 inhibits ES cell differentiation and 
enhances an aggressive breast cancer phenotype by affecting PRC2 function.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2013.95
PMCID: PMC3671259
PMID: 23624935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is important for maintenance of stem cell pluripotency and suppression of cell differentiation by promoting histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and transcriptional repression of differentiation genes. Here we show that the tumour-suppressor protein BRCA1 interacts with the Polycomb protein EZH2 in mouse embryonic stem (ES) and human breast cancer cells. The BRCA1-binding region in EZH2 overlaps with the noncoding RNA (ncRNA)-binding domain, and BRCA1 expression inhibits the binding of EZH2 to the HOTAIR ncRNA. Decreased expression of BRCA1 causes genome-wide EZH2 re-targeting and elevates H3K27me3 levels at PRC2 target loci in both mouse ES and human breast cancer cells. BRCA1 deficiency blocks ES cell differentiation and enhances breast cancer migration and invasion in an EZH2-dependent manner. These results reveal that BRCA1 is a key negative modulator of PRC2 and that loss of BRCA1 inhibits ES cell differentiation and enhances an aggressive breast cancer phenotype by affecting PRC2 function.

Introduction

The evolutionally conserved Polycomb group (PcG) proteins play pivotal roles in transcription repression by forming chromatin-modifying complexes termed Polycomb-repressive complexes (PRCs) such as PRC1 and PRC2 ( Kennison, 1995 ; Schwartz and Pirrotta, 2007 ; Simon and Kingston, 2009 ; Margueron and Reinberg, 2011 ). PRC2 contains four core subunits of EZH2, SUZ12, EED and RbAp46/48 in humans or E(z), Su(z)12, esc and Nurf55 in Drosophila . EZH2 is an enzymatic subunit of PRC2 that contains a SET domain catalysing histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3; Cao et al, 2002 ; Czermin et al, 2002 ; Kuzmichev et al, 2002 ; Muller et al, 2002 ). This chromatin mark is commonly associated with silencing of differentiation genes and has key roles in developmental patterning in organisms ranging from plants and flies to humans. PRC2 is important for embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, cell-fate decisions and generation of inducible pluripotent stem (iPS) cells ( Boyer et al, 2006 ; Lee et al, 2006 ; Ezhkova et al, 2009 ; Onder et al, 2012 ). EZH2 is often overexpressed or mutated in human solid and hematologic tumours and has been implicated in cancer progression ( Varambally et al, 2002 ; Bracken et al, 2003 ; Kleer et al, 2003 ; Morin et al, 2010 ).

Mounting evidence indicates that the potent function of EZH2 is tightly regulated in diverse biological contexts. EZH2 expression is regulated by RB/p130-E2F pathways, microRNA 101 and sex hormones ( Bracken et al, 2003 ; Varambally et al, 2008 ; Bohrer et al, 2010 ). Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) such as HOTAIR and XIST bind to and facilitate PRC2 occupancy on chromatin ( Rinn et al, 2007 ; Zhao et al, 2008 ; Gupta et al, 2010 ). The protein kinase AKT phosphorylates EZH2 at serine 21, which inhibits PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 and gene silencing but activates Polycomb-independent oncogenic functions of EZH2 ( Cha et al, 2005 ; Xu et al, 2012 ). Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and CDK2 phosphorylate EZH2 at threonine 350 (T350) and 487 (T487) residues and regulate PRC2 recruitment to its target loci ( Chen et al, 2010 ; Kaneko et al, 2010 ; Wei et al, 2011 ). T350 phosphorylation also enhances EZH2 binding to HOTAIR and XIST ncRNAs and accelerates turnover of phosphorylated EZH2 ( Kaneko et al, 2010 ; Wu and Zhang, 2011 ). Moreover, the Jumonji C-containing protein Jarid2 has been shown to interact with and regulate PRC2 enzymatic activity and target gene occupancy in ES cells ( Peng et al, 2009 ; Shen et al, 2009 ; Landeira et al, 2010 ; Li et al, 2010 ; Pasini et al, 2010 ).

Breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 ( BRCA1 ) was identified as a hereditary cancer susceptibility gene ( Miki et al, 1994 ). Heterozygous germline mutations of BRCA1 predispose women to breast and ovarian cancer with a lifetime risk up to 85% by age 70 years ( King et al, 2003 ; Wooster and Weber, 2003 ). Strikingly, the majority of breast cancers arising in BRCA1 mutation carriers are of the basal-like phenotype with unique characteristics such as lack of estrogen receptor (ER) but expression of basal or myoepithelial cell markers cytokeratins (CKs) CK5/6, CK14 and CK17 ( Foulkes et al, 2003 ; Sorlie et al, 2003 ; Foulkes, 2004 ; Lakhani et al, 2005 ). It has therefore been suggested that BRCA1 tumours are originated from basal-like stem cells ( Foulkes, 2004 ; Vassilopoulos et al, 2008 ). To date, a large number of biochemical activities have been linked to BRCA1 function, which include DNA damage response and repair ( Scully et al, 1997 ; Cortez et al, 1999 ), transcription regulation ( Chapman and Verma, 1996 ; Harkin et al, 1999 ), chromatin remodelling ( Bochar et al, 2000 ), heterochromatin maintenance ( Zhu et al, 2011 ), among others. Moreover, the NH2-terminal RING domain and the COOH-terminal BRCT domain have been identified as two major functional domains of BRCA1 ( Huen et al, 2010 ). However, how BRCA1 regulates cell differentiation and how BRCA1 deregulation contributes to development of aggressive phenotypes of basal-like breast tumours remain elusive. In the present study we report that BRCA1 binds to EZH2 and modulates its functions in regulation of transcription repression, ES cell differentiation and breast cancer cell migration and invasion.

Discussion

The striking bias observed in BRCA1 mutation carriers towards developing aggressive basal-like breast cancers has driven significant interest in understanding how BRCA1 might regulate gene expression and cell fate. Mediating global gene silencing, the PRC2 chromatin-modifying complex has been implicated in stem cell differentiation ( Boyer et al, 2006 ; Lee et al, 2006 ; Pasini et al, 2007 ; Ezhkova et al, 2009 ) and cancer progression ( Varambally et al, 2002 ; Bracken et al, 2003 ; Kleer et al, 2003 ). In this report we provide evidence that BRCA1 interacts with EZH2 in vitro and in cultured cells. Reduction of BRCA1 levels in ES cells leads to genome-wide re-targeting of EZH2 and concomitant increase in H3K27me3 levels in PRC2 target loci. BRCA1 deficiency also blocks ES cell differentiation and enhances breast cancer cell migration and invasion, and these effects are mediated, at least in part, through EZH2. Thus, we have identified modulation of EZH2 functions as a novel mechanism of BRCA1 in regulation of gene expression, stem cell differentiation and cancer aggressive phenotypes.

BRCA1 is detected in many protein complexes with diverse functions including DNA damage response and repair, transcription regulation and chromatin remodelling ( Huen et al, 2010 ). Through the RING domain at the NH2-terminus, BRCA1 forms a heterodimer with BARD1, a well-studied BRCA1 partner protein that has been implicated in regulation of genomic stability, DNA repair and transcription ( Meza et al, 1999 ; Huen et al, 2010 ). Our in vitro protein binding and co-IP assays demonstrated that BRCA1 binds to the PRC2 complex through its NH2-terminal (amino acids 1–1021), but not the COOH-terminal portion (amino acids 1022–1863). However, we found that neither BARD1 was detected in the BRCA1–PRC2 complex nor BARD1 overexpression affected BRCA1–EZH2 interaction. Thus, our data reveal that BRCA1 associates with PRC2 in a protein complex different from the BRCA1–BARD1 complex, suggesting that BRCA1–PRC2 interaction works independent of the BRCA1–BARD1 heterodimer and thereby may not interfere with the heterodimer function of BRCA1–BARD1 in DNA damage. Moreover, there is an emerging link between PcG and the DNA damage response in mammalian cells ( Liu et al, 2009 ; Chou et al, 2010 ; Lukas et al, 2011 ; Vissers et al, 2012 ). We found that the binding of EZH2 by BRCA1 was substantially reduced following UV irradiation in 293T cells ( Supplementary Figure S6 ). These data implicate that BRCA1-mediated inhibition of EZH2 can be attenuated in response to DNA damage, which is consistent with the notion that activated EZH2 might enhance DNA repair by repressing gene transcription at sites of damage ( Chou et al, 2010 ; Vissers et al, 2012 ). How DNA damage affects the BRCA1–EZH2 interaction warrants further investigation.

BRCA1 has been implicated in mammary luminal epithelial differentiation and basal-like breast cancer development ( Furuta et al, 2005 ; Liu et al, 2008 ; Lim et al, 2009 ; Molyneux et al, 2010 ; Proia et al, 2011 ). However, which biochemical activity of BRCA1 mediates such a function is not fully understood. Using mouse ES cells as a working model, we demonstrate that Brca1 knockdown blocks mouse ES cell differentiation in a manner dependent on Ezh2. We provide evidence that decreased expression of Brca1 broadens genome-wide occupancy of Ezh2 on chromatin and represses Ezh2 target gene expression in mouse ES cell lines. We further show that loss of BRCA1 induces aggressive (migratory/invasive) phenotypes of breast cancer and that these effects are mediated through EZH2. Based upon these results, we envisage a model that reduced BRCA1 expression augments function of PRC2, thereby preventing committed cell lineage differentiation and/or favouring undesired reprogramming of differentiated BRCA1 -mutated luminal cells into basal-like, aggressive breast adenocarcinoma cells. Our hypothesis is supported by previous findings that the function of PRC2 is crucial for the maintenance of stem cell properties and reprogramming of somatic cells into iPS cells ( Boyer et al, 2006 ; Lee et al, 2006 ; Pasini et al, 2007 ; Ezhkova et al, 2009 ; Pereira et al, 2010 ; Onder et al, 2012 ). Moreover, this notion is consistent with the report that the synthetic lethality of BRCA1-mutant breast cancers is attributed to EZH2 inhibition ( Puppe et al, 2009 ). It is hence warranted to explore if EZH2 plays a causal role in Brca1 deletion-induced formation of basal-like breast tumours in animals ( Liu et al, 2007 ).

Findings from mouse and human ES cell studies suggest that PRC2 plays a key role in maintenance of ES cell pluripotency and H3K27me3-mediated transcriptional repression of cell lineage-specific differentiation genes ( Boyer et al, 2006 ; Lee et al, 2006 ). Further studies show that PRC2 targets are bivalent genes that often contain the transcription repression mark H3K27me3 and the activation mark H3K4me3 ( Bernstein et al, 2006 ), suggesting that PRC2 target genes are poised for activation during differentiation. Consistent with this notion, it has been shown that Suz12-null mouse ES cells fail to undergo retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation ( Pasini et al, 2007 ) and Eed-null ES cells exhibit severe defect in mesoendoderm (ME) differentiation ( Shen et al, 2008 ). Thus, it has been speculated that PRC2 complexes are required for both suppression and activation of differentiation genes in ES cells ( Ezhkova et al, 2009 ). In contrast to the findings in Suz12- and Eed-null ES cells, we found that EZH2 knockdown did not impair ES cell differentiation. Similar to our observation, it has been shown previously that Ezh2-null ES cells have less severe defect in ME differentiation than Eed-null cells ( Shen et al, 2008 ). One plausible explanation is that Ezh1, a homologue of Ezh2, has complementary but nonredundant roles in mediating H3K27me3 and ES cell function ( Margueron et al, 2008 ; Shen et al, 2008 ). Additionally, different from Ezh2-null ES cells, the residual Ezh2 proteins in Ezh2-knockdown ES cells ( Figure 6A ) may enable to fine-tune the balance between suppression and activation of differentiation genes.

Although it is not entirely clear how PRC2 targets specific chromatin regions in mammalian cells ( Kaneko et al, 2010 ), long ncRNAs HOTAIR and XIST have been shown to bind to and recruit the PRC2 complex in cis or in trans ( Rinn et al, 2007 ; Zhao et al, 2008 ). A functional motif, designated as ncRBD1, is critical for EZH2 binding to HOTAIR and XIST ( Kaneko et al, 2010 ). Consistent with the observation that the BRCA1 binding region in EZH2 overlaps with ncRBD1, we show that BRCA1 overexpression inhibits, but BRCA1 knockdown enhances, EZH2 binding to HOTAIR . BRCA1 overexpression also abolishes HOTAIR -augmented binding of EZH2 on the promoter of PRC2 target gene HOXA9 in human breast cancer cells and fibroblasts. Despite the fact that the cognate mouse Hotair ncRNA is poorly conserved in sequence ( Schorderet and Duboule, 2011 ), we provide evidence that Brca1 knockdown-induced Ezh2 recruitment at PRC2 target loci was abolished by RNase treatment in mouse ES cells. Thus, our data suggest that inhibition of EZH2 binding to ncRNAs could be one of the potential mechanisms that mediate BRCA1 interference of PRC2 targeting in both ES and breast cancer cells.

In closing, BRCA1 has been implicated in transcription regulation and mammary luminal epithelial differentiation, and loss of BRCA1 was shown to lead to basal-like breast cancers that are migratory and invasive; however, the underlying mechanism is largely unclear. We uncovered a previously uncharacterized interaction between the tumour-suppressor BRCA1 and the oncoprotein EZH2. Reduction of BRCA1 levels broadens genome-wide EZH2 occupancy on chromatin and elevates H3K27me3 levels at PRC2 target loci. We further showed that decreased BRCA1 expression blocks ES cell differentiation and augments breast cancer migration and invasion in a manner dependent on EZH2. Thus, our study has identified the BRCA1–EZH2 interaction as a key mechanism mediating BRCA1 regulation of gene expression, stem cell differentiation and cancer aggressive phenotypes. Our findings suggest that the PRC2 complex may serve as a viable target for the treatment of human basal-like breast cancers carrying a mutated or methylated BRCA1 gene.
