---
pmid: '22327739'
title: EARLY FLOWERING4 recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in the nucleus sustains the
  Arabidopsis circadian clock.
authors:
- Herrero E
- Kolmos E
- Bujdoso N
- Yuan Y
- Wang M
- Berns MC
- Uhlworm H
- Coupland G
- Saini R
- Jaskolski M
- Webb A
- Gonçalves J
- Davis SJ
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3315225
doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.093807
---

# EARLY FLOWERING4 recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in the nucleus sustains the Arabidopsis circadian clock.
**Authors:** Herrero E, Kolmos E, Bujdoso N, Yuan Y, Wang M, Berns MC, Uhlworm H, Coupland G, Saini R, Jaskolski M, Webb A, Gonçalves J, Davis SJ
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.111.093807](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.111.093807)
**PMC:** [PMC3315225](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3315225/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2012 Feb;24(2):428-43. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.093807. Epub 2012 Feb 
10.

EARLY FLOWERING4 recruitment of EARLY FLOWERING3 in the nucleus sustains the 
Arabidopsis circadian clock.

Herrero E(1), Kolmos E, Bujdoso N, Yuan Y, Wang M, Berns MC, Uhlworm H, Coupland 
G, Saini R, Jaskolski M, Webb A, Gonçalves J, Davis SJ.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, D-50829 Cologne, Germany.

The plant circadian clock is proposed to be a network of several interconnected 
feedback loops, and loss of any component leads to changes in oscillator speed. 
We previously reported that Arabidopsis thaliana EARLY FLOWERING4 (ELF4) is 
required to sustain this oscillator and that the elf4 mutant is arrhythmic. This 
phenotype is shared with both elf3 and lux. Here, we show that overexpression of 
either ELF3 or LUX ARRHYTHMO (LUX) complements the elf4 mutant phenotype. 
Furthermore, ELF4 causes ELF3 to form foci in the nucleus. We used expression 
data to direct a mathematical position of ELF3 in the clock network. This 
revealed direct effects on the morning clock gene PRR9, and we determined 
association of ELF3 to a conserved region of the PRR9 promoter. A cis-element in 
this region was suggestive of ELF3 recruitment by the transcription factor LUX, 
consistent with both ELF3 and LUX acting genetically downstream of ELF4. Taken 
together, using integrated approaches, we identified ELF4/ELF3 together with LUX 
to be pivotal for sustenance of plant circadian rhythms.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.111.093807
PMCID: PMC3315225
PMID: 22327739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
