---
pmid: '12135493'
title: Engineering and mechanistic studies of the Arabidopsis FAE1 beta-ketoacyl-CoA
  synthase, FAE1 KCS.
authors:
- Ghanevati M
- Jaworski JG
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03039.x
---

# Engineering and mechanistic studies of the Arabidopsis FAE1 beta-ketoacyl-CoA synthase, FAE1 KCS.
**Authors:** Ghanevati M, Jaworski JG
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03039.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03039.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jul;269(14):3531-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03039.x.

Engineering and mechanistic studies of the Arabidopsis FAE1 beta-ketoacyl-CoA 
synthase, FAE1 KCS.

Ghanevati M(1), Jaworski JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA.

The Arabidopsis FAE1 beta-ketoacyl-CoA synthase (FAE1 KCS) catalyzes the 
condensation of malonyl-CoA with long-chain acyl-CoAs. Sequence analysis of FAE1 
KCS predicted that this condensing enzyme is anchored to a membrane by two 
adjacent N-terminal membrane-spanning domains. In order to characterize the FAE1 
KCS and analyze its mechanism, FAE1 KCS and its mutants were engineered with a 
His6-tag at their N-terminus, and expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The 
membrane-bound enzyme was then solubilized and purified to near homogeneity on a 
metal affinity column. Wild-type recombinant FAE1 KCS was active with several 
acyl-CoA substrates, with highest activity towards saturated and monounsaturated 
C16 and C18. In the absence of an acyl-CoA substrate, FAE1 KCS was unable to 
carry out decarboxylation of [3-(14)C]malonyl-CoA, indicating that it requires 
binding of the acyl-CoA for decarboxylation activity. Site-directed mutagenesis 
was carried out on the FAE1 KCS to assess if this condensing enzyme was 
mechanistically related to the well characterized soluble condensing enzymes of 
fatty acid and flavonoid syntheses. A C223A mutant enzyme lacking the acylation 
site was unable to carry out decarboxylation of malonyl-CoA even when 18:1-CoA 
was present. Mutational analyses of the conserved Asn424 and His391 residues 
indicated the importance of these residues for FAE1-KCS activity. The results 
presented here provide the initial analysis of the reaction mechanism for a 
membrane-bound condensing enzyme from any source and provide evidence for a 
mechanism similar to the soluble condensing enzymes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.03039.x
PMID: 12135493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
