---
pmid: '12107182'
title: Epithelial membrane proteins induce membrane blebbing and interact with the
  P2X7 receptor C terminus.
authors:
- Wilson HL
- Wilson SA
- Surprenant A
- North RA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205120200
---

# Epithelial membrane proteins induce membrane blebbing and interact with the P2X7 receptor C terminus.
**Authors:** Wilson HL, Wilson SA, Surprenant A, North RA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M205120200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205120200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 13;277(37):34017-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205120200. Epub 
2002 Jul 9.

Epithelial membrane proteins induce membrane blebbing and interact with the P2X7 
receptor C terminus.

Wilson HL(1), Wilson SA, Surprenant A, North RA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Physiology, University of Sheffield S10 2TN, United 
Kingdom. H.L.Wilson@sheffield.ac.uk

The binding of extracellular ATP to the P2X(7) receptor opens an integral 
cation-permeable channel; it also leads to membrane blebbing and, in certain 
immune cells, interleukin-1beta secretion and eventual death. The latter three 
effects are unique to the P2X(7) receptor; also unique among P2X receptors is 
the long intracellular C terminus of the protein. We have shown that the 
C-terminal domain of the P2X(7) receptor is responsible for the cell blebbing 
phenotype. A screen for proteins that associate with the C-terminal domain of 
the P2X(7) receptor and might mediate the blebbing phenotype, identified 
epithelial membrane protein 2 (EMP-2). The interaction between EMP-2 and P2X(7) 
was confirmed biochemically by co-immunoprecipitation, co-purification, and 
glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays, and this interaction was entirely 
dependent on the C-terminal domain of P2X(7). The P2X(7) receptor also 
interacted with the other members of the epithelial membrane protein family 
(EMP-1, EMP-3, and PMP-22). All four EMPs were found to be expressed in HEK-293 
cells and in THP-1 monocytes, which express P2X(7) receptors. Interestingly, the 
constitutive overexpression of any of the EMPs in HEK-293 cells led to cell 
blebbing, annexin V binding, and cell death, by a caspase-dependent pathway. 
These findings suggest that the P2X(7) C-terminal domain associates with EMPs, 
and this interaction may mediate some aspects of the downstream signaling 
following P2X(7) receptor activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205120200
PMID: 12107182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
