---
pmid: '16319921'
title: Notch1 augments NF-kappaB activity by facilitating its nuclear retention.
authors:
- Shin HM
- Minter LM
- Cho OH
- Gottipati S
- Fauq AH
- Golde TE
- Sonenshein GE
- Osborne BA
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1356346
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600902
---

# Notch1 augments NF-kappaB activity by facilitating its nuclear retention.
**Authors:** Shin HM, Minter LM, Cho OH, Gottipati S, Fauq AH, Golde TE, Sonenshein GE, Osborne BA
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600902](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600902)
**PMC:** [PMC1356346](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1356346/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Jan 11;25(1):129-38. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600902. Epub 2005 Dec
 1.

Notch1 augments NF-kappaB activity by facilitating its nuclear retention.

Shin HM(1), Minter LM, Cho OH, Gottipati S, Fauq AH, Golde TE, Sonenshein GE, 
Osborne BA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Massachusetts/Amherst, 
Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Notch1 specifically upregulates expression of the cytokine interferon-gamma in 
peripheral T cells through activation of NF-kappaB. However, how Notch mediates 
NF-kappaB activation remains unclear. Here, we examined the temporal 
relationship between Notch signaling and NF-kappaB induction during T-cell 
activation. NF-kappaB activation occurs within minutes of T-cell receptor (TCR) 
engagement and this activation is sustained for at least 48 h following TCR 
signaling. We used gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) to prevent the cleavage and 
subsequent activation of Notch family members. We demonstrate that GSI blocked 
the later, sustained NF-kappaB activation, but did not affect the initial 
activation of NF-kappaB. Using biochemical approaches, as well as confocal 
microscopy, we show that the intracellular domain of Notch1 (N1IC) directly 
interacts with NF-kappaB and competes with IkappaBalpha, leading to retention of 
NF-kappaB in the nucleus. Additionally, we show that N1IC can directly regulate 
IFN-gamma expression through complexes formed on the IFN-gamma promoter. Taken 
together, these data suggest that there are two 'waves' of NF-kappaB activation: 
an initial, Notch-independent phase, and a later, sustained activation of 
NF-kappaB, which is Notch dependent.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600902
PMCID: PMC1356346
PMID: 16319921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
