---
pmid: '17187824'
title: 'The sec14 homology module of neurofibromin binds cellular glycerophospholipids:
  mass spectrometry and structure of a lipid complex.'
authors:
- Welti S
- Fraterman S
- D'Angelo I
- Wilm M
- Scheffzek K
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.055
---

# The sec14 homology module of neurofibromin binds cellular glycerophospholipids: mass spectrometry and structure of a lipid complex.
**Authors:** Welti S, Fraterman S, D'Angelo I, Wilm M, Scheffzek K
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.055](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.055)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 16;366(2):551-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.055. Epub
2006  Nov 18.

The sec14 homology module of neurofibromin binds cellular glycerophospholipids: 
mass spectrometry and structure of a lipid complex.

Welti S(1), Fraterman S, D'Angelo I, Wilm M, Scheffzek K.

Author information:
(1)Structural and Computational Biology, Developmental Biology and Gene 
Expression Units, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstrasse 1, 
69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Neurofibromin is the protein product of the tumor suppressor gene NF1, 
alterations of which are responsible for the pathogenesis of the common disorder 
Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1). The only well-characterized function of 
neurofibromin is its RasGAP activity, contained in the central GAP related 
domain (GRD). By solving the crystal structure of a 31 kDa fragment at the 
C-terminal end of the GRD we have recently identified a novel bipartite 
lipid-binding module composed of a Sec14 homologous and a previously undetected 
pleckstrin homology (PH)-like domain. Using lipid exchange assays along with 
mass spectrometry we show here that the Sec14-like portion binds to 
1-(3-sn-phosphatidyl)-sn-glycerol (PtdGro), (3-sn-phosphatidyl)-ethanolamine 
(PtdEtn) and -choline (PtdCho) and to a minor extent to 
(3-sn-phosphatidyl)-l-serine (PtdSer) and 1-(3-sn-phosphatidyl)-d-myo-inositol 
(PtdIns). Phosphorylated PtdIns (PtdInsPs) are not detected as binders in the 
mass spectrometry assay, but their soluble inositol-phosphate headgroups and 
related compounds can inhibit the lipid exchange reaction. We also present here 
the crystal structure of this module with the Sec14 portion bound to a cellular 
glycerophospholipid ligand. Our structure has model character for the 
substrate-bound form of yeast Sec14p, of which only detergent bound structures 
are available so far. To assess potential regulation of the lipid exchange 
reaction in detail, we present a novel strategy using nanospray mass 
spectrometry. Ion intensities of initial phospholipids and exchanged deuterated 
analogues bound by the protein module allow the quantitative analysis of 
differences in the exchange activity under various conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.11.055
PMID: 17187824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
