---
pmid: '16354669'
title: Guide molecule-driven stereospecific degradation of alpha-methylpolyamines
  by polyamine oxidase.
authors:
- Järvinen A
- Keinänen TA
- Grigorenko NA
- Khomutov AR
- Uimari A
- Vepsäläinen J
- Närvänen A
- Alhonen L
- Jänne J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509959200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Guide molecule-driven stereospecific degradation of alpha-methylpolyamines by polyamine oxidase.
**Authors:** Järvinen A, Keinänen TA, Grigorenko NA, Khomutov AR, Uimari A, Vepsäläinen J, Närvänen A, Alhonen L, Jänne J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M509959200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M509959200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4589-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509959200. Epub
2005  Dec 14.

Guide molecule-driven stereospecific degradation of alpha-methylpolyamines by 
polyamine oxidase.

Järvinen A(1), Keinänen TA, Grigorenko NA, Khomutov AR, Uimari A, Vepsäläinen J, 
Närvänen A, Alhonen L, Jänne J.

Author information:
(1)A. I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, Kuopio, Finland.

FAD-dependent polyamine oxidase (PAO; EC 1.5.3.11) is one of the key enzymes in 
the catabolism of polyamines spermidine and spermine. The natural substrates for 
the enzyme are N1-acetylspermidine, N1-acetylspermine, and 
N1,N12-diacetylspermine. Here we report that PAO, which normally metabolizes 
achiral substrates, oxidized (R)-isomer of 1-amino-8-acetamido-5-azanonane and 
N1-acetylspermidine as efficiently while (S)-1-amino-8-acetamido-5-azanonane was 
a much less preferred substrate. It has been shown that in the presence of 
certain aldehydes, the substrate specificity of PAO and the kinetics of the 
reaction are changed to favor spermine and spermidine as substrates. Therefore, 
we examined the effect of several aldehydes on the ability of PAO to oxidize 
different enantiomers of alpha-methylated polyamines. PAO supplemented with 
benzaldehyde predominantly catalyzed the cleavage of (R)-isomer of 
alpha-methylspermidine, whereas in the presence of pyridoxal the 
(S)-alpha-methylspermidine was preferred. PAO displayed the same 
stereospecificity with both singly and doubly alpha-methylated spermine 
derivatives when supplemented with the same aldehydes. Structurally related 
ketones proved to be ineffective. This is the first time that the 
stereospecificity of FAD-dependent oxidase has been successfully regulated by 
changing the supplementary aldehyde. These findings might facilitate the 
chemical regulation of stereospecificity of the enzymes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509959200
PMID: 16354669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
