---
pmid: '10824116'
title: Molecular cloning and characterization of murine and human N-acetylglucosamine
  kinase.
authors:
- Hinderlich S
- Berger M
- Schwarzkopf M
- Effertz K
- Reutter W
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01360.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular cloning and characterization of murine and human N-acetylglucosamine kinase.
**Authors:** Hinderlich S, Berger M, Schwarzkopf M, Effertz K, Reutter W
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01360.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01360.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jun;267(11):3301-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01360.x.

Molecular cloning and characterization of murine and human N-acetylglucosamine 
kinase.

Hinderlich S(1), Berger M, Schwarzkopf M, Effertz K, Reutter W.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Biochemie, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Berlin-Dahlem, Germany. hinderli@zedat.fu-berlin.de

N-Acetylglucosamine is produced by the endogenous degradation of glycoconjugates 
and by the degradation of dietary glycoconjugates by glycosidases. It enters the 
pathways of aminosugar metabolism by the action of N-acetylglucosamine kinase. 
In this study we report the isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone 
encoding the murine enzyme. An open reading frame of 1029 base pairs encodes 343 
amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 37.3 kDa. The deduced amino-acid 
sequence contains matches of the sequences of eight peptides derived from 
tryptic cleavage of rat N-acetylglucosamine kinase. The recombinant murine 
enzyme was functionally expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 cells, where it 
displays N-acetylglucosamine kinase activity as well as N-acetylmannosamine 
kinase activity. The complete cDNA sequence of human N-acetylglucosamine kinase 
was derived from the nucleotide sequences of several expressed sequence tags. An 
open reading frame of 1032 base pairs encodes 344 amino acids and a protein with 
a predicted molecular mass of 37.4 kDa. Similarities between human and murine 
N-acetylglucosamine kinase were 86.6% on the nucleotide level and 91.6% on the 
amino-acid level. Amino-acid sequences of murine and human N-acetylglucosamine 
kinase show sequence similarities to other sugar kinases, and all five sequence 
motifs necessary for the binding of ATP by sugar kinases are present. Tissue 
distribution of murine N-acetylglucosamine kinase revealed an ubiquitous 
occurrence of the enzyme and a very high expression in testis. The size of the 
murine mRNA was 1.35 kb in all tissues investigated, with the exception of 
testis, where it was 1.45 kb mRNA of the murine enzyme was continuously 
expressed during mouse development. mRNA of the human enzyme was expressed in 
all investigated human tissues, as well as in cancer cell lines. In both the 
tissues and the cancer cell lines, the human mRNA was 1.35 kb in size.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01360.x
PMID: 10824116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
