---
pmid: '22302990'
title: Direct role of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins in transcriptional regulation.
authors:
- Gascue C
- Tan PL
- Cardenas-Rodriguez M
- Libisch G
- Fernandez-Calero T
- Liu YP
- Astrada S
- Robello C
- Naya H
- Katsanis N
- Badano JL
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3283873
doi: 10.1242/jcs.089375
---

# Direct role of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins in transcriptional regulation.
**Authors:** Gascue C, Tan PL, Cardenas-Rodriguez M, Libisch G, Fernandez-Calero T, Liu YP, Astrada S, Robello C, Naya H, Katsanis N, Badano JL
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.089375](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.089375)
**PMC:** [PMC3283873](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3283873/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jan 15;125(Pt 2):362-75. doi: 10.1242/jcs.089375. Epub 2012
Feb  2.

Direct role of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins in transcriptional regulation.

Gascue C(1), Tan PL, Cardenas-Rodriguez M, Libisch G, Fernandez-Calero T, Liu 
YP, Astrada S, Robello C, Naya H, Katsanis N, Badano JL.

Author information:
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, 
Montevideo, CP 11400, Uruguay.

Primary cilia are conserved organelles that play crucial roles as mechano- and 
chemosensors, as well as transducing signaling cascades. Consequently, ciliary 
dysfunction results in a broad range of phenotypes: the ciliopathies. 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a model ciliopathy, is caused by mutations in 16 
known genes. However, the biochemical functions of the BBS proteins are not 
fully understood. Here we show that the BBS7 protein (localized in the 
centrosomes, basal bodies and cilia) probably has a nuclear role by virtue of 
the presence of a biologically confirmed nuclear export signal. Consistent with 
this observation, we show that BBS7 interacts physically with the polycomb group 
(PcG) member RNF2 and regulate its protein levels, probably through a 
proteasome-mediated mechanism. In addition, our data supports a similar role for 
other BBS proteins. Importantly, the interaction with this PcG member is 
biologically relevant because loss of BBS proteins leads to the aberrant 
expression of endogenous RNF2 targets in vivo, including several genes that are 
crucial for development and for cellular and tissue homeostasis. Our data 
indicate a hitherto unappreciated, direct role for the BBS proteins in 
transcriptional regulation and potentially expand the mechanistic spectrum that 
underpins the development of ciliary phenotypes in patients.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.089375
PMCID: PMC3283873
PMID: 22302990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
