---
pmid: '20169165'
title: SIRT1 negatively regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin.
authors:
- Ghosh HS
- McBurney M
- Robbins PD
journal: PLoS One
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2821410
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009199
---

# SIRT1 negatively regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin.
**Authors:** Ghosh HS, McBurney M, Robbins PD
**Journal:** PLoS One (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0009199](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009199)
**PMC:** [PMC2821410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2821410/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 15;5(2):e9199. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009199.

SIRT1 negatively regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin.

Ghosh HS(1), McBurney M, Robbins PD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The IGF/mTOR pathway, which is modulated by nutrients, growth factors, energy 
status and cellular stress regulates aging in various organisms. SIRT1 is a NAD+ 
dependent deacetylase that is known to regulate caloric restriction mediated 
longevity in model organisms, and has also been linked to the insulin/IGF 
signaling pathway. Here we investigated the potential regulation of mTOR 
signaling by SIRT1 in response to nutrients and cellular stress. We demonstrate 
that SIRT1 deficiency results in elevated mTOR signaling, which is not abolished 
by stress conditions. The SIRT1 activator resveratrol reduces, whereas SIRT1 
inhibitor nicotinamide enhances mTOR activity in a SIRT1 dependent manner. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate that SIRT1 interacts with TSC2, a component of the 
mTOR inhibitory-complex upstream to mTORC1, and regulates mTOR signaling in a 
TSC2 dependent manner. These results demonstrate that SIRT1 negatively regulates 
mTOR signaling potentially through the TSC1/2 complex.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009199
PMCID: PMC2821410
PMID: 20169165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
