---
pmid: '9228033'
title: Interaction of apolipoprotein J-amyloid beta-peptide complex with low density
  lipoprotein receptor-related protein-2/megalin. A mechanism to prevent pathological
  accumulation of amyloid beta-peptide.
authors:
- Hammad SM
- Ranganathan S
- Loukinova E
- Twal WO
- Argraves WS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18644
---

# Interaction of apolipoprotein J-amyloid beta-peptide complex with low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-2/megalin. A mechanism to prevent pathological accumulation of amyloid beta-peptide.
**Authors:** Hammad SM, Ranganathan S, Loukinova E, Twal WO, Argraves WS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.30.18644](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.30.18644)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 25;272(30):18644-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18644.

Interaction of apolipoprotein J-amyloid beta-peptide complex with low density 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein-2/megalin. A mechanism to prevent 
pathological accumulation of amyloid beta-peptide.

Hammad SM(1), Ranganathan S, Loukinova E, Twal WO, Argraves WS.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology and Anatomy Department, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, South Carolina 29425-2204, USA.

Apolipoprotein J (apoJ) has been shown to be the predominant amyloid 
beta-peptide (Abeta)-binding protein in cerebrospinal fluid. We have previously 
demonstrated that the endocytic receptor low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-2/megalin (LRP-2), which is expressed by choroid plexus 
epithelium and ependymal cells lining the brain ventricles and neural tube, 
binds and mediates cellular uptake of apoJ (Kounnas, M. Z., Loukinova, E. B., 
Stefansson, S., Harmony, J. A., Brewer, B., Strickland, D. K., and Argraves, W. 
S. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 13070-13075). In the present study, we evaluated 
the ability of apoJ to mediate binding of Abeta1-40-apoJ complex to LRP-2 in 
vitro. Immunoblot analysis showed that incubation of apoJ with Abeta1-40 
resulted in the formation of Abeta1-40-apoJ complex and the inhibition of the 
formation of Abeta1-40 aggregates. Using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
an estimated dissociation constant (Kd) of 4.8 nM was derived for the 
interaction between Abeta1-40 and apoJ. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was 
also used to study the interaction of the Abeta1-40-apoJ complex with LRP-2. The 
results showed that Abeta alone did not bind directly to LRP-2; however, when 
Abeta1-40 was combined with apoJ to form a complex, binding to LRP-2 took place. 
The binding interaction could be blocked by inclusion of the receptor-associated 
protein, an antagonist of apoJ binding to LRP-2. When LRP-2-expressing cells 
were given 125I-Abeta1-40, cellular uptake of the radiolabeled peptide was 
promoted by co-incubation with apoJ. When the cells were provided purified 
125I-Abeta1-40-apoJ complex, the complex was internalized and degraded, and both 
processes were inhibited with polyclonal LRP-2 antibodies. Furthermore, 
chloroquine treatment inhibited the cellular degradation of the complex. The 
data indicate that apoJ facilitates Abeta1-40 binding to LRP-2 and that the 
receptor mediates cellular clearance of Abeta1-40-apoJ complex leading to 
lysosomal degradation of Abeta1-40. The findings support the possibility that 
LRP-2 can act in vivo to mediate clearance of the complex from biological fluids 
such as cerebrospinal fluid and thereby play a role in the regulation of Abeta 
accumulation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18644
PMID: 9228033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
