---
pmid: '9748258'
title: Characterization of functional domains of an embryonic stem cell coactivator
  UTF1 which are conserved and essential for potentiation of ATF-2 activity.
authors:
- Fukushima A
- Okuda A
- Nishimoto M
- Seki N
- Hori TA
- Muramatsu M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.40.25840
---

# Characterization of functional domains of an embryonic stem cell coactivator UTF1 which are conserved and essential for potentiation of ATF-2 activity.
**Authors:** Fukushima A, Okuda A, Nishimoto M, Seki N, Hori TA, Muramatsu M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.40.25840](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.40.25840)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25840-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.40.25840.

Characterization of functional domains of an embryonic stem cell coactivator 
UTF1 which are conserved and essential for potentiation of ATF-2 activity.

Fukushima A(1), Okuda A, Nishimoto M, Seki N, Hori TA, Muramatsu M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Medical School, 38 Morohongo, Moroyama, 
Iruma-gun Saitama 350-0495, Japan.

We have recently cloned a cDNA encoding an embryonic stem cell transcriptional 
coactivator termed UTF1 from the mouse F9 teratocarcinoma cell line (Okuda, A., 
Fukushima, A., Nishimoto, M., Orimo, A., Yamagishi, T., Nabeshima, Y., Kuro-o, 
M., Nabeshima, Y., Boon, K., Keaveney, M., Stunnenberg, H.G., and Muramatsu, M. 
(1998) EMBO J. 17, 2019-2032). Here we have cloned a cDNA for human UTF1 and 
identified two highly conserved domains termed conserved domain (CD)1 and CD2. 
Human UTF1, like that of mouse, binds to ATF-2 and the mutagenesis analyses 
reveal that the leucine zipper motif within the CD2 of the UTF1 and metal 
binding motif of ATF-2 are involved in this interaction. The factor also binds 
to TATA-binding protein containing complex. By means of immunoprecipitation 
analysis, we mapped two domains which are independently able to bind to the 
complex. Importantly, both domains are located within the conserved domains (one 
in CD1 and the other in CD2). Furthermore, transient transfection analyses point 
out the importance of these domains for activating ATF-2. Thus, these results 
suggest that these two conserved domains identified here play important roles in 
activating specific transcription at least in part by supporting physical 
interaction between the upstream factor, ATF-2, and basal transcription 
machinery.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.40.25840
PMID: 9748258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
