---
pmid: '9427751'
title: AGO1 defines a novel locus of Arabidopsis controlling leaf development.
authors:
- Bohmert K
- Camus I
- Bellini C
- Bouchez D
- Caboche M
- Benning C
journal: EMBO J
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1170368
doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.1.170
---

# AGO1 defines a novel locus of Arabidopsis controlling leaf development.
**Authors:** Bohmert K, Camus I, Bellini C, Bouchez D, Caboche M, Benning C
**Journal:** EMBO J (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/17.1.170](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/17.1.170)
**PMC:** [PMC1170368](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170368/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1998 Jan 2;17(1):170-80. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.1.170.

AGO1 defines a novel locus of Arabidopsis controlling leaf development.

Bohmert K(1), Camus I, Bellini C, Bouchez D, Caboche M, Benning C.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Genbiologische Forschung Berlin GmbH, Ihnestrasse 63, D-14195
Berlin, Germany.

An allelic series of the novel argonaute mutant (ago1-1 to ago1-6) of the
herbaceous plant Arabidopsis thaliana has been isolated. The ago1 mutation
pleotropically affects general plant architecture. The apical shoot meristem
generates rosette leaves and a single stem, but axillary meristems rarely
develop. Rosette leaves lack a leaf blade but still show adaxial/abaxial
differentiation. Instead of cauline leaves, filamentous structures without
adaxial/abaxial differentiation develop along the stem and an abnormal
inflorescence bearing infertile flowers with filamentous organs is produced. Two
independent T-DNA insertions into the AGO1 locus led to the isolation of two
corresponding genomic sequences as well as a complete cDNA. The AGO1 locus was
mapped close to the marker mi291a on chromosome 1. Antisense expression of the
cDNA resulted in a partial mutant phenotype. Sense expression caused some
transgenic lines to develop goblet-like leaves and petals. The cDNA encodes a
putative 115 kDa protein with sequence similarity to translation products of a
novel gene family present in nematodes as well as humans. No specific function
has been assigned to these genes. Similar proteins are not encoded by the
genomes of yeast or bacteria, suggesting that AGO1 belongs to a novel class of
genes with a function specific to multicellular organisms.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.1.170
PMCID: PMC1170368
PMID: 9427751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
