---
pmid: '22157815'
title: The SNF2-like helicase HELLS mediates E2F3-dependent transcription and cellular
  transformation.
authors:
- von Eyss B
- Maaskola J
- Memczak S
- Möllmann K
- Schuetz A
- Loddenkemper C
- Tanh MD
- Otto A
- Muegge K
- Heinemann U
- Rajewsky N
- Ziebold U
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3280551
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.451
---

# The SNF2-like helicase HELLS mediates E2F3-dependent transcription and cellular transformation.
**Authors:** von Eyss B, Maaskola J, Memczak S, Möllmann K, Schuetz A, Loddenkemper C, Tanh MD, Otto A, Muegge K, Heinemann U, Rajewsky N, Ziebold U
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.451](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.451)
**PMC:** [PMC3280551](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3280551/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 15;31(4):972-85. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.451. Epub 2011 Dec
13.

The SNF2-like helicase HELLS mediates E2F3-dependent transcription and cellular 
transformation.

von Eyss B(1), Maaskola J, Memczak S, Möllmann K, Schuetz A, Loddenkemper C, 
Tanh MD, Otto A, Muegge K, Heinemann U, Rajewsky N, Ziebold U.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research, Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC), Berlin, 
Germany.

The activating E2F-transcription factors are best known for their dependence on 
the Retinoblastoma protein and their role in cellular proliferation. E2F3 is 
uniquely amplified in specific human tumours where its expression is inversely 
correlated with the survival of patients. Here, E2F3B interaction partners were 
identified by mass spectrometric analysis. We show that the SNF2-like helicase 
HELLS interacts with E2F3A in vivo and cooperates with its oncogenic functions. 
Depletion of HELLS severely perturbs the induction of E2F-target genes, hinders 
cell-cycle re-entry and growth. Using chromatin immmunoprecipitation coupled to 
sequencing, we identified genome-wide targets of HELLS and E2F3A/B. HELLS binds 
promoters of active genes, including the trithorax-related MLL1, and 
co-regulates E2F3-dependent genes. Strikingly, just as E2F3, HELLS is 
overexpressed in human tumours including prostate cancer, indicating that either 
factor may contribute to the malignant progression of tumours. Our work reveals 
that HELLS is important for E2F3 in tumour cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.451
PMCID: PMC3280551
PMID: 22157815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The activating E2F-transcription factors are best known for their dependence on the Retinoblastoma protein and their role in cellular proliferation. E2F3 is uniquely amplified in specific human tumours where its expression is inversely correlated with the survival of patients. Here, E2F3B interaction partners were identified by mass spectrometric analysis. We show that the SNF2-like helicase HELLS interacts with E2F3A in vivo and cooperates with its oncogenic functions. Depletion of HELLS severely perturbs the induction of E2F-target genes, hinders cell-cycle re-entry and growth. Using chromatin immmunoprecipitation coupled to sequencing, we identified genome-wide targets of HELLS and E2F3A/B. HELLS binds promoters of active genes, including the trithorax-related MLL1 , and co-regulates E2F3-dependent genes. Strikingly, just as E2F3, HELLS is overexpressed in human tumours including prostate cancer, indicating that either factor may contribute to the malignant progression of tumours. Our work reveals that HELLS is important for E2F3 in tumour cell proliferation.

Introduction

The E2F-transcription factor family is well conserved and widely known for its role in proliferation and cell-cycle progression ( van den Heuvel and Dyson, 2008 ). Among this family, E2F1–E2F3 are most intriguing, since these E2Fs directly associate with and are antagonized by the pRB (retinoblastoma) tumour suppressor protein ( Burkhart and Sage, 2008 ). Genetic mouse models provided first evidence that E2F3 largely contributes to pRb-attributed tumourigenic events, such as the reduction of Rb -deficient pituitary adenomas in E2F3-deficient mice ( Ziebold et al, 2003 ), but also preneoplastic lesions of the lung ( Parisi et al, 2007 ). In addition, the loss of E2F3, in combination with E2F1 and E2F2, reduces hyperplasia in intestinal epithelia ( Chong et al, 2009 ). Also in human patients, aberrant E2F3-expression was linked to cancer. In some of these tumours such as invasive urinary bladder carcinoma, it was suggested that the loss of pRB as well as amplification of E2F3 are obligate events for tumourigenesis ( Feber et al, 2004 ; Oeggerli et al, 2004 ; Hurst et al, 2008 ). In advanced prostate cancers, E2F3 is highly overexpressed and the highest E2F3 levels determine the worst clinical outcome for the patient ( Foster et al, 2004 ). Apart from inappropriate E2F3-expression, the whole pRB/E2F-pathway is regarded as being deregulated in nearly every human tumour ( Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011 ).

In the past, the transcriptional programmes of specific E2Fs were established after overexpression of E2Fs in mammalian cells and subsequent microarray ( DeGregori and Johnson, 2006 ). These analyses led to the identification of many DNA synthesis, checkpoint control, DNA repair and apoptosis-associated targets and suggested that there are similarities but also specificity among the individual E2Fs ( Kong et al, 2007 ). Using the more sophisticated chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays coupled to microarrays, it was concluded that there are functional overlaps between the E2Fs, but also that isoform-specific functions exist ( Takahashi et al, 2000 ; Ren et al, 2002 ; Asp et al, 2009 ). Owing to these studies many new E2F-targets were identified, but the impact of most targets for the oncogenic E2F function is still elusive.

Recently, more attempts were made to deconstruct the mechanistic basis of the pRB/E2F complex ( Blais and Dynlacht, 2007 ). Various molecules were identified that are tethered by pRB/E2F, acting both locally and globally, to modify the chromatin of E2F-dependent promoters. Most of the numerous pRB-interacting molecules, such as the histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 contribute to repression. pRB-tethered SUV39H1 leads to heterochromatinization and silencing of S-phase genes ( Nielsen et al, 2001 ; Narita et al, 2003 ). In order for a cell to proceed through the cell-cycle E2F-dependent promoters have to be inverted from this repressive chromatin state into a state favouring transcription. E2F1–E2F3 commence this transition by recruiting chromatin regulators such as HCF-1 in complex with the mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL1) protein that possess methyltransferase activity towards histone H3 lysine 4, H3K4 ( Tyagi et al, 2007 ). To alleviate the repressive state of the chromatin, HCF-1 also enlists the histone lysine demethylase PHF8 ( Liu et al, 2010 ). That a majority of promoters bound by PHF8 overlap with E2F-bound promoters was demonstrated by ChIP coupled with deep sequencing technology (ChIP-Seq). Anticipating that all molecules that assist the E2F-transactivating function or revert the state of the chromatin at E2F-dependent promoters harbour immense potential as drug targets in human tumours, we explored such molecules in the context of oncogenic E2F3.

Here, we identified the SNF2-like, ‘lymphoid-specific’ helicase HELLS (also called SMARCA6, PASG or LSH) as a novel E2F3-interaction partner. Previously, it was shown that HELLS is required for the silencing of constitutive heterochromatic regions such as retrotransposons or the pericentromer ( Dennis et al, 2001 ; Sun et al, 2004 ) via an interaction with DNA methyltransferases ( Myant and Stancheva, 2008 ). Now, we demonstrate that HELLS binds to E2F3 in vivo , aiding induction of E2F-target genes and cell-cycle re-entry. Furthermore, we provide evidence that HELLS, akin to E2F3, is overexpressed in several human tumours. In prostate carcinomas, HELLS/E2F3 co-expression is marking the most aggressive stages. The vast overlap of the identified co-bound promoters suggests that E2F3 and HELLS co-regulate target genes. Notably, a highly HELLS-enriched promoter is the trithorax-related MLL1 . We suggest that in cancer cells MLL1, that is important for histone methylation and activation of key cyclin genes, depends itself on E2F3:HELLS.

Discussion

In studies using knockout mice, E2f3 is considered the most critical E2f for the control of cellular proliferation, the induction of target genes but also survival ( Humbert et al, 2000 ; Tsai et al, 2008 ). Our screen for E2F3-interactors adds a new aspect: the SNF2-like helicase HELLS is specifically complexed to E2F3 in vivo but not to other E2Fs ( Figure 1G ), thus loss of HELLS, like E2F3, creates cell-cycle defects. We show that Hells binds well to either the E2F3A or the E2F3B isoform ( Figure 2A and C ), which is congruent with both isoforms contributing to G 1 /S-specific gene expression and proliferation ( Danielian et al, 2008 ; Chong et al, 2009 ). The E2F3 isoforms have different N-termini and are differentially regulated during the cell cycle ( Leone et al, 2000 ), but they have identical CC-domains and they have largely overlapping functions in vivo . HELLS depends on this E2F3-CC-domain for complex formation ( Figure 1G ). Murine cells deficient for E2f3a and E2f3b, as well as Hells mutant cells show inappropriate up-regulation of the p19 Arf –p53–p21 Cip1 network ( Fan et al, 2003 ; Aslanian et al, 2004 ). Although initially E2f3b was regarded to be the sole repressor of p19 Arf , this now seems incorrect ( Danielian et al, 2008 ). In this study, E2f3 ChIP-Seq data established with an antibody recognizing E2f3a and E2f3b show a large overlap with Hells-bound promoters. Importantly, this led to the identification of unanticipated, physiologically relevant E2f3:Hells ChIP-Seq targets (e.g., Kras or Mll1 ). By conventional ChIP and in the tag density representation ( Supplementary Figure S6 ), Hells was also detectable at classical E2f-targets (e.g., CCNA2 ), at mostly E2f3b-controlled promoters (p19 ARF and other CDK-inhibitors; Aslanian et al, 2004 ) as well as some of the classical Hells targets (as Hoxa5 ). The poor ChIP quality of E2f3 isoform-specific antibodies has precluded a more detailed analysis of isoform-specific target genes ( Aslanian et al, 2004 ; own observation).

Here, we propose that Hells largely aids E2f3a in the activation of specific target genes ( Figures 3C and 7B ). This is supported by the S-phase expression of Hells ( Figure 3C ), the ability to form ternary complexes with E2F3:DP2 (fostering the ability to bind to DNA), the largely overlapping target set, the presence of an E2F-like T[CG][CG]CGC motif in 74% of all Hells-bound promoters and the fact that a massive surge of E2F3A at E2F-promoters cannot compensate for the loss of HELLS in target gene and S-phase induction ( Figure 4C and D ). Our findings contrast that Hells acts solely as a repressor involved in long-term silencing of heterochromatic regions ( Huang et al, 2004 ) or Hox genes ( Xi et al, 2007 ). This is supported by the fact, that HELLS overexpression does not hinder cell-cycle re-entry ( Supplementary Figure S8 ). A positive role for Hells in aiding transactivation is also supported by the fact that most Hells-bound promoters overlap with the active H3K4me3 and not the repressive H3K27me3 histone mark. Intriguingly, HELLS binds via its N-terminus to E2F3 ( Figure 1D ), the same domain that is responsible for recruitment of the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B, which in turn is complexed with HDAC1/2 and DNMT1 to silence specific genomic targets ( Zhu et al, 2006 ; Myant and Stancheva, 2008 ; Myant et al, 2011 ). The fact that they bind to the same region of HELLS, may lead under physiological conditions to competition between E2F3 and the DNMT/HDAC complex for the available pools of HELLS for the co-recruitment to genes that are to be activated by E2F3A. This view is supported by the fact that E2F3 is hardly detected at certain HELLS/DNMT3B-bound Hox genes ( Xi et al, 2007 ) by ChIP assays ( Supplementary Table SIII ) and that HDAC1 can only be detected in quiescent cells at E2F-regulated promoters in a pocket protein-dependent manner ( Rayman et al, 2002 ). Since E2f3-loss might shift the equilibrium, we monitored Hells chromatin recruitment in cells devoid of E2f3 activity. In these cells, Hells still bound to a large set of promoters, but we did not observe a larger overlap to H3K27me3 as compared with WT cells. Importantly, we rather counted more than less Hells-bound promoters with the E2f3-like motif, 95% instead of 74% ( Supplementary Table SIV ). These findings are consistent with the idea that Hells chromatin association, for example, at classic Hox -regulatory elements, is not restrained by E2f3. The ChIP-Seq data support that Hells binds chromatin E2f3 independently, but we have indications suggesting that its chromosomal localization at some promoters is altered in the absence of E2f3 and/or loses part of the signal at the TSS in the case of Kras and Rnf146 ( Supplementary Figure S7G ). If Hells in conjunction with E2f3 changes its localization in a context-dependent manner, this could lend further support to the idea of Hells acting as a chromatin remodeller. In the future, it will be important to determine if and what kind of Hells-shifts can be found at specific promoters.

We are not adverse to the idea that Hells also acts as a repressor, since the ability to function as activator and repressor of transcription is also found for other SWI/SNF molecules ( Bell et al, 2011 ). Here, we imply a model based on the interplay between Hells and E2f3a/b in which the interaction of E2f3a/b and the promoter depends on its sequence (containing the E2f3-binding site) and this process coincides with Hells recruitment, facilitating transcriptional activation. It remains to be seen if Hells recruitment leads to a nucleosome sliding or if specific histone variants are involved to explain how transcription of genes such as Mll1 might be initiated within the cell cycle.

An important insight of our study is that E2F3:HELLS leads to sustained proliferation in human tumours. Consistent with this finding, we show that the elevated level of E2F3 is mirrored by high HELLS expression in specific human tumour entities ( Supplementary Figure S4A and B ), likely owing to the fact that HELLS itself is an E2F-target ( Supplementary Figure S4C–F ). Since the full E2F3-driven transformation capacity of prostate tumour cells also depends on HELLS, it is consistent with the high levels of E2F3:HELLS found marking the most advanced stages of prostate tumours. Combined, we infer that the E2F3:HELLS connection fuels the progression of tumours ( Figure 5 ), making HELLS an attractive therapeutic target. Interestingly, HELLS was recently identified as a progression marker in a rare human tumour ( Waseem et al, 2010 ). All our results combined, we present HELLS as a novel member of the pRB/E2F-pathway. The activity of HELLS plays a surprising positive role on E2F3-promoters to allow transcriptional activation and proliferation. This analysis is the first to link HELLS with E2F-controlled processes that are critical to establish a proliferative tumour circuitry. This study highlights that ChIP-Seq is the method of choice to obtain an unambiguous picture of the crosstalk between chromatin-associated factors. Among the many newly identified E2F3:HELLS target genes, a target such as MLL1 may provide a mechanistic explanation into the transformation and growth phenotypes of E2F3. Lastly, identifying HELLS as a partner of E2F3 might prove helpful in the development of new targets for future drug developments against specific E2F3-propelled malignancies.
