---
pmid: '11278996'
title: Heavy chain ferritin enhances serine hydroxymethyltransferase expression and
  de novo thymidine biosynthesis.
authors:
- Oppenheim EW
- Adelman C
- Liu X
- Stover PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100039200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Heavy chain ferritin enhances serine hydroxymethyltransferase expression and de novo thymidine biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Oppenheim EW, Adelman C, Liu X, Stover PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M100039200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M100039200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):19855-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M100039200. Epub
2001  Mar 12.

Heavy chain ferritin enhances serine hydroxymethyltransferase expression and de 
novo thymidine biosynthesis.

Oppenheim EW(1), Adelman C, Liu X, Stover PJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA.

We have elucidated a biochemical mechanism whereby changes in iron metabolism 
cause changes in folate-dependent one-carbon metabolism. Although animal and 
clinical studies have demonstrated that perturbations in iron status and 
metabolism alter folate metabolism, the biochemical mechanisms underlying these 
associations have yet to be identified. The effect of altered ferritin 
expression on folate metabolism was determined in human MCF-7 cells and SH-SY5Y 
neuroblastoma. Cells expressing rat heavy chain ferritin (HCF) exhibited 
markedly increased expression of the folate-dependent enzyme cytoplasmic serine 
hydroxymethyltransferase (cSHMT). These effects were not seen when rat light 
chain ferritin was expressed. Additionally, cSHMT expression was not altered 
when HCF expression was induced in MCF-7 cells cultured with supplemental ferric 
citrate. This indicates that cSHMT expression is increased by elevated HCF 
concentrations, independent of increased iron availability, suggesting that 
cSHMT expression may respond to HCF-induced chelation of the regulatory iron 
pool. Increased HCF expression did not alter cSHMT mRNA levels, but did increase 
translation rates of cSHMT mRNA. The increase in translation was mediated, at 
least in part, through the cSHMT 5'-untranslated region of the transcript. MCF-7 
cells with increased expression of cSHMT displayed increased efficiency of de 
novo thymidylate biosynthesis, indicating that thymidylate synthesis is normally 
limited by cSHMT activity in MCF-7 cells. Our data suggest that the iron 
regulatory pool may play an important role in regulating folate metabolism and 
thereby thymidine biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M100039200
PMID: 11278996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
