---
pmid: '26490168'
title: FancJ (Brip1) loss-of-function allele results in spermatogonial cell depletion
  during embryogenesis and altered processing of crossover sites during meiotic prophase
  I in mice.
authors:
- Sun X
- Brieño-Enríquez MA
- Cornelius A
- Modzelewski AJ
- Maley TT
- Campbell-Peterson KM
- Holloway JK
- Cohen PE
journal: Chromosoma
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5415080
doi: 10.1007/s00412-015-0549-2
---

# FancJ (Brip1) loss-of-function allele results in spermatogonial cell depletion during embryogenesis and altered processing of crossover sites during meiotic prophase I in mice.
**Authors:** Sun X, Brieño-Enríquez MA, Cornelius A, Modzelewski AJ, Maley TT, Campbell-Peterson KM, Holloway JK, Cohen PE
**Journal:** Chromosoma (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00412-015-0549-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00412-015-0549-2)
**PMC:** [PMC5415080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5415080/)

## Abstract

1. Chromosoma. 2016 Jun;125(2):237-52. doi: 10.1007/s00412-015-0549-2. Epub 2015 
Oct 21.

FancJ (Brip1) loss-of-function allele results in spermatogonial cell depletion 
during embryogenesis and altered processing of crossover sites during meiotic 
prophase I in mice.

Sun X(1), Brieño-Enríquez MA(1), Cornelius A(1), Modzelewski AJ(2), Maley TT(1), 
Campbell-Peterson KM(1), Holloway JK(1), Cohen PE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Reproductive Genomics, 
Cornell University, Tower Road, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Center for Reproductive Genomics, 
Cornell University, Tower Road, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. paula.cohen@cornell.edu.

Fancj, the gene associated with Fanconi anemia (FA) Complementation Group J, 
encodes a DNA helicase involved in homologous recombination repair and the 
cellular response to replication stress. FANCJ functions in part through its 
interaction with key DNA repair proteins, including MutL homolog-1 (MLH1), 
Breast Cancer Associated gene-1 (BRCA1), and Bloom syndrome helicase (BLM). All 
three of these proteins are involved in a variety of events that ensure genome 
stability, including the events of DNA double strand break (DSB) repair during 
prophase I of meiosis. Meiotic DSBs are repaired through homologous 
recombination resulting in non-crossovers (NCO) or crossovers (CO). The 
frequency and placement of COs are stringently regulated to ensure that each 
chromosome receives at least one CO event, and that longer chromosomes receive 
at least one additional CO, thus facilitating the accurate segregation of 
homologous chromosomes at the first meiotic division. In the present study, we 
investigated the role of Fancj during prophase I using a gene trap mutant 
allele. Fancj (GT/GT) mutants are fertile, but their testes are very much 
smaller than wild-type littermates, predominantly as a result of impeded 
spermatogonial proliferation and mildly increased apoptosis during testis 
development in the fetus. This defect in spermatogonial proliferation is 
consistent with mutations in other FA genes. During prophase I, early events of 
synapsis and DSB induction/repair appear mostly normal in Fancj (GT/GT) males, 
and the FANCJ-interacting protein BRCA1 assembles normally on meiotic chromosome 
cores. However, MLH1 focus frequency is increased in Fancj (GT/GT) males, 
indicative of increased DSB repair via CO, and is concomitant with increased 
chiasmata at diakinesis. This increase in COs in the absence of FANCJ is 
associated with increased localization of BLM helicase protein, indicating that 
BLM may facilitate the increased rate of crossing over in Fancj (GT/GT) males. 
Taken together, these results demonstrate a critical role for FANCJ in 
spermatogenesis at two stages: firstly in the proliferative activity that gives 
rise to the full complement of testicular spermatogonia and secondly in the 
establishment of appropriate CO numbers during prophase I.

DOI: 10.1007/s00412-015-0549-2
PMCID: PMC5415080
PMID: 26490168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest relating to the work described herein.
