---
pmid: '9642183'
title: Efflux pumps involved in toluene tolerance in Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.
authors:
- Ramos JL
- Duque E
- Godoy P
- Segura A
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC107285
doi: 10.1128/JB.180.13.3323-3329.1998
---

# Efflux pumps involved in toluene tolerance in Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.
**Authors:** Ramos JL, Duque E, Godoy P, Segura A
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.180.13.3323-3329.1998](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.180.13.3323-3329.1998)
**PMC:** [PMC107285](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC107285/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1998 Jul;180(13):3323-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.180.13.3323-3329.1998.

Efflux pumps involved in toluene tolerance in Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E.

Ramos JL(1), Duque E, Godoy P, Segura A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology of Plants, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientifícas, Granada, Spain. 
jlramos@eez.csic.es

The basic mechanisms underlying solvent tolerance in Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E 
are efflux pumps that remove the solvent from bacterial cell membranes. The 
solvent-tolerant P. putida DOT-T1E grows in the presence of high concentrations 
(e.g., 1% [vol/vol]) of toluene and octanol. Growth of P. putida DOT-T1E cells 
in LB in the presence of toluene supplied via the gas phase has a clear effect 
on cell survival: the sudden addition of 0.3% (vol/vol) toluene to P. putida 
DOT-T1E pregrown with toluene in the gas phase resulted in survival of almost 
100% of the initial cell number, whereas only 0.01% of cells pregrown in the 
absence of toluene tolerated exposure to this aromatic hydrocarbon. One class of 
toluene-sensitive octanol-tolerant mutant was isolated after Tn5-'phoA 
mutagenesis of wild-type P. putida DOT-T1E cells. The mutant, called P. putida 
DOT-T1E-18, was extremely sensitive to 0.3% (vol/vol) toluene added when cells 
were pregrown in the absence of toluene, whereas pregrowth on toluene supplied 
via the gas phase resulted in survival of about 0.0001% of the initial number. 
Solvent exclusion was tested with 1,2,4-[14C]trichlorobenzene. The levels of 
radiochemical accumulated in wild-type cells grown in the absence and in the 
presence of toluene were not significantly different. In contrast, the mutant 
was unable to remove 1,2,4-[14C]trichlorobenzene from the cell membranes when 
grown on Luria-Bertani (LB) medium but was able to remove the aromatic compound 
when pregrown on LB medium with toluene supplied via the gas phase. The amount 
of 14C-labeled substrate in whole cells increased in competition assays in which 
toluene-and xylenes were the unlabeled competitors, whereas this was not the 
case when benzene was the competitor. This finding suggests that the exclusion 
system works specifically with certain aromatic substrates. The mutation in P. 
putida DOT-T1E-18 was cloned, and the knockedout gene was sequenced and found to 
be homologous to the drug exclusion gene mexB, which belongs to the efflux pump 
family of the resistant nodulator division type.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.180.13.3323-3329.1998
PMCID: PMC107285
PMID: 9642183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
