---
pmid: '20354142'
title: Proteomic identification of sorting nexin 6 as a negative regulator of BACE1-mediated
  APP processing.
authors:
- Okada H
- Zhang W
- Peterhoff C
- Hwang JC
- Nixon RA
- Ryu SH
- Kim TW
journal: FASEB J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2909280
doi: 10.1096/fj.09-146357
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Proteomic identification of sorting nexin 6 as a negative regulator of BACE1-mediated APP processing.
**Authors:** Okada H, Zhang W, Peterhoff C, Hwang JC, Nixon RA, Ryu SH, Kim TW
**Journal:** FASEB J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.09-146357](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.09-146357)
**PMC:** [PMC2909280](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2909280/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2010 Aug;24(8):2783-94. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-146357. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

Proteomic identification of sorting nexin 6 as a negative regulator of 
BACE1-mediated APP processing.

Okada H(1), Zhang W, Peterhoff C, Hwang JC, Nixon RA, Ryu SH, Kim TW.

Author information:
(1)Integrated Program in Cellular, Molecular, and Biophysical Studies, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

The beta-site APP cleaving enzyme-1 (BACE1) mediates the first cleavage of the 
beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) to yield the amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta), 
a key pathogenic agent in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Using a proteomic approach 
based on in-cell chemical cross-linking and tandem affinity purification (TAP), 
we herein identify sorting nexin 6 (SNX6) as a BACE1-associated protein. SNX6, a 
PX domain protein, is a putative component of retromer, a multiprotein cargo 
complex that mediates the retrograde trafficking of the cation-independent 
mannose-6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) and sortilin. RNA interference suppression 
of SNX6 increased BACE1-dependent secretion of soluble APP (sAPPbeta) and 
cell-associated fragments (C99), resulting in increased Abeta secretion. 
Furthermore, SNX6 reduction led to elevated steady-state BACE1 levels as well as 
increased retrograde transport of BACE1 in the endocytic pathway, suggesting 
that SNX6 modulates the retrograde trafficking and basal levels of BACE1, 
thereby regulating BACE1-mediated APP processing and Abeta biogenesis. Our study 
identifies a novel cellular pathway by which SNX6 negatively modulates 
BACE1-mediated cleavage of APP.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.09-146357
PMCID: PMC2909280
PMID: 20354142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
