---
pmid: '14704433'
title: RNAi-mediated targeting of heterochromatin by the RITS complex.
authors:
- Verdel A
- Jia S
- Gerber S
- Sugiyama T
- Gygi S
- Grewal SI
- Moazed D
journal: Science
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3244756
doi: 10.1126/science.1093686
---

# RNAi-mediated targeting of heterochromatin by the RITS complex.
**Authors:** Verdel A, Jia S, Gerber S, Sugiyama T, Gygi S, Grewal SI, Moazed D
**Journal:** Science (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1093686](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1093686)
**PMC:** [PMC3244756](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3244756/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2004 Jan 30;303(5658):672-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1093686. Epub 2004 
Jan 2.

RNAi-mediated targeting of heterochromatin by the RITS complex.

Verdel A(1), Jia S, Gerber S, Sugiyama T, Gygi S, Grewal SI, Moazed D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Science. 2013 Oct 11;342(6155):193.

RNA interference (RNAi) is a widespread silencing mechanism that acts at both 
the posttranscriptional and transcriptional levels. Here, we describe the 
purification of an RNAi effector complex termed RITS (RNA-induced initiation of 
transcriptional gene silencing) that is required for heterochromatin assembly in 
fission yeast. The RITS complex contains Ago1 (the fission yeast Argonaute 
homolog), Chp1 (a heterochromatin-associated chromodomain protein), and Tas3 (a 
novel protein). In addition, the complex contains small RNAs that require the 
Dicer ribonuclease for their production. These small RNAs are homologous to 
centromeric repeats and are required for the localization of RITS to 
heterochromatic domains. The results suggest a mechanism for the role of the 
RNAi machinery and small RNAs in targeting of heterochromatin complexes and 
epigenetic gene silencing at specific chromosomal loci.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1093686
PMCID: PMC3244756
PMID: 14704433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

RNA interference (RNAi) is a widespread silencing mechanism that acts at both the posttranscriptional and transcriptional levels. Here, we describe the purification of an RNAi effector complex termed RITS (RNA-induced initiation of transcriptional gene silencing) that is required for heterochromatin assembly in fission yeast. The RITS complex contains Ago1 (the fission yeast Argonaute homolog), Chp1 (a heterochromatin-associated chromodomain protein), and Tas3 (a novel protein). In addition, the complex contains small RNAs that require the Dicer ribonuclease for their production. These small RNAs are homologous to centromeric repeats and are required for the localization of RITS to heterochromatic domains. The results suggest a mechanism for the role of the RNAi machinery and small RNAs in targeting of heterochromatin complexes and epigenetic gene silencing at specific chromosomal loci.
