---
pmid: '16365045'
title: The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 interacts with glycogen
  synthase kinase 3 and attenuates activity.
authors:
- Mi K
- Dolan PJ
- Johnson GV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M508657200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 interacts with glycogen synthase kinase 3 and attenuates activity.
**Authors:** Mi K, Dolan PJ, Johnson GV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M508657200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M508657200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 24;281(8):4787-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M508657200. Epub
2005  Dec 19.

The low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 interacts with glycogen 
synthase kinase 3 and attenuates activity.

Mi K(1), Dolan PJ, Johnson GV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0017, USA.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) is a widely expressed Ser/Thr protein kinase 
that phosphorylates numerous substrates. This large number of substrates 
requires precise and specific regulation of GSK3 activity, which is achieved by 
a combination of phosphorylation, localization, and interactions with 
GSK3-binding proteins. Members of the Wnt canonical pathway have been shown to 
influence GSK3 activity. Through a yeast two-hybrid screen, we identified the 
Wnt canonical pathway co-receptor protein low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) as a GSK3-binding protein. The interaction 
between the C terminus of LRP6 and GSK3 was also confirmed by in vitro GST 
pull-down assays and in situ coimmunoprecipitation assays. In vitro assays using 
immunoprecipitated proteins demonstrated that the C terminus of LRP6 
significantly attenuated the activity of GSK3beta. In situ, LRP6 significantly 
decreased GSK3beta-mediated phosphorylation of tau at both primed and unprimed 
sites. Finally, it was also demonstrated that GSK3beta phosphorylates the 
PPP(S/T)P motifs in the C terminus of LRP6. This is the first identification of 
a direct interaction between LRP6 and GSK3, which results in an attenuation of 
GSK3 activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M508657200
PMID: 16365045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
