---
pmid: '11093761'
title: Molecular and functional characterization of HSC54, a novel variant of human
  heat-shock cognate protein 70.
authors:
- Tsukahara F
- Yoshioka T
- Muraki T
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1124/mol.58.6.1257
---

# Molecular and functional characterization of HSC54, a novel variant of human heat-shock cognate protein 70.
**Authors:** Tsukahara F, Yoshioka T, Muraki T
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1124/mol.58.6.1257](https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.58.6.1257)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Dec;58(6):1257-63. doi: 10.1124/mol.58.6.1257.

Molecular and functional characterization of HSC54, a novel variant of human 
heat-shock cognate protein 70.

Tsukahara F(1), Yoshioka T, Muraki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, School of 
Medicine, 8-1, Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

A novel variant of human heat-shock cognate protein 70 (HSC70) transcript, named 
heat-shock cognate protein 54 (HSC54), was identified and characterized. The 
transcript encodes the protein lacking 153 amino acid residues of HSC70 in a 
part of the protein-binding and variable domains, resulting in a calculated 
molecular mass of 53.5 kDa. HSC54 mRNA was detected in all human cells and 
tissues examined. The protein was also detected in peripheral mononuclear cells 
and U937 human histiocytic lymphoma cells. Heat treatment of U937 cells 
up-regulated the expression of HSC54. The chaperoning activity of HSC54 was 
examined by luciferase renaturation assay. HSC70 recovered the luciferase 
activity in the presence of reticulocyte lysate as a source of cochaperones. 
However, HSC54 did not facilitate the recovery of denatured luciferase; besides, 
HSC54 significantly inhibited the HSC70-mediated chaperoning activity. In 
pull-down experiments, HSC54 interacted with cochaperones, p60, HSP40, and p48, 
as HSC70 did. The resonant mirror detection analysis showed that p60 binds to 
HSC54 with a higher association rate constant than HSC70 with a similar affinity 
constant. These results suggest that HSC54 is constitutively expressed and also 
inducible by stress and may function as an endogenous inhibitory regulator of 
HSC70 by competing the cochaperones.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.58.6.1257
PMID: 11093761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
