---
reference_id: PMID:22833285
title: Differential phosphorylation of thylakoid proteins in mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts from maize plants grown under low or high light.
authors:
- Fristedt R
- Wasilewska W
- Romanowska E
- Vener AV
journal: Proteomics
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200196
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential phosphorylation of thylakoid proteins in mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts from maize plants grown under low or high light.
**Authors:** Fristedt R, Wasilewska W, Romanowska E, Vener AV
**Journal:** Proteomics (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.201200196](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201200196)

## Content

1. Proteomics. 2012 Sep;12(18):2852-61. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200196. Epub 2012
Aug  28.

Differential phosphorylation of thylakoid proteins in mesophyll and bundle 
sheath chloroplasts from maize plants grown under low or high light.

Fristedt R(1), Wasilewska W, Romanowska E, Vener AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, 
Linköping, Sweden.

In C4 plants, such as maize, the photosynthetic apparatus is partitioned over 
two cell types called mesophyll (M) and bundle sheath (BS), which have different 
structure and specialization of the photosynthetic thylakoid membranes. We 
characterized protein phosphorylation in thylakoids of the two cell types from 
maize grown under either low or high light. Western blotting with 
phosphothreonine antibodies and ProQ phosphostaining detected light-dependent 
changes in the protein phosphorylation patterns. LC-MS/MS with alternating CID 
and electron transfer dissociation sequencing of peptide ions mapped 15 protein 
phosphorylation sites. Phosphorylated D2, CP29, CP26, Lhcb2 proteins, and 
ATPsynthase were found only in M membranes. A previously unknown phosphorylation 
site was mapped in phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase from the BS cells. 
Phosphorylation stoichiometry was calculated from the ratios of normalized ion 
currents for phosphorylated to nonphosphorylated peptide pairs from the D1, D2, 
CP43, and PbsH proteins of photosystem II (PSII). Every PSII in M thylakoids 
contained on average 1.5 ± 0.1 or 2.3 ± 0.2 phosphoryl groups in plants grown 
under either low or high light, while in BS membranes the corresponding numbers 
were 0.25 ± 0.1 or 0.7 ± 0.2, respectively. It is suggested that the 
phosphorylation level, as well as turnover of PSII depend on the structure of 
thylakoids.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.201200196
PMID: 22833285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]