---
pmid: '21081126'
title: Anti-apoptotic protein TCTP controls the stability of the tumor suppressor
  p53.
authors:
- Rho SB
- Lee JH
- Park MS
- Byun HJ
- Kang S
- Seo SS
- Kim JY
- Park SY
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.014
---

# Anti-apoptotic protein TCTP controls the stability of the tumor suppressor p53.
**Authors:** Rho SB, Lee JH, Park MS, Byun HJ, Kang S, Seo SS, Kim JY, Park SY
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.014)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2011 Jan 3;585(1):29-35. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.014. Epub 
2010 Nov 17.

Anti-apoptotic protein TCTP controls the stability of the tumor suppressor p53.

Rho SB(1), Lee JH, Park MS, Byun HJ, Kang S, Seo SS, Kim JY, Park SY.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Ilsandong-gu, Goyang-si 
Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea. sbrho@ncc.re.kr

In this study, we identified p53 as a novel TCTP-interacting protein using TCTP 
as bait. Also, we determined the critical binding sites between TCTP and p53. To 
elucidate the functional consequence of the interaction, we developed the 
overexpression and inhibition system of TCTP and p53 expression. Overexpression 
of TCTP in lung carcinoma cells reversed p53 mediated apoptosis and inhibition 
of TCTP expression by small interfering RNA increased apoptosis of lung 
carcinoma cells. Moreover, it was observed that TCTP overexpression promotes 
degradation of p53. These results clearly indicate that the interaction between 
TCTP and p53 prevents apoptosis by destabilizing p53. Thus, TCTP acts as a 
negative regulator of apoptosis in lung cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.11.014
PMID: 21081126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
