---
pmid: '15166214'
title: Cross-talk between thiamin diphosphate binding and phosphorylation loop conformation
  in human branched-chain alpha-keto acid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Li J
- Wynn RM
- Machius M
- Chuang JL
- Karthikeyan S
- Tomchick DR
- Chuang DT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403611200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cross-talk between thiamin diphosphate binding and phosphorylation loop conformation in human branched-chain alpha-keto acid decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Li J, Wynn RM, Machius M, Chuang JL, Karthikeyan S, Tomchick DR, Chuang DT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M403611200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M403611200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 30;279(31):32968-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403611200. Epub 
2004 May 27.

Cross-talk between thiamin diphosphate binding and phosphorylation loop 
conformation in human branched-chain alpha-keto acid 
decarboxylase/dehydrogenase.

Li J(1), Wynn RM, Machius M, Chuang JL, Karthikeyan S, Tomchick DR, Chuang DT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.

The decarboxylase/dehydrogenase (E1b) component of the 4-megadalton human 
branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKD) metabolic machine is a 
thiamin diphosphate (ThDP)-dependent enzyme with a heterotetrameric 
cofactor-binding fold. The E1b component catalyzes the decarboxylation of 
alpha-keto acids and the subsequent reductive acylation of the lipoic 
acid-bearing domain (LBD) from the 24-meric transacylase (E2b) core. In the 
present study, we show that the binding of cofactor ThDP to the E1b active site 
induces a disorder-to-order transition of the conserved phosphorylation loop 
carrying the two phosphorylation sites Ser(292)-alpha and Ser(302)-alpha, as 
deduced from the 1.80-1.85 A apoE1b and holoE1b structures. The induced loop 
conformation is essential for the recognition of lipoylated LBD to initiate 
E1b-catalyzed reductive acylation. Alterations of invariant Arg(287)-alpha, 
Asp(295)-alpha, Tyr(300)-alpha, and Arg(301)-alpha that form a hydrogen-bonding 
network in the phosphorylation loop result in the disordering of the loop 
conformation as elucidated by limited proteolysis, accompanied by the impaired 
binding and diminished reductive acylation of lipoylated LBD. In contrast, 
k(cat) values for E1b-catalyzed decarboxylation of the alpha-keto acid are 
higher in these E1b mutants than in wild-type E1b, with higher K(m) values for 
the substrate in the mutants. ThDP binding that orders the loop prevents 
phosphorylation of E1b by the BCKD kinase and averts the inactivation of 
wild-type E1b, but not the above mutants, by this covalent modification. Our 
results establish that the cross-talk between the bound ThDP and the 
phosphorylation loop conformation serves as a feed-forward switch for multiple 
reaction steps in the BCKD metabolic machine.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M403611200
PMID: 15166214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
