---
pmid: '15110721'
title: Sox1 acts through multiple independent pathways to promote neurogenesis.
authors:
- Kan L
- Israsena N
- Zhang Z
- Hu M
- Zhao LR
- Jalali A
- Sahni V
- Kessler JA
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.005
---

# Sox1 acts through multiple independent pathways to promote neurogenesis.
**Authors:** Kan L, Israsena N, Zhang Z, Hu M, Zhao LR, Jalali A, Sahni V, Kessler JA
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.005)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2004 May 15;269(2):580-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.005.

Sox1 acts through multiple independent pathways to promote neurogenesis.

Kan L(1), Israsena N, Zhang Z, Hu M, Zhao LR, Jalali A, Sahni V, Kessler JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University's Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611-3008, USA. 1-kan@northwestern.edu

Although Sox1, Sox2, and Sox3 are all part of the Sox-B1 group of 
transcriptional regulators, only Sox1 appears to play a direct role in neural 
cell fate determination and differentiation. We find that overexpression of Sox1 
but not Sox2 or Sox3 in cultured neural progenitor cells is sufficient to induce 
neuronal lineage commitment. Sox1 binds directly to the Hes1 promoter and 
suppresses Hes1 transcription, thus attenuating Notch signaling. Sox1 also binds 
to beta-catenin and suppresses beta-catenin-mediated TCF/LEF signaling, thus 
potentially attenuating the wnt signaling pathway. The C-terminus of Sox1 is 
required for both of these interactions. Sox1 also promotes exit of cells from 
cell cycle and up-regulates transcription of the proneural bHLH transcription 
factor neurogenin 1 (ngn1). These observations suggest that Sox1 works through 
multiple independent pathways to promote neuronal cell fate determination and 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.02.005
PMID: 15110721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
