---
pmid: '11438326'
title: 'Concentrations of angiogenic factors in follicular fluid and oocyte-cumulus
  complex culture medium from women undergoing in vitro fertilization: association
  with oocyte maturity and fertilization.'
authors:
- Malamitsi-Puchner A
- Sarandakou A
- Baka SG
- Tziotis J
- Rizos D
- Hassiakos D
- Creatsas G
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0015-0282(01)01854-4
---

# Concentrations of angiogenic factors in follicular fluid and oocyte-cumulus complex culture medium from women undergoing in vitro fertilization: association with oocyte maturity and fertilization.
**Authors:** Malamitsi-Puchner A, Sarandakou A, Baka SG, Tziotis J, Rizos D, Hassiakos D, Creatsas G
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0015-0282(01)01854-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0015-0282(01)01854-4)

## Abstract

1. Fertil Steril. 2001 Jul;76(1):98-101. doi: 10.1016/s0015-0282(01)01854-4.

Concentrations of angiogenic factors in follicular fluid and oocyte-cumulus 
complex culture medium from women undergoing in vitro fertilization: association 
with oocyte maturity and fertilization.

Malamitsi-Puchner A(1), Sarandakou A, Baka SG, Tziotis J, Rizos D, Hassiakos D, 
Creatsas G.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Athens, Athens, 
Greece.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the concentration of angiogenic factors (vascular 
endothelial growth factor [VEGF], basic fibroblast growth factor [bFGF], and 
angiogenin) in the follicular fluid (FF) and oocyte-cumulus complex culture 
medium (CM) of women undergoing IVF and to investigate the association of the 
concentrations with the maturity and fertilization of the oocyte.
DESIGN: Prospective study.
SETTING: Academic tertiary-care institution.
PATIENT(S): IVF patients with unexplained or tubal factor infertility.
INTERVENTION(S): Analysis of VEGF, bFGF, and angiogenin FF and CM 
concentrations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Oocyte maturity and fertilization and FF and CM 
angiogenic factor concentrations.
RESULT(S): VEGF, bFGF, and angiogenin were determined in FF and CM. FF 
angiogenin concentrations were significantly higher when the oocyte was mature 
versus immature. CM VEGF concentrations were significantly higher when the 
oocyte was nonfertilized versus fertilized. Positive correlations were observed 
between angiogenic factors in CM.
CONCLUSION(S): VEGF, bFGF, and angiogenin (determined for the first time) are 
secreted in the FF and CM. Elevated CM VEGF concentrations, probably implying 
oocyte-cumulus complex hypoxia, are negatively associated with oocyte 
fertilization. Elevated FF angiogenin concentrations are positively associated 
with oocyte maturity, possibly indicating angiogenin's biological role beyond 
neovascularization.

DOI: 10.1016/s0015-0282(01)01854-4
PMID: 11438326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
