---
pmid: '16037417'
title: Effects of telomerase and telomere length on epidermal stem cell behavior.
authors:
- Flores I
- Cayuela ML
- Blasco MA
journal: Science
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1115025
---

# Effects of telomerase and telomere length on epidermal stem cell behavior.
**Authors:** Flores I, Cayuela ML, Blasco MA
**Journal:** Science (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1115025](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1115025)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2005 Aug 19;309(5738):1253-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1115025. Epub 2005
 Jul 21.

Effects of telomerase and telomere length on epidermal stem cell behavior.

Flores I(1), Cayuela ML, Blasco MA.

Author information:
(1)Telomeres and Telomerase Group, Molecular Oncology Program, Spanish National 
Cancer Centre (CNIO), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, Madrid E-28029, Spain.

A key process in organ homeostasis is the mobilization of stem cells out of 
their niches. We show through analysis of mouse models that telomere length, as 
well as the catalytic component of telomerase, Tert, are critical determinants 
in the mobilization of epidermal stem cells. Telomere shortening inhibited 
mobilization of stem cells out of their niche, impaired hair growth, and 
resulted in suppression of stem cell proliferative capacity in vitro. In 
contrast, Tert overexpression in the absence of changes in telomere length 
promoted stem cell mobilization, hair growth, and stem cell proliferation in 
vitro. The effects of telomeres and telomerase on stem cell biology anticipate 
their role in cancer and aging.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1115025
PMID: 16037417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
