---
pmid: '12483226'
title: IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice.
authors:
- Holzenberger M
- Dupont J
- Ducos B
- Leneuve P
- Géloën A
- Even PC
- Cervera P
- Le Bouc Y
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature01298
---

# IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice.
**Authors:** Holzenberger M, Dupont J, Ducos B, Leneuve P, Géloën A, Even PC, Cervera P, Le Bouc Y
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01298](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01298)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Jan 9;421(6919):182-7. doi: 10.1038/nature01298. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice.

Holzenberger M(1), Dupont J, Ducos B, Leneuve P, Géloën A, Even PC, Cervera P, 
Le Bouc Y.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U515, Hôpital 
Saint-Antoine, 75571 Paris 12, France. holzenberger@st-antoine.inserm.fr

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Jan 9;421(6919):125-6. doi: 10.1038/421125a.

Studies in invertebrates have led to the identification of a number of genes 
that regulate lifespan, some of which encode components of the insulin or 
insulin-like signalling pathways. Examples include the related tyrosine kinase 
receptors InR (Drosophila melanogaster) and DAF-2 (Caenorhabditis elegans) that 
are homologues of the mammalian insulin-like growth factor type 1 receptor 
(IGF-1R). To investigate whether IGF-1R also controls longevity in mammals, we 
inactivated the IGF-1R gene in mice (Igf1r). Here, using heterozygous knockout 
mice because null mutants are not viable, we report that Igf1r(+/-) mice live on 
average 26% longer than their wild-type littermates (P < 0.02). Female 
Igf1r(+/-) mice live 33% longer than wild-type females (P < 0.001), whereas the 
equivalent male mice show an increase in lifespan of 16%, which is not 
statistically significant. Long-lived Igf1r(+/-) mice do not develop dwarfism, 
their energy metabolism is normal, and their nutrient uptake, physical activity, 
fertility and reproduction are unaffected. The Igf1r(+/-) mice display greater 
resistance to oxidative stress, a known determinant of ageing. These results 
indicate that the IGF-1 receptor may be a central regulator of mammalian 
lifespan.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01298
PMID: 12483226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
