---
pmid: '24218572'
title: CDK10/cyclin M is a protein kinase that controls ETS2 degradation and is deficient
  in STAR syndrome.
authors:
- Guen VJ
- Gamble C
- Flajolet M
- Unger S
- Thollet A
- Ferandin Y
- Superti-Furga A
- Cohen PA
- Meijer L
- Colas P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3845122
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1306814110
---

# CDK10/cyclin M is a protein kinase that controls ETS2 degradation and is deficient in STAR syndrome.
**Authors:** Guen VJ, Gamble C, Flajolet M, Unger S, Thollet A, Ferandin Y, Superti-Furga A, Cohen PA, Meijer L, Colas P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1306814110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1306814110)
**PMC:** [PMC3845122](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3845122/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19525-30. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1306814110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

CDK10/cyclin M is a protein kinase that controls ETS2 degradation and is 
deficient in STAR syndrome.

Guen VJ(1), Gamble C, Flajolet M, Unger S, Thollet A, Ferandin Y, Superti-Furga 
A, Cohen PA, Meijer L, Colas P.

Author information:
(1)P2I2 Group, Protein Phosphorylation and Human Disease Unit, Station 
Biologique, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Unité de 
Service et de Recherche USR3151, 29680 Roscoff, France.

Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) regulate a variety of fundamental cellular 
processes. CDK10 stands out as one of the last orphan CDKs for which no 
activating cyclin has been identified and no kinase activity revealed. Previous 
work has shown that CDK10 silencing increases ETS2 (v-ets erythroblastosis virus 
E26 oncogene homolog 2)-driven activation of the MAPK pathway, which confers 
tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells. The precise mechanisms by which 
CDK10 modulates ETS2 activity, and more generally the functions of CDK10, remain 
elusive. Here we demonstrate that CDK10 is a cyclin-dependent kinase by 
identifying cyclin M as an activating cyclin. Cyclin M, an orphan cyclin, is the 
product of FAM58A, whose mutations cause STAR syndrome, a human developmental 
anomaly whose features include toe syndactyly, telecanthus, and anogenital and 
renal malformations. We show that STAR syndrome-associated cyclin M mutants are 
unable to interact with CDK10. Cyclin M silencing phenocopies CDK10 silencing in 
increasing c-Raf and in conferring tamoxifen resistance to breast cancer cells. 
CDK10/cyclin M phosphorylates ETS2 in vitro, and in cells it positively controls 
ETS2 degradation by the proteasome. ETS2 protein levels are increased in cells 
derived from a STAR patient, and this increase is attributable to decreased 
cyclin M levels. Altogether, our results reveal an additional regulatory 
mechanism for ETS2, which plays key roles in cancer and development. They also 
shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying STAR syndrome.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1306814110
PMCID: PMC3845122
PMID: 24218572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
