---
pmid: '3302682'
title: Complex interactions among members of an essential subfamily of hsp70 genes
  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Werner-Washburne M
- Stone DE
- Craig EA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC365392
doi: 10.1128/mcb.7.7.2568-2577.1987
---

# Complex interactions among members of an essential subfamily of hsp70 genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Werner-Washburne M, Stone DE, Craig EA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.7.7.2568-2577.1987](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.7.7.2568-2577.1987)
**PMC:** [PMC365392](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC365392/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 Jul;7(7):2568-77. doi: 10.1128/mcb.7.7.2568-2577.1987.

Complex interactions among members of an essential subfamily of hsp70 genes in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Werner-Washburne M, Stone DE, Craig EA.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae contains a large family of genes related to hsp70, the 
major heat shock-inducible gene of Drosophila melanogaster. One subfamily, 
identified by sequence homology, contains four genes, SSA1, SSA2, SSA3, and SSA4 
(formerly YG100, YG102, YG106, and YG107, respectively). Previous studies showed 
that strains containing mutations in SSA1 and SSA2 are temperature sensitive for 
growth. SSA4, which is normally heat inducible and not expressed during 
vegetative growth, is expressed at high levels in ssa1 ssa2 strains at 23 
degrees C. We constructed mutations in SSA3 and SSA4 and analyzed strains 
carrying mutations in the four genes. Strains carrying mutations in SSA3 SSA4 or 
SSA3 and SSA4 were indistinguishable from the wild type. However, ssa1 ssa2 ssa4 
strains were inviable. SSA3, like SSA4, is a heat-inducible gene that is not 
normally expressed at 23 degrees C. Nevertheless, an intact copy of SSA3 
regulated by the constitutive SSA2 promoter was capable of rescuing a ssa1 ssa2 
ssa4 strain. This indicates that SSA3 encodes a functional protein and that the 
SSA1, SSA2, SSA3, and SSA4 gene products are functionally similar.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.7.7.2568-2577.1987
PMCID: PMC365392
PMID: 3302682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
