---
pmid: '17803946'
title: HMGB1 is a cofactor in mammalian base excision repair.
authors:
- Prasad R
- Liu Y
- Deterding LJ
- Poltoratsky VP
- Kedar PS
- Horton JK
- Kanno S
- Asagoshi K
- Hou EW
- Khodyreva SN
- Lavrik OI
- Tomer KB
- Yasui A
- Wilson SH
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2799894
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.029
---

# HMGB1 is a cofactor in mammalian base excision repair.
**Authors:** Prasad R, Liu Y, Deterding LJ, Poltoratsky VP, Kedar PS, Horton JK, Kanno S, Asagoshi K, Hou EW, Khodyreva SN, Lavrik OI, Tomer KB, Yasui A, Wilson SH
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.029)
**PMC:** [PMC2799894](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2799894/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Sep 7;27(5):829-41. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.029.

HMGB1 is a cofactor in mammalian base excision repair.

Prasad R(1), Liu Y, Deterding LJ, Poltoratsky VP, Kedar PS, Horton JK, Kanno S, 
Asagoshi K, Hou EW, Khodyreva SN, Lavrik OI, Tomer KB, Yasui A, Wilson SH.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Structural Biology, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Deoxyribose phosphate (dRP) removal by DNA polymerase beta (Pol beta) is a 
pivotal step in base excision repair (BER). To identify BER cofactors, 
especially those with dRP lyase activity, we used a Pol beta null cell extract 
and BER intermediate as bait for sodium borohydride crosslinking. Mass 
spectrometry identified the high-mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) as 
specifically interacting with the BER intermediate. Purified HMGB1 was found to 
have weak dRP lyase activity and to stimulate AP endonuclease and FEN1 
activities on BER substrates. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed 
interactions of HMGB1 with known BER enzymes, and GFP-tagged HMGB1 was found to 
accumulate at sites of oxidative DNA damage in living cells. HMGB1(-/-) mouse 
cells were slightly more resistant to MMS than wild-type cells, probably due to 
the production of fewer strand-break BER intermediates. The results suggest 
HMGB1 is a BER cofactor capable of modulating BER capacity in cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.029
PMCID: PMC2799894
PMID: 17803946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
