---
pmid: '38264852'
title: 'GADD45A: With or without you.'
authors:
- Palomer X
- Salvador JM
- Griñán-Ferré C
- Barroso E
- Pallàs M
- Vázquez-Carrera M
journal: Med Res Rev
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/med.22015
---

# GADD45A: With or without you.
**Authors:** Palomer X, Salvador JM, Griñán-Ferré C, Barroso E, Pallàs M, Vázquez-Carrera M
**Journal:** Med Res Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/med.22015](https://doi.org/10.1002/med.22015)

## Abstract

1. Med Res Rev. 2024 Jul;44(4):1375-1403. doi: 10.1002/med.22015. Epub 2024 Jan
24.

GADD45A: With or without you.

Palomer X(1)(2)(3)(4), Salvador JM(5), Griñán-Ferré C(1)(6)(7), Barroso 
E(1)(2)(3)(4), Pallàs M(1)(6)(7), Vázquez-Carrera M(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutic Chemistry, Faculty of 
Pharmacy and Food Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute of Biomedicine of the University of Barcelona (IBUB), University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Spanish Biomedical Research Center in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic 
Diseases (CIBERDEM)-Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Pediatric Research Institute-Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de 
Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC, 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de Barcelona (NeuroUB), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(7)Spanish Biomedical Research Center in Neurodegenerative Diseases 
(CIBERNED)-Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

The growth arrest and DNA damage inducible (GADD)45 family includes three small 
and ubiquitously distributed proteins (GADD45A, GADD45B, and GADD45G) that 
regulate numerous cellular processes associated with stress signaling and injury 
response. Here, we provide a comprehensive review of the current literature 
investigating GADD45A, the first discovered member of the family. We first 
depict how its levels are regulated by a myriad of genotoxic and non-genotoxic 
stressors, and through the combined action of intricate transcriptional, 
posttranscriptional, and even, posttranslational mechanisms. GADD45A is a 
recognized tumor suppressor and, for this reason, we next summarize its role in 
cancer, as well as the different mechanisms by which it regulates cell cycle, 
DNA repair, and apoptosis. Beyond these most well-known actions, GADD45A may 
also influence catabolic and anabolic pathways in the liver, adipose tissue and 
skeletal muscle, among others. Not surprisingly, GADD45A may trigger 
AMP-activated protein kinase activity, a master regulator of metabolism, and is 
known to act as a transcriptional coregulator of numerous nuclear receptors. 
GADD45A has also been reported to display a cytoprotective role by regulating 
inflammation, fibrosis and oxidative stress in several organs and tissues, and 
is regarded an important contributor for the development of heart failure. 
Overall data point to that GADD45A may play an important role in metabolic, 
neurodegenerative and cardiovascular diseases, and also autoimmune-related 
disorders. Thus, the potential mechanisms by which dysregulation of GADD45A 
activity may contribute to the progression of these diseases are also reviewed 
below.

© 2024 The Authors. Medicinal Research Reviews published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/med.22015
PMID: 38264852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
