---
pmid: '12782624'
title: Heparan sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase is essential for muscle development in
  zebrafish.
authors:
- Bink RJ
- Habuchi H
- Lele Z
- Dolk E
- Joore J
- Rauch GJ
- Geisler R
- Wilson SW
- den Hertog J
- Kimata K
- Zivkovic D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M213124200
---

# Heparan sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase is essential for muscle development in zebrafish.
**Authors:** Bink RJ, Habuchi H, Lele Z, Dolk E, Joore J, Rauch GJ, Geisler R, Wilson SW, den Hertog J, Kimata K, Zivkovic D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M213124200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M213124200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):31118-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M213124200. Epub 
2003 Jun 1.

Heparan sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase is essential for muscle development in 
zebrafish.

Bink RJ(1), Habuchi H, Lele Z, Dolk E, Joore J, Rauch GJ, Geisler R, Wilson SW, 
den Hertog J, Kimata K, Zivkovic D.

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, 
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans function in development and disease. They consist 
of a core protein with attached heparan sulfate chains that are altered by a 
series of carbohydrate-modifying enzymes and sulfotransferases. Here, we report 
on the identification and characterization of a gene encoding zebrafish heparan 
sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase (hs6st) that shows high homology to other heparan 
sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferases. When expressed as a fusion protein in cultured 
cells, the protein shows specific 6-O-sulfotransferase activity and 
preferentially acts on the iduronosyl N-sulfoglycosamine. In the developing 
embryo, hs6st is expressed in the brain, the somites, and the fins; the same 
structures that were affected upon morpholino-mediated functional knockdown. 
Morpholino injections significantly inhibited 6-O- but not 2-O-sulfation as 
assessed by HPLC. Morphants display disturbed somite specification independent 
of the somite oscillator mechanism and have impaired muscle differentiation. In 
conclusion, our results show that transfer of sulfate to specific positions on 
glycosaminoglycans is essential for muscle development.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M213124200
PMID: 12782624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
