---
pmid: '10973252'
title: Mutations in ATP6N1B, encoding a new kidney vacuolar proton pump 116-kD subunit,
  cause recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with preserved hearing.
authors:
- Smith AN
- Skaug J
- Choate KA
- Nayir A
- Bakkaloglu A
- Ozen S
- Hulton SA
- Sanjad SA
- Al-Sabban EA
- Lifton RP
- Scherer SW
- Karet FE
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/79208
---

# Mutations in ATP6N1B, encoding a new kidney vacuolar proton pump 116-kD subunit, cause recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with preserved hearing.
**Authors:** Smith AN, Skaug J, Choate KA, Nayir A, Bakkaloglu A, Ozen S, Hulton SA, Sanjad SA, Al-Sabban EA, Lifton RP, Scherer SW, Karet FE
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/79208](https://doi.org/10.1038/79208)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Sep;26(1):71-5. doi: 10.1038/79208.

Mutations in ATP6N1B, encoding a new kidney vacuolar proton pump 116-kD subunit, 
cause recessive distal renal tubular acidosis with preserved hearing.

Smith AN(1), Skaug J, Choate KA, Nayir A, Bakkaloglu A, Ozen S, Hulton SA, 
Sanjad SA, Al-Sabban EA, Lifton RP, Scherer SW, Karet FE.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Molecular Mechanisms in Disease, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The multi-subunit H+-ATPase pump is present at particularly high density on the 
apical (luminal) surface of -intercalated cells of the cortical collecting duct 
of the distal nephron, where vectorial proton transport is required for urinary 
acidification. The complete subunit composition of the apical ATPase, however, 
has not been fully agreed upon. Functional failure of -intercalated cells 
results in a group of disorders, the distal renal tubular acidoses (dRTA), whose 
features include metabolic acidosis accompanied by disturbances of potassium 
balance, urinary calcium solubility, bone physiology and growth. Mutations in 
the gene encoding the B-subunit of the apical pump (ATP6B1) cause dRTA 
accompanied by deafness. We previously localized a gene for dRTA with preserved 
hearing to 7q33-34 (ref. 4). We report here the identification of this gene, 
ATP6N1B, which encodes an 840 amino acid novel kidney-specific isoform of 
ATP6N1A, the 116-kD non-catalytic accessory subunit of the proton pump. 
Northern-blot analysis demonstrated ATP6N1B expression in kidney but not other 
main organs. Immunofluorescence studies in human kidney cortex revealed that 
ATP6N1B localizes almost exclusively to the apical surface of -intercalated 
cells. We screened nine dRTA kindreds with normal audiometry that linked to the 
ATP6N1B locus, and identified different homozygous mutations in ATP6N1B in 
eight. These include nonsense, deletion and splice-site changes, all of which 
will truncate the protein. Our findings identify a new kidney-specific proton 
pump 116-kD accessory subunit that is highly expressed in proton-secreting cells 
in the distal nephron, and illustrate its essential role in normal vectorial 
acid transport into the urine by the kidney.

DOI: 10.1038/79208
PMID: 10973252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
