---
pmid: '21536907'
title: Structural context for mobilization of a human tRNA synthetase from its cytoplasmic
  complex.
authors:
- Fang P
- Zhang HM
- Shapiro R
- Marshall AG
- Schimmel P
- Yang XL
- Guo M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3100937
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1100224108
---

# Structural context for mobilization of a human tRNA synthetase from its cytoplasmic complex.
**Authors:** Fang P, Zhang HM, Shapiro R, Marshall AG, Schimmel P, Yang XL, Guo M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1100224108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1100224108)
**PMC:** [PMC3100937](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3100937/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 17;108(20):8239-44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1100224108. Epub 2011 May 2.

Structural context for mobilization of a human tRNA synthetase from its 
cytoplasmic complex.

Fang P(1), Zhang HM, Shapiro R, Marshall AG, Schimmel P, Yang XL, Guo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Scripps 
Florida, 130 Scripps Way, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

Human lysyl-tRNA synthetase is bound to the multi-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC) 
that maintains and regulates the aminoacylation and nuclear functions of LysRS. 
The p38 scaffold protein binds LysRS to the MSC and, only with the appropriate 
cue, mobilizes LysRS for redirection to the nucleus to interact with the 
microphthalmia associated transcription factor (MITF). In recent work, an 
(α(2))(2) LysRS tetramer crystallized to yield a high-resolution structure and 
raised the question of how LysRS is arranged (dimer or tetramer) in the MSC to 
interact with p38. To understand the structural organization of the LysRS-p38 
complex that regulates LysRS mobilization, we investigated the complex by use of 
small angle X-ray scattering and hydrogen-deuterium exchange with mass 
spectrometry in solution. The structure revealed a surprising α(2)β(1):β(1)α(2) 
organization in which a dimeric p38 scaffold holds two LysRS α(2) dimers in a 
parallel configuration. Each of the N-terminal 48 residues of p38 binds one 
LysRS dimer and, in so doing, brings two copies of the LysRS dimer into the MSC. 
The results suggest that this unique geometry, which reconfigures the LysRS 
tetramer from α(2):α(2) to α(2)β(1):β(1)α(2), is designed to control both 
retention and mobilization of LysRS from the MSC.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1100224108
PMCID: PMC3100937
PMID: 21536907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
