---
pmid: '23182941'
title: A novel ER-localized transmembrane protein, EMC6, interacts with RAB5A and
  regulates cell autophagy.
authors:
- Li Y
- Zhao Y
- Hu J
- Xiao J
- Qu L
- Wang Z
- Ma D
- Chen Y
journal: Autophagy
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3552880
doi: 10.4161/auto.22742
---

# A novel ER-localized transmembrane protein, EMC6, interacts with RAB5A and regulates cell autophagy.
**Authors:** Li Y, Zhao Y, Hu J, Xiao J, Qu L, Wang Z, Ma D, Chen Y
**Journal:** Autophagy (2013)
**DOI:** [10.4161/auto.22742](https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.22742)
**PMC:** [PMC3552880](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3552880/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2013 Feb 1;9(2):150-63. doi: 10.4161/auto.22742. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

A novel ER-localized transmembrane protein, EMC6, interacts with RAB5A and 
regulates cell autophagy.

Li Y(1), Zhao Y, Hu J, Xiao J, Qu L, Wang Z, Ma D, Chen Y.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology, Ministry of Health, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Autophagy is mediated by a unique organelle, the autophagosome, which encloses a 
portion of the cytoplasm for delivery to the lysosome. Phosphatidylinositol 
3-phosphate (PtdIns3P) produced by the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PtdIns3K) complex is essential for canonical autophagosome formation. RAB5A, a 
small GTPase localized to early endosomes, has been shown to associate with the 
class III PtdIns3K complex, regulate its activity and promote autophagosome 
formation. However, little is known about how endosome-localized RAB5A functions 
with the class III PtdIns3K complex. Here we identified a novel endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER)-localized transmembrane protein, ER membrane protein complex 
subunit 6 (EMC6), which interacted with both RAB5A and BECN1/Beclin 1 and 
colocalized with the omegasome marker ZFYVE1/DFCP1. It was shown to regulate 
autophagosome formation, and its deficiency caused the accumulation of 
autophagosomal precursor structures and impaired autophagy. Our study showed for 
the first time that EMC6 is a novel regulator involved in autophagy.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.22742
PMCID: PMC3552880
PMID: 23182941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
