---
pmid: '18782771'
title: The STAT3 NH2-terminal domain stabilizes enhanceosome assembly by interacting
  with the p300 bromodomain.
authors:
- Hou T
- Ray S
- Lee C
- Brasier AR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2576556
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805941200
---

# The STAT3 NH2-terminal domain stabilizes enhanceosome assembly by interacting with the p300 bromodomain.
**Authors:** Hou T, Ray S, Lee C, Brasier AR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M805941200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M805941200)
**PMC:** [PMC2576556](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2576556/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30725-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805941200. Epub
2008  Sep 9.

The STAT3 NH2-terminal domain stabilizes enhanceosome assembly by interacting 
with the p300 bromodomain.

Hou T(1), Ray S, Lee C, Brasier AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas 77555-1060, USA.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a latent 
transcription factor mainly activated by the interleukin-6 cytokine family. 
Previous studies have shown that activated STAT3 recruits p300, a coactivator 
whose intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity is essential for 
transcription. Here we investigated the function of the STAT3 NH(2)-terminal 
domain and how its interaction with p300 regulates STAT3 signal transduction. In 
STAT3(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts, a stably expressed NH(2) 
terminus-deficient STAT3 mutant (STAT3-DeltaN) was unable to efficiently induce 
either STAT3-mediated reporter activity or endogenous mRNA expression. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays were performed to determine whether the 
NH(2)-terminal domain regulates p300 recruitment or stabilizes enhanceosome 
assembly. Despite equivalent levels of STAT3 binding, cells expressing the 
STAT3-DeltaN mutant were unable to recruit p300 and RNA polymerase II to the 
native socs3 promoter as efficiently as those expressing STAT3-full length. We 
previously reported that the STAT3 NH(2)-terminal domain is acetylated by p300 
at Lys-49 and Lys-87. By introducing K49R/K87R mutations, here we found that the 
acetylation status of the STAT3 NH(2)-terminal domain regulates its interaction 
with p300. In addition, the STAT3 NH(2)-terminal binding site maps to the p300 
bromodomain, a region spanning from amino acids 995 to 1255. Finally a p300 
mutant lacking the bromodomain (p300-DeltaB) exhibited a weaker binding to 
STAT3, and the enhanceosome formation on the socs3 promoter was inhibited when 
p300-DeltaB was overexpressed. Taken together, our data suggest that the STAT3 
NH(2)-terminal domain plays an important role in the interleukin-6 signaling 
pathway by interacting with the p300 bromodomain, thereby stabilizing 
enhanceosome assembly.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M805941200
PMCID: PMC2576556
PMID: 18782771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
