---
pmid: '35387802'
title: Biallelic CFAP61 variants cause male infertility in humans and mice with severe
  oligoasthenoteratozoospermia.
authors:
- Hu T
- Meng L
- Tan C
- Luo C
- He WB
- Tu C
- Zhang H
- Du J
- Nie H
- Lu GX
- Lin G
- Tan YQ
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108249
---

# Biallelic CFAP61 variants cause male infertility in humans and mice with severe oligoasthenoteratozoospermia.
**Authors:** Hu T, Meng L, Tan C, Luo C, He WB, Tu C, Zhang H, Du J, Nie H, Lu GX, Lin G, Tan YQ
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108249](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108249)

## Abstract

1. J Med Genet. 2023 Feb;60(2):144-153. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108249. Epub 
2022 Apr 6.

Biallelic CFAP61 variants cause male infertility in humans and mice with severe 
oligoasthenoteratozoospermia.

Hu T(#)(1), Meng L(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Tan C(1), Luo C(1), He WB(1)(2)(3)(4), Tu 
C(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang H(1)(2)(3)(4), Du J(1)(2)(3)(4), Nie H(2)(3), Lu 
GX(2)(3)(4), Lin G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Tan YQ(6)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Reproduction and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science,Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)Genetic Center, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-Xiangya, Changsha, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Clinical Research Center for Reproduction and Genetics in Hunan Province, 
Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(4)NHC key laboratory of human stem cell and reproductive engineering, Changsha, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, People's Republic 
of China.
(6)Institute of Reproduction and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical 
Science,Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China 
tanyueqiu@csu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The genetic causes for most male infertility due to severe 
oligoasthenoteratozoospermia (OAT) remain unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the genetic cause of male infertility characterised by 
OAT.
METHODS: Variant screening was performed by whole-exome sequencing from 325 
infertile patients with OAT and 392 fertile individuals. In silico and in vitro 
analyses were performed to evaluate the impacts of candidate disease-causing 
variants. A knockout mouse model was generated to confirm the candidate 
disease-causing gene, and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) was used to 
evaluate the efficiency of clinical treatment.
RESULTS: We identified biallelic CFAP61 variants (NM_015585.4: c.1654C>T 
(p.R552C) and c.2911G>A (p.D971N), c.144-2A>G and c.1666G>A (p.G556R)) in two 
(0.62%) of the 325 OAT-affected men. In silico bioinformatics analysis predicted 
that all four variants were deleterious, and in vitro functional analysis 
confirmed the deleterious effects of the mutants. Notably, H&E staining and 
electron microscopy analyses of the spermatozoa revealed multiple morphological 
abnormalities of sperm flagella, the absence of central pair microtubules and 
mitochondrial sheath malformation in sperm flagella from man with CFAP61 
variants. Further immunofluorescence assays revealed markedly reduced CFAP61 
staining in the sperm flagella. In addition, Cfap61-deficient mice showed the 
OAT phenotype, suggesting that loss of function of CFAP61 was the cause of OAT. 
Two individuals accepted ICSI therapy using their own ejaculated sperm, and one 
of them succeeded in fathering a healthy baby.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that CFAP61 is essential for spermatogenesis 
and that biallelic CFAP61 variants lead to male infertility in humans and mice 
with OAT.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2021-108249
PMID: 35387802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
