---
pmid: '15491368'
title: The ColR-ColS two-component signal transduction system is involved in regulation
  of Tn4652 transposition in Pseudomonas putida under starvation conditions.
authors:
- Hõrak R
- Ilves H
- Pruunsild P
- Kuljus M
- Kivisaar M
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04311.x
---

# The ColR-ColS two-component signal transduction system is involved in regulation of Tn4652 transposition in Pseudomonas putida under starvation conditions.
**Authors:** Hõrak R, Ilves H, Pruunsild P, Kuljus M, Kivisaar M
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04311.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04311.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2004 Nov;54(3):795-807. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04311.x.

The ColR-ColS two-component signal transduction system is involved in regulation 
of Tn4652 transposition in Pseudomonas putida under starvation conditions.

Hõrak R(1), Ilves H, Pruunsild P, Kuljus M, Kivisaar M.

Author information:
(1)Estonian Biocentre and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu 
University, 51010 Tartu, Estonia. rhoarak@ebc.ee

Bacteria use two-component signal transduction pathways to sense both 
extracellular and intracellular environment and to coordinate cellular events 
according to changing conditions. Adaptation can be either physiological or 
genetical. Here, we present evidence that a genome reorganization process such 
as transposition can be controlled by certain environmental cues sensed by a 
two-component signal transduction system. We demonstrate that 
transposition-dependent accumulation of phenol-utilizing mutants is severely 
decreased in Pseudomonas putida defective in a two-component system colRS. 
Translocation of Tn4652 is decreased both in colR- and colS-defective strains, 
indicating that signal transduction from a histidine kinase ColS to a response 
regulator ColR is necessary for the activation of Tn4652 in bacteria starving on 
phenol. However, overexpression of ColR in a colS-defective strain restores 
Tn4652 transposition, suggesting that absence of the signal from ColS can be 
compensated by an elevated amount of ColR. In vitro analysis of purified ColR 
and ColS proteins evidenced that they constitute a functional phosphorelay. 
Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that a conserved H221 can be the 
phosphoryl-accepting residue in ColS and that aspartate residues D8 and D51 of 
ColR are necessary for the phosphotransfer from ColS to ColR. To our knowledge, 
Tn4652 is the first bacterial transposon regulated by a two-component system. 
This finding indicates that transpositional activity can respond to signals 
sensed and processed by the host.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04311.x
PMID: 15491368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
