---
pmid: '21791287'
title: Endocytosis promotes rapid dopaminergic signaling.
authors:
- Kotowski SJ
- Hopf FW
- Seif T
- Bonci A
- von Zastrow M
journal: Neuron
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3417347
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.036
---

# Endocytosis promotes rapid dopaminergic signaling.
**Authors:** Kotowski SJ, Hopf FW, Seif T, Bonci A, von Zastrow M
**Journal:** Neuron (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.036)
**PMC:** [PMC3417347](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3417347/)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2011 Jul 28;71(2):278-90. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.036.

Endocytosis promotes rapid dopaminergic signaling.

Kotowski SJ(1), Hopf FW, Seif T, Bonci A, von Zastrow M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA.

D(1) dopamine receptors are primary mediators of dopaminergic signaling in the 
CNS. These receptors internalize rapidly following agonist-induced activation, 
but the functional significance of this process is unknown. We investigated D(1) 
receptor endocytosis and signaling in HEK293 cells and cultured striatal neurons 
using real-time fluorescence imaging and cAMP biosensor technology. 
Agonist-induced activation of D(1) receptors promoted endocytosis of receptors 
with a time course overlapping that of acute cAMP accumulation. Inhibiting 
receptor endocytosis blunted acute D(1) receptor-mediated signaling in both 
dissociated cells and striatal slice preparations. Although endocytic inhibition 
markedly attenuated acute cAMP accumulation, inhibiting the subsequent recycling 
of receptors had no effect. Further, D(1) receptors localized in close proximity 
to endomembrane-associated trimeric G protein and adenylyl cyclase immediately 
after endocytosis. Together, these results suggest a previously unanticipated 
role of endocytosis, and the early endocytic pathway, in supporting rapid 
dopaminergic neurotransmission.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.05.036
PMCID: PMC3417347
PMID: 21791287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
