---
pmid: '30880001'
title: Maturation and Clearance of Autophagosomes in Neurons Depends on a Specific
  Cysteine Protease Isoform, ATG-4.2.
authors:
- Kargbo-Hill SE
- Kauffman KJ
- Krout M
- Richmond JE
- Melia TJ
- Colón-Ramos DA
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6482087
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.02.013
---

# Maturation and Clearance of Autophagosomes in Neurons Depends on a Specific Cysteine Protease Isoform, ATG-4.2.
**Authors:** Kargbo-Hill SE, Kauffman KJ, Krout M, Richmond JE, Melia TJ, Colón-Ramos DA
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2019.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2019.02.013)
**PMC:** [PMC6482087](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6482087/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2019 Apr 22;49(2):251-266.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.02.013.
Epub  2019 Mar 14.

Maturation and Clearance of Autophagosomes in Neurons Depends on a Specific 
Cysteine Protease Isoform, ATG-4.2.

Kargbo-Hill SE(1), Kauffman KJ(2), Krout M(3), Richmond JE(3), Melia TJ(2), 
Colón-Ramos DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Program in Cellular Neuroscience, 
Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL 60607, USA.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Program in Cellular Neuroscience, 
Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA; Instituto de Neurobiología, Recinto de Ciencias Médicas, 
Universidad de Puerto Rico, 201 Blvd del Valle, San Juan 00901, Puerto Rico. 
Electronic address: daniel.colon-ramos@yale.edu.

In neurons, defects in autophagosome clearance have been associated with 
neurodegenerative disease. Yet, the mechanisms that coordinate trafficking and 
clearance of synaptic autophagosomes are poorly understood. Here, we use genetic 
screens and in vivo imaging in single neurons of C. elegans to identify 
mechanisms necessary for clearance of synaptic autophagosomes. We observed that 
autophagy at the synapse can be modulated in vivo by the state of neuronal 
activity, that autophagosomes undergo UNC-16/JIP3-mediated retrograde transport, 
and that autophagosomes containing synaptic material mature in the cell body. 
Through forward genetic screens, we then determined that autophagosome 
maturation in the cell body depends on the protease ATG-4.2, but not the related 
ATG-4.1, and that ATG-4.2 can cleave LGG-1/Atg8/GABARAP from membranes. Our 
studies revealed that ATG-4.2 is specifically necessary for the maturation and 
clearance of autophagosomes and that defects in transport and ATG-4.2-mediated 
maturation genetically interact to enhance abnormal accumulation of 
autophagosomes in neurons.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.02.013
PMCID: PMC6482087
PMID: 30880001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.
