---
pmid: '10413469'
title: Spt16 and Pob3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae form an essential, abundant heterodimer
  that is nuclear, chromatin-associated, and copurifies with DNA polymerase alpha.
authors:
- Wittmeyer J
- Joss L
- Formosa T
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi982851d
---

# Spt16 and Pob3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae form an essential, abundant heterodimer that is nuclear, chromatin-associated, and copurifies with DNA polymerase alpha.
**Authors:** Wittmeyer J, Joss L, Formosa T
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi982851d](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi982851d)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jul 13;38(28):8961-71. doi: 10.1021/bi982851d.

Spt16 and Pob3 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae form an essential, abundant 
heterodimer that is nuclear, chromatin-associated, and copurifies with DNA 
polymerase alpha.

Wittmeyer J(1), Joss L, Formosa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84132, USA.

Previously we showed that the yeast proteins Spt16 (Cdc68) and Pob3 are 
physically associated, and interact physically and genetically with the 
catalytic subunit of DNA polymerase alpha, Pol1 [Wittmeyer and Formosa (1997) 
Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 4178-4190]. Here we show that purified Spt16 and Pob3 form 
a stable, abundant, elongated heterodimer and provide evidence that this is the 
functional form of these proteins. Genetic interactions between mutations in 
SPT16 and POB3 support the importance of the Spt16-Pob3 interaction in vivo. 
Spt16, Pob3, and Pol1 proteins were all found to localize to the nucleus in S. 
cerevisiae. A portion of the total cellular Spt16-Pob3 was found to be 
chromatin-associated, consistent with the proposed roles in modulating chromatin 
function. Some of the Spt16-Pob3 complex was found to copurify with the yeast 
DNA polymerase alpha/primase complex, further supporting a connection between 
Spt16-Pob3 and DNA replication.

DOI: 10.1021/bi982851d
PMID: 10413469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
