---
pmid: '11316806'
title: Amyloid-beta induces chemotaxis and oxidant stress by acting at formylpeptide
  receptor 2, a G protein-coupled receptor expressed in phagocytes and brain.
authors:
- Tiffany HL
- Lavigne MC
- Cui YH
- Wang JM
- Leto TL
- Gao JL
- Murphy PM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101031200
---

# Amyloid-beta induces chemotaxis and oxidant stress by acting at formylpeptide receptor 2, a G protein-coupled receptor expressed in phagocytes and brain.
**Authors:** Tiffany HL, Lavigne MC, Cui YH, Wang JM, Leto TL, Gao JL, Murphy PM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M101031200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M101031200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23645-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M101031200. Epub 
2001 Apr 20.

Amyloid-beta induces chemotaxis and oxidant stress by acting at formylpeptide 
receptor 2, a G protein-coupled receptor expressed in phagocytes and brain.

Tiffany HL(1), Lavigne MC, Cui YH, Wang JM, Leto TL, Gao JL, Murphy PM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Signaling and Genetic Immunotherapy Sections, Laboratory of Host 
Defenses, NIAID, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20982, USA.

Amyloid-beta, the pathologic protein in Alzheimer's disease, induces chemotaxis 
and production of reactive oxygen species in phagocytic cells, but mechanisms 
have not been fully defined. Here we provide three lines of evidence that the 
phagocyte G protein-coupled receptor (N-formylpeptide receptor 2 (FPR2)) 
mediates these amyloid-beta-dependent functions in phagocytic cells. First, 
transfection of FPR2, but not related receptors, including the other known 
N-formylpeptide receptor FPR, reconstituted amyloid-beta-dependent chemotaxis 
and calcium flux in HEK 293 cells. Second, amyloid-beta induced both calcium 
flux and chemotaxis in mouse neutrophils (which express endogenous FPR2) with 
similar potency as in FPR2-transfected HEK 293 cells. This activity could be 
specifically desensitized in both cell types by preincubation with a specific 
FPR2 agonist, which desensitizes the receptor, or with pertussis toxin, which 
uncouples it from G(i)-dependent signaling. Third, specific and reciprocal 
desensitization of superoxide production was observed when N-formylpeptides and 
amyloid-beta were used to sequentially stimulate neutrophils from FPR -/- mice, 
which express FPR2 normally. Potential biological relevance of these results to 
the neuroinflammation associated with Alzheimer's disease was suggested by two 
additional findings: first, FPR2 mRNA could be detected by PCR in mouse brain; 
second, induction of FPR2 expression correlated with induction of calcium flux 
and chemotaxis by amyloid-beta in the mouse microglial cell line N9. Further, in 
sequential stimulation experiments with N9 cells, N-formylpeptides and 
amyloid-beta were able to reciprocally cross-desensitize each other. 
Amyloid-beta was also a specific agonist at the human counterpart of FPR2, the 
FPR-like 1 receptor. These results suggest a unified signaling mechanism for 
linking amyloid-beta to phagocyte chemotaxis and oxidant stress in the brain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M101031200
PMID: 11316806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
