---
pmid: '19686689'
title: Wnt2/2b and beta-catenin signaling are necessary and sufficient to specify
  lung progenitors in the foregut.
authors:
- Goss AM
- Tian Y
- Tsukiyama T
- Cohen ED
- Zhou D
- Lu MM
- Yamaguchi TP
- Morrisey EE
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2763331
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.005
---

# Wnt2/2b and beta-catenin signaling are necessary and sufficient to specify lung progenitors in the foregut.
**Authors:** Goss AM, Tian Y, Tsukiyama T, Cohen ED, Zhou D, Lu MM, Yamaguchi TP, Morrisey EE
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.005)
**PMC:** [PMC2763331](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2763331/)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2009 Aug;17(2):290-8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.005.

Wnt2/2b and beta-catenin signaling are necessary and sufficient to specify lung 
progenitors in the foregut.

Goss AM(1), Tian Y, Tsukiyama T, Cohen ED, Zhou D, Lu MM, Yamaguchi TP, Morrisey 
EE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Patterning of the primitive foregut promotes appropriate organ specification 
along its anterior-posterior axis. However, the molecular pathways specifying 
foregut endoderm progenitors are poorly understood. We show here that Wnt2/2b 
signaling is required to specify lung endoderm progenitors within the anterior 
foregut. Embryos lacking Wnt2/2b expression exhibit complete lung agenesis and 
do not express Nkx2.1, the earliest marker of the lung endoderm. In contrast, 
other foregut endoderm-derived organs, including the thyroid, liver, and 
pancreas, are correctly specified. The phenotype observed is recapitulated by an 
endoderm-restricted deletion of beta-catenin, demonstrating that Wnt2/2b 
signaling through the canonical Wnt pathway is required to specify lung endoderm 
progenitors within the foregut. Moreover, activation of canonical 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling results in the reprogramming of esophagus and stomach 
endoderm to a lung endoderm progenitor fate. Together, these data reveal that 
canonical Wnt2/2b signaling is required for the specification of lung endoderm 
progenitors in the developing foregut.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.06.005
PMCID: PMC2763331
PMID: 19686689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The primitive foregut is patterned in a manner that spatially promotes proper organ specification along the anterior-posterior foregut axis. However, the molecular pathways that specify foregut endoderm progenitors are poorly understood. We show that Wnt2/2b signaling is required to specify lung endoderm progenitors within the anterior foregut. Embryos lacking Wnt2/2b expression exhibit complete lung agenesis and do not express Nkx2.1, the earliest marker of the lung endoderm. In contrast, other foregut endoderm derived organs including the thyroid, liver, and pancreas are correctly specified in Wnt2/2b null animals. We show that this phenotype is recapitulated by an endoderm restricted deletion of β-catenin, demonstrating that Wnt2/2b signaling through the canonical Wnt pathway is required to specify lung endoderm progenitors within the foregut. Moreover, activation of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling results in reprogramming of esophagus and stomach endoderm to a lung endoderm progenitor fate. Together, these data reveal that canonical Wnt2/2b signaling is uniquely required for specification of lung endoderm progenitors in the developing foregut.

INTRODUCTION

The vertebrate gut tube is patterned such that organs are specified in a precise spatial location along the anterior-posterior axis of the developing embryo. Signaling molecules expressed in the surrounding lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) are thought to promote development and patterning of these organs including the thyroid, lung, liver, and pancreas in part through proper specification of endoderm progenitors. Although several important signaling pathways have been implicated in the regulation of foregut endoderm development the pathways that uniquely specify the lung within the anterior foregut are unknown.

Wnt signaling is one such pathway known to be important for early tissue morphogenesis. Multiple roles for β-catenin in cell proliferation and differentiation have been reported in the endodermal components of multiple tissues including the liver, pancreas, and lung ( Apte et al., 2007 ; Dessimoz et al., 2005 ; Mucenski et al., 2003 ; Murtaugh et al., 2005 ; Shu et al., 2005 ; Tan et al., 2006 ). However, whether Wnt signaling plays a role in specification of foregut derived tissues remains unclear. In this report, we show that Wnt2 and Wnt2b play an essential and cooperative role in specifying lung endoderm progenitors within the anterior foregut without affecting the specification of other foregut derived tissues. Moreover, we show that activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling can reprogram posterior endoderm to a lung progenitor fate indicating the potent role of Wnt signaling in specifying early lung endoderm progenitors. Thus, our studies reveal a unique role for Wnt/β-catenin signaling in promoting lung endoderm specification in the foregut.

DISCUSSION

Mutations in other genes have resulted in either a severe truncation in lung development (i.e. Fgf10 null mutants) or defects in LPM leading to severe foregut agenesis including the lung and esophagus (i.e. Gli2/Gli3 double mutants) ( Motoyama et al., 1998 ; Sekine et al., 1999 ). Here, we show the Wnt2/2b are distinct in their ability to specify lung progenitors within the developing foregut while sparing other organs including the thyroid, esophagus, liver, and pancreas. Moreover, we show that activation of Wnt signaling can reprogram esophagus and stomach endoderm to a lung progenitor fate. Our data support the importance of mesoderm to endoderm signaling that promotes development of foregut derived tissues and extends these findings to provide a molecular hierarchy of foregut endoderm specification.

Previous reports have elucidated additional roles for Wnt signaling in the developing lung. Loss of β-catenin or expression of the Wnt inhibitor dikkopf1 in lung epithelium after lung specification leads to decreased distal airway epithelial development and an overall proximalization of the lung ( Mucenski et al., 2003 ; Shu et al., 2005 ). A dermo1-cre mesenchymal specific loss of β-catenin in the lung leads to defective lung mesenchymal proliferation and development ( De Langhe et al., 2008 ; Yin et al., 2008 ). A previous report on a different Wnt2 allele did not report a lung phenotype although approximately 50% of null animals died by birth ( Monkley et al., 1996 ). This could be explained by the presence of significant levels of a truncated Wnt2 mRNA species observed in this previous allele ( Monkley et al., 1996 ). Expression of several other Wnt ligands besides Wnt2 and Wnt2b has been reported in the lung including Wnt7b and Wnt5a ( Li et al., 2002 ; Weidenfeld et al., 2002 ). Wnt7b has been shown to regulate mesenchymal proliferation as well as epithelial proliferation and maturation ( Rajagopal et al., 2008 ; Shu et al., 2002 ). Loss of Wnt7b also disrupts lung smooth muscle development leading to a loss of vascular integrity ( Shu et al., 2002 ). The decreased proliferation observed in Wnt7b mutant lungs is similar to that observed in the Wnt2 null lungs suggesting that one of the major roles for Wnt signaling in the lung post-specification is regulation of organ growth and size. Wnt5a is expressed initially in both the mesenchyme and distal epithelium of the developing lung ( Li et al., 2002 ). After E12.5, however, expression of Wnt5a becomes restricted to the distal epithelium ( Li et al., 2002 ). Loss of Wnt5a leads to increased mesenchymal proliferation and a loss in late airway maturation ( Li et al., 2002 ). Since Wnt5a has been reported to act in the non-canonical Wnt pathway ( Topol et al., 2003 ), which can antagonize β-catenin dependent canonical signaling, the increased proliferation observed in the lung mesenchyme of Wnt5a mutants could be due to increased canonical Wnt signaling in this tissue. The present study shows that in addition to regulation of lung development and growth, Wnt signaling through Wnt2/2b is essential for specification of lung endoderm progenitors in the foregut.

In contrast to previous studies in zebrafish which demonstrated an important role for wnt2b in liver development and specification as well as fin development in zebrafish, our data show that Wnt2/2b are not required for mammalian liver specification ( Ng et al., 2002 ; Ober et al., 2006 ). The studies described here suggest that the role for Wnt/β-catenin signaling along the anterior-posterior axis of the foregut varies between species which may have occurred as Wnt2/2b and the canonical Wnt pathway were co-opted during evolution to specify the lung during the vertebrate expansion into the terrestrial environment. The specificity for Wnt signaling, in particular Wnt2 and Wnt2b, in regulating specification of the lung is interesting in light of previous reports showing an important role for this pathway in pancreas and liver development ( Apte et al., 2007 ; Dessimoz et al., 2005 ; Murtaugh et al., 2005 ; Tan et al., 2006 ). This may be due to the precise expression pattern of these two Wnt ligands or to an important sensitivity of lung endoderm progenitors to canonical Wnt signaling. Moreover, the phenotype in Ctnnb1:Shh-cre mutants is likely due to the timing and specificity of the Shh-cre line since we do not observe early activity in the liver ( Supplemental Figure 6 ). It is also important to note that since Fgf10 is a direct target of Wnt/β-catenin signaling ( Cohen et al., 2007 ), the ability of Wnt2/2b to regulate its expression in the mesoderm surrounding the anterior foregut in a cell autonomous manner could affect other pathways important for mesoderm-endoderm signaling during lung development. Given the critical importance of Wnt2/2b signaling in lung endoderm specification, it will be interesting in future studies to determine whether simple activation of Wnt signaling can rescue the Wnt2/2b phenotype in foregut endoderm. Previous reports have shown that Wnt/β-catenin signaling is also important in adult lung progenitor expansion after injury ( Reynolds et al., 2008 ; Zhang et al., 2008 ). Thus, Wnt signaling plays a key role in both embryonic as well as adult lung endoderm progenitor development, which reinforces the importance of critical developmental pathways that are recapitulated upon injury and repair.

Wnt/β-catenin signaling is one of the critical developmental pathways that are considered important for both self-renewal and differentiation of stem/progenitor cells. With vigorous efforts underway to determine whether agonists or antagonists can be used to manipulate this pathway for therapeutic purposes, our findings that Wnt signaling is central to the specification and ability to reprogram foregut endoderm to a lung endoderm fate provides important information for investigating lung regeneration. In summary, our data provide a molecular hierarchy of foregut endoderm progenitor specification with Wnt2/2b signaling acting dominantly to specify lung endoderm progenitors in the anterior foregut.
