---
pmid: '28199315'
title: SZT2 dictates GATOR control of mTORC1 signalling.
authors:
- Peng M
- Yin N
- Li MO
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5570594
doi: 10.1038/nature21378
---

# SZT2 dictates GATOR control of mTORC1 signalling.
**Authors:** Peng M, Yin N, Li MO
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature21378](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21378)
**PMC:** [PMC5570594](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5570594/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2017 Mar 16;543(7645):433-437. doi: 10.1038/nature21378. Epub 2017 Feb
 15.

SZT2 dictates GATOR control of mTORC1 signalling.

Peng M(1), Yin N(1), Li MO(1).

Author information:
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York 10065, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2018 Jun;558(7710):E2. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0114-2.

Mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) integrates nutrient signals to 
control cell growth and organismal homeostasis across eukaryotes. The 
evolutionarily conserved GATOR complex regulates mTORC1 signalling through Rag 
GTPases, and GATOR1 displays GTPase activating protein (GAP) activity for RAGA 
and RAGB (RAGA/B) and GATOR2 has been proposed to be an inhibitor of GATOR1. 
Furthermore, the metazoan-specific SESN proteins function as guanine nucleotide 
dissociation inhibitors (GDIs) for RAGA/B, and interact with GATOR2 with unknown 
effects. Here we show that SZT2 (seizure threshold 2), a metazoan-specific 
protein mutated in epilepsy, recruits a fraction of mammalian GATOR1 and GATOR2 
to form a SZT2-orchestrated GATOR (SOG) complex with an essential role in GATOR- 
and SESN-dependent nutrient sensing and mTORC1 regulation. The interaction of 
SZT2 with GATOR1 and GATOR2 was synergistic, and an intact SOG complex was 
required for its localization at the lysosome. SZT2 deficiency resulted in 
constitutive mTORC1 signalling in cells under nutrient-deprived conditions and 
neonatal lethality in mice, which was associated with failure to inactivate 
mTORC1 during fasting. Hyperactivation of mTORC1 in SZT2-deficient cells could 
be partially corrected by overexpression of the GATOR1 component DEPDC5, and by 
the lysosome-targeted GATOR2 component WDR59 or lysosome-targeted SESN2. These 
findings demonstrate that SZT2 has a central role in dictating GATOR-dependent 
nutrient sensing by promoting lysosomal localization of SOG, and reveal an 
unexpected function of lysosome-located GATOR2 in suppressing mTORC1 signalling 
through SESN recruitment.

DOI: 10.1038/nature21378
PMCID: PMC5570594
PMID: 28199315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Financial Interests The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
