---
pmid: '25026213'
title: Ubiquitylation of autophagy receptor Optineurin by HACE1 activates selective
  autophagy for tumor suppression.
authors:
- Liu Z
- Chen P
- Gao H
- Gu Y
- Yang J
- Peng H
- Xu X
- Wang H
- Yang M
- Liu X
- Fan L
- Chen S
- Zhou J
- Sun Y
- Ruan K
- Cheng S
- Komatsu M
- White E
- Li L
- Ji H
- Finley D
- Hu R
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4166492
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.015
---

# Ubiquitylation of autophagy receptor Optineurin by HACE1 activates selective autophagy for tumor suppression.
**Authors:** Liu Z, Chen P, Gao H, Gu Y, Yang J, Peng H, Xu X, Wang H, Yang M, Liu X, Fan L, Chen S, Zhou J, Sun Y, Ruan K, Cheng S, Komatsu M, White E, Li L, Ji H, Finley D, Hu R
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.015)
**PMC:** [PMC4166492](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4166492/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2014 Jul 14;26(1):106-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.015.

Ubiquitylation of autophagy receptor Optineurin by HACE1 activates selective 
autophagy for tumor suppression.

Liu Z(1), Chen P(1), Gao H(2), Gu Y(3), Yang J(1), Peng H(1), Xu X(1), Wang 
H(1), Yang M(4), Liu X(5), Fan L(5), Chen S(2), Zhou J(6), Sun Y(2), Ruan K(4), 
Cheng S(7), Komatsu M(8), White E(9), Li L(4), Ji H(4), Finley D(10), Hu R(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 
Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China; Graduate School, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 
200031, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, No. 
180, Fenglin Road, Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 
Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China; School of Life Science, Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 
Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.
(5)School of Life Science, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui 230032, China.
(6)Liver Cancer Institute, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, 
Ministry of Education, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, No. 180, Fenglin 
Road, Shanghai 200032, China.
(7)Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical University, 
Shanghai, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China.
(8)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506, 
Japan.
(9)The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, 195 Little Albany 
Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08903-2681, USA.
(10)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(11)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 
Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China; Cancer Research Center, SIBS-Xuhui 
Central Hospital, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-yang Road, Shanghai 
200031, China; Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes 
for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-yang Road, 
Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address: coryhu@sibs.ac.cn.

In selective autophagy, receptors are central for cargo selection and delivery. 
However, it remains yet unclear whether and how multiple autophagy receptors 
might form complex and function concertedly to control autophagy. Optineurin 
(OPTN), implicated genetically in glaucoma and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
was a recently identified autophagy receptor. Here we report that 
tumor-suppressor HACE1, a ubiquitin ligase, ubiquitylates OPTN and promotes its 
interaction with p62/SQSTM1 to form the autophagy receptor complex, thus 
accelerating autophagic flux. Interestingly, the Lys48-linked polyubiquitin 
chains that HACE1 conjugates onto OPTN might predominantly target OPTN for 
autophagic degradation. By demonstrating that the HACE1-OPTN axis 
synergistically suppresses growth and tumorigenicity of lung cancer cells, our 
findings may open an avenue for developing autophagy-targeted therapeutic 
intervention into cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.05.015
PMCID: PMC4166492
PMID: 25026213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

IntroductionMacroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is an evolutionarily conserved process that cells use to deliver cytosolic proteins to the lysosome for degradation (Klionsky et al., 2012; Ohsumi, 2014). Although autophagy has generally been thought to be non-selective, recent work has identified mechanisms for selective uptake of cytoplasmic proteins into nascent autophagic vesicles. Selectivity in autophagy is achieved through cargo recognition by a family of autophagy receptors, the common feature of which is a functionally conserved LIR (LC3-interacting region) domain (Hurley and Schulman; Kirkin et al., 2009a; Pankiv et al., 2007). The LIR domain targets the autophagy receptor to ATG8-family proteins on the surface of the nascent autophagic vesicle. Currently known autophagy receptors include p62/Squestosome-1 (p62/SQSTM1, hereafter referred to as p62), NBR1, NDP52, Nix, Cbl, Stbd1 and OPTN (Optic neuropathy-inducing protein, Optineurin) (Wild et al., 2011). Among them, p62 and NBR1 are known to oligomerize through their N-terminal PB1 (Phox and Bem1p) domains, thus playing central role in recruiting and targeting cargoes to autophagosome. So far, multiple autophagy receptors are known to be involved in selective autophagy, in a conceptualized complex (Johansen and Lamark, 2011; Mijaljica et al., 2012). However, it remains yet unclear whether and how multiple autophagy receptors might actually form complex and operate concertedly to control selective autophagy.There is also emerging evidence that the functionality of autophagy receptors might be regulated to modulate cellular autophagic activity in response to diverse stimuli. Optineurin (OPTN), a most recently identified autophagy receptor, has been implicated genetically in human glaucoma, Paget’s Disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Maruyama et al., 2010; Rezaie et al., 2002). Recently, TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of OPTN was shown to promote interaction between OPTN and LC3, activating selective autophagy to clear invading Salmonella (Wild et al., 2011). OPTN was also found to be ubiquitylated and degraded in mammalian cells (Shen et al., 2011), but the molecular basis, regulatory mechanism and impact of its ubiquitylation on the function of OPTN as an autophagy receptor remain unclear.Meanwhile, impaired autophagy has been linked to many types of malignancies, owing to functional defects in various pathway components. Allelic loss of autophagic regulator Beclin1 leads to increased tumorigenesis in mice, and Beclin1 gene was found to be mono-allelically deleted in 40-75% of sporadic human breast cancers and ovarian cancers (Liang et al., 1999). Mice lacking Atg5 or Atg7, which are essential components in autophagy pathway, are defective in autophagy and show elevated rates of spontaneous tumor formation (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010). Impaired autophagy was also widely observed in human lung cancers, with yet unknown mechanistic basis (Moscat and Diaz-Meco, 2009). Therefore, defining the context-specific roles of autophagy in cancer and the regulatory mechanisms involved will be critical for developing autophagy-targeted therapeutics against specific types of cancer (White, 2012).Here we set out to examine the ubiquitylation status of endogenous OPTN protein, identified and further characterized the E3 Ub ligase that could mediate the ubiquitylation of OPTN. We further investigated the impact of such ubiquitylation of OPTN on its function as an autophagy receptor and a potential tumor suppressor.

Introduction

Macroautophagy (hereafter referred to as autophagy) is an evolutionarily conserved process that cells use to deliver cytosolic proteins to the lysosome for degradation (Klionsky et al., 2012; Ohsumi, 2014). Although autophagy has generally been thought to be non-selective, recent work has identified mechanisms for selective uptake of cytoplasmic proteins into nascent autophagic vesicles. Selectivity in autophagy is achieved through cargo recognition by a family of autophagy receptors, the common feature of which is a functionally conserved LIR (LC3-interacting region) domain (Hurley and Schulman; Kirkin et al., 2009a; Pankiv et al., 2007). The LIR domain targets the autophagy receptor to ATG8-family proteins on the surface of the nascent autophagic vesicle. Currently known autophagy receptors include p62/Squestosome-1 (p62/SQSTM1, hereafter referred to as p62), NBR1, NDP52, Nix, Cbl, Stbd1 and OPTN (Optic neuropathy-inducing protein, Optineurin) (Wild et al., 2011). Among them, p62 and NBR1 are known to oligomerize through their N-terminal PB1 (Phox and Bem1p) domains, thus playing central role in recruiting and targeting cargoes to autophagosome. So far, multiple autophagy receptors are known to be involved in selective autophagy, in a conceptualized complex (Johansen and Lamark, 2011; Mijaljica et al., 2012). However, it remains yet unclear whether and how multiple autophagy receptors might actually form complex and operate concertedly to control selective autophagy.

There is also emerging evidence that the functionality of autophagy receptors might be regulated to modulate cellular autophagic activity in response to diverse stimuli. Optineurin (OPTN), a most recently identified autophagy receptor, has been implicated genetically in human glaucoma, Paget’s Disease or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) (Maruyama et al., 2010; Rezaie et al., 2002). Recently, TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of OPTN was shown to promote interaction between OPTN and LC3, activating selective autophagy to clear invading Salmonella (Wild et al., 2011). OPTN was also found to be ubiquitylated and degraded in mammalian cells (Shen et al., 2011), but the molecular basis, regulatory mechanism and impact of its ubiquitylation on the function of OPTN as an autophagy receptor remain unclear.

Meanwhile, impaired autophagy has been linked to many types of malignancies, owing to functional defects in various pathway components. Allelic loss of autophagic regulator Beclin1 leads to increased tumorigenesis in mice, and Beclin1 gene was found to be mono-allelically deleted in 40-75% of sporadic human breast cancers and ovarian cancers (Liang et al., 1999). Mice lacking Atg5 or Atg7, which are essential components in autophagy pathway, are defective in autophagy and show elevated rates of spontaneous tumor formation (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010). Impaired autophagy was also widely observed in human lung cancers, with yet unknown mechanistic basis (Moscat and Diaz-Meco, 2009). Therefore, defining the context-specific roles of autophagy in cancer and the regulatory mechanisms involved will be critical for developing autophagy-targeted therapeutics against specific types of cancer (White, 2012).

Here we set out to examine the ubiquitylation status of endogenous OPTN protein, identified and further characterized the E3 Ub ligase that could mediate the ubiquitylation of OPTN. We further investigated the impact of such ubiquitylation of OPTN on its function as an autophagy receptor and a potential tumor suppressor.

ResultsEndogenous OPTN is ubiquitylated in vivoPreviously, OPTN (Figure 1A) was found to be ubiquitylated and to undergo degradation, but the regulatory mechanisms are unknown. As shown in Figure 1B, endogenous OPTN in human HEK293FT cells is heavily modified by ubiquitylation, as assessed by immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-OPTN antibodies, followed by immunoblotting with anti-ubiquitin. Of note, the IP was performed in modified radioimmunoprecipitation (RIPA) buffer to remove the ubiquitylated autophagy cargos that might interact with the UBAN domain of OPTN. Moreover, since autophagy inhibitor Bafilomycin (Baf) rather than proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ) seemed to stabilize endogenous OPTN (Figure S1A), cells were treated with Baf prior to the IP using anti-OPTN. The high molecular weight signal of modified OPTN was eliminated after incubation with Usp2cc, the catalytic core of human USP2 (ubiquitin-specific protease 2), confirming that endogenous OPTN was indeed ubiquitylated in HEK293FT cells (Figure S1B).Tumor suppressor E3 Ub ligase HACE1 interacts with, and ubiquitylates OPTNWe next sought to identify the E3 Ub ligase responsible for ubiquitylation of OPTN, using yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening (Fields and Song, 1989). Human OPTN was employed as the bait to screen potential OPTN-interacting proteins from an Y2H prey library containing ORFs (open-reading frames) from human cDNAs encoding over 400 putative ubiquitin ligases or their substrate binding subunits. Positive colonies were selected and found to harbor the prey vector expressing the HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 Ub ligase (HACE1). HACE1-OPTN interaction was indicated by colony formation on yeast SD-4 (SD-Leu-Trp-His-Ura) selection media as well as plate assays for β-galactosidase activity (Figure 1C). HACE1, a member of the HECT family of Ub ligases, consists of an N-terminal stretch of six ankyrin repeats, the C-terminal HECT ubiquitin ligase domain, and a connecting linker sequence (Figure 1A).When using HACE1 as bait, Y2H screening also revealed that OPTN interacted with wild-type HACE1 as well as HACE1C876S, the E3 Ub ligase activity dead mutant (Figure 1D), suggesting that the Ub ligase activity is not required for such interaction. It was previously reported that genetic ablation of HACE1 promotes tumorigenesis in multiple tissues of mice, and down-regulation or mutation of HACE1 is associated with multiple human malignancies, which established HACE1 as a potent tumor suppressor (Zhang et al., 2007). However, the mechanism underlying the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 remains unknown.In vivo, both tagged and endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins seemed to indeed form a complex that could survive the multi-step procedure in co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP) assay (Figure 1E, 1F). GST pull-down assays showed that OPTN directly interacted with HACE1 in vitro, likely through the N-terminal ankyrin repeats of HACE1 (Figure 1G, 1H). Reciprocal pull-down assay also mapped the 411-456 residues in OPTN as the major HACE1-interaction region (HIR) (Figure 1A, 1I, 1J). HACE1 and OPTN, tagged respectively with GFP (Green fluorescence protein) and RFP (Red fluorescence protein), did co-localize mostly in extra-nuclear region of the cell (Figure S1C).To examine whether HACE1 actually catalyzes the ubiquitylation of OPTN, we assembled an in vitro ubiquitylation system that contained ATP, the E1 Ub-activating enzyme (Uba1), the E2 Ub conjugating enzyme (UbcH7), the substrate (OPTN) and the E3 ub ligase (HACE1). As shown in Figure 2A, wild-type HACE1 ubiquitylated OPTN in vitro, apparently without involving the UBAN domain of OPTN. HACE1-conjugated ubiquitin chains on OPTN were primarily in Lys 27 (K27) and Lys 48 (K48) Ub linkages in vivo, as Ub containing K27 or K48 as the only Lys residue was conjugated efficiently but Ub with K27R or K48R mutation was not (Figure 2B, 2C). Furthermore, knocking down endogenous HACE1 in HEK293 cells with short-hairpin RNA efficiently blocked the formation of polyubiquitin (poly-Ub) chains on OPTN (Figure S1E, S2A, S2B), suggesting that endogenous HACE1 might be the major E3 Ub ligase ubiquitylating OPTN in HEK293 cells.HACE1-mediated K48-linked poly-Ub chains targets OPTN for autophagic degradationHaving known that endogenous OPTN was stabilized by autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (Baf) but not as much by proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) (Figure S1A), we are particularly interested in what K48-linked poly-Ub chain would target OPTN for. As shown in Figure 2D, interestingly, K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN turned out to be slightly stabilized in cells treated with BTZ, but significantly accumulated when autophagy was inhibited upon Baf treatment. The K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN was also accumulated in autophagy deficient ATG7 -/- cells, suggesting that OPTN with K48-linked poly-Ub chains might be predominantly targeted for autophagy-dependent degradation. Autophagy activator rapamycin destabilized endogenous OPTN protein, while genetic ablation of ATG7 gene or treatment with autophagy inhibitor 3-Methyladenine (3-MA) had the opposite effect, suggesting that endogenous OPTN indeed undergo autophagic degradation (Figure 3A, 3B). These observations depart from the generally accepted notion that proteins with K48-linked poly-Ub chains are exclusively targeted to proteasome-dependent degradation (Chau et al., 1989; Deshaies and Joazeiro, 2009; Finley, 2009; Finley et al., 2004; Komander and Rape, 2012; Weissman et al., 2011). Notably, it has been reported that K48-linked ubiquitin conjugates accumulate when autophagy is impaired (Riley et al., 2010).Lys193 in OPTN is one of the major sites for HACE1-mediated ubiquitylationAfter an in vitro ubiquitylation reaction, ubiquitylated OPTN was recovered (Figure S2C) and subjected to tryptic digestion, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Attachment of ubiquitin to the side chain of a Lysine (Lys, K) residue renders it resistant to trypsin cleavage, and tryptic digestion of ubiquitin (chains) attached to the site leaves a –Gly-Gly- group, originating from the C-terminus of ubiquitin, on the side chain of the modified Lys (Kim et al., 2011). Based on these signature features, ubiquitylation sites in OPTN were identified from MS/MS spectra. Altogether, a total of 12 Lys residues were found to be ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 2E; Figure S2D).We then asked which Lys residues in OPTN might be the major ubiquitylation sites in vivo. We generated OPTN mutants bearing single or multiple Lys-to-Arg (K-to-R) substitutions in every potential ubiquitylation site. As shown in Figure 2F, K-to-R substitutions on all the potential ubiquitylation sites indeed almost completely abolished the HACE1-catalyzed ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. Remarkably, Ub conjugation to OPTN mutant with Lys-193-to-Arg (K193R) substitution, OPTNK193R, was substantially reduced, compared with that of either wild-type OPTN or any mutant bearing single K-to-R substitutions on each of the other ubiquitylation sites (Figure 2G; Figure S2E, S2F). This result suggested that ubiquitylation on Lys193, which reside close to the LIR motif in OPTN (Figure 1A), might be functionally important. Therefore we proceeded to investigate the biological consequences of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193.Lys193 in OPTN is not involved into the interaction between OPTN and LC3 IISince Lys193, a major site for HACE1-conjugated ubiquitylation on OPTN, resides close to the LIR (F178VEI181) of human OPTN, it was natural to ask whether above K193R mutation in OPTN would have any effect on the interaction between LC3 and OPTN. GST pull-down assay was thus performed between bacterially expressed LC3 and wild-type OPTN or the OPTNK193R mutant. As shown in Figure S2H, compared to that of wild-type OPTN, K193R mutation in OPTN seemed to have no appreciable effect on the interaction between GST-tagged LC3 and OPTN, suggesting that OPTNK193R might be structurally intact, at least in terms of its affinity to LC3.OPTN and HACE1 are down-regulated in multiple human lung cancer cellsHECT family of ubiquitin ligases have been known to play multiple roles in cancer development (Bernassola et al., 2008; Rotin and Kumar, 2009). Specifically, HACE1 has been recognized as a potent tumor suppressor, as previous work has shown that HACE1 is inactivated or down-regulated in multiple types of human malignancies, such as Wilms’ tumor (Diskin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2007). In addition, sporadic tumors occurred frequently in various tissues of HACE1 knockout mice (Zhang et al., 2007). Impaired autophagy was also widely observed in human malignancies including lung cancers, with mechanism yet unknown (Moscat and Diaz-Meco, 2009).Interestingly, an analysis of a recently published dataset revealed a strong correlation between higher expression of OPTN and better relapse-free survival in 1715 lung cancer patients (Gyorffy et al.) (Figure S3F). Meanwhile, highly frequent mutations in OPTN or HACE1 gene were uncovered in thirteen different human cancer types, according to data extracted from TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) datasets (Cerami et al.; Gao et al., 2013) (Figure S3D, S3E). Taken together, these results strongly underscored the potential tumor-suppressing roles of OPTN and HACE1 in human malignancies including lung cancer.Therefore, we used lung cancer cells as a model to directly assess the potential association between lung cancer and down-regulation of OPTN and/or HACE1. We first surveyed the expression of OPTN and HACE1 in multiple lung cancer cell lines from ATCC (American Type Culture Collection). In these cells, the levels of OPTN protein appeared to be low in 3 lines. CRL-5872 cells were then selected for subsequent studies, as they expressed endogenous HACE1 and OPTN at fairly low level (Figure S3A-S3C). This would allow functional study of the exogenous wild-type HACE1, OPTN or their indicated mutants, free of potential interference from the endogenous counterparts.HACE1-OPTN promotes the formation of LC3 puncta and lipidation of LC3II in human lung cancer cellsPrevious studies established OPTN as an autophagy receptor, and phosphorylation of OPTN by TBK1 on Ser177 was shown to promote autophagic clearance of Salmonella (Wild et al., 2011). Accordingly, we asked whether HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might impact cellular autophagic activity, through assessing through monitoring LC3-containing puncta, lipidation of LC3 (the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I]) and cellular autophagic flux (Klionsky et al., 2012).Consistently, only expression of wild-type HACE1, but not HACE1C876S, resulted in increased levels of phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (PE)-modified LC3 (LC3-II-PE), with concomitant increase in OPTN ubiquitylation (See the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I], Figure 3C). As shown in Figure 3D-3E, fluorescence microscopic analysis with the reporter cell line CRL-5872 stably expressing GFP-LC3 and subsequent quantitation revealed that overexpression of human HACE1 or OPTN alone induced the formation of the GFP-LC3 puncta, similar to, but to a lesser extent than that observed in cells treated with rapamycin, a known autophagy inducer. Co-expression of exogenous OPTN and HACE1 further enhanced the formation of GFP-LC3 puncta, whereas the enzymatically inactive HACE1 mutant, HACE1C876S, did not, suggesting the E3 Ub ligase activity of HACE1 was important for induction of puncta formation. Remarkably, this effect was almost abolished when OPTNK193R was co-expressed with HACE1, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 was critical for induction of LC3 puncta formation (Figure 3E). Consistent data were also obtained with endogenous LC3 as indicated by immunomicroscopy analysis using anti-LC3 antibodies (Figure S3J). Moreover, significantly fewer LC3 puncta were formed in the cells that overexpressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down with RNA interference (Figure 3JA), suggesting that HACE1-induced autophagy might be OPTN-dependent.Therefore, HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN appeared to activate autophagy.HACE1-OPTN promotes autophagic removal of p62/SQSTM1 and oxidatively damaged proteins in human lung cancer cellsAccumulation of protein carbonyl groups is a biomarker of cellular oxidative stress and compromise in cellular proteolytic capacity (Dalle-Donne et al., 2003). Cellular levels of oxidatively damaged proteins can be efficiently assessed by derivatizing the carbonyl groups with hydrazines such as DNPH (2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine), followed by immunoblotting with anti-DNP antibodies to visualize the carbonylated proteins. Meanwhile, the DNP group also has a characteristic absorbance at 370 nm, making possible a facile quantitative assay of the content of carbonyl groups on a pool of proteins. Normally, oxidatively damaged proteins are removed in timely manner, largely through autophagy, as their degradation could be promoted by rapamycin, but blocked by autophagy inhibitor 3-MA or Baf stabilized them (also Figure S3G). N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) effectively scavenges cellular oxidants, while pyocyanin (PCN) is a secondary metabolite from Pseudomonas aeruginosa that can drastically increase the oxidative flux of cellular proteins. Therefore, cellular protein oxidation can be reliably gauged through anti-DNP blotting, using cells treated with NAC or PCN as negative or positive controls, respectively.As shown in Figure 3F, overexpression of wild-type OPTN alone slightly decreased the total level of oxidized proteins in the lung cancer cells. Strikingly, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN reduced the cellular level of oxidized proteins so much that signal became barely detectable in anti-DNP blotting, which could be reversed by addition of Baf or knocking down HACE1. Further experiment with the ligase activity dead HACE1C876S or OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN is critical for removal of the carbonylated proteins during autophagy activated by HACE1-OPTN (Figure 3G, 3H). p62 along with oxidized proteins were accumulated in human lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) (Figure S3H). Similarly, when endogenous OPTN was knocked down with shRNA, overexpression of wild-type HACE1 alone did not increase removal of p62 or cellular oxidized proteins (Figure S3H). Interestingly, p62 and oxidized proteins remained high in cells overexpressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193 (Figure 5A, S6C). Taken together, these results suggested that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193, might be essential for activating autophagy, as determined by removal of oxidatively damaged proteins, the conversion of LC3 I into lipidated LC3 II, and the degradation of p62 (Figure 3C-3H; Figure S3H).HACE1 and OPTN form a functional axis to promote autophagy in a p62-dependent mannerWe next used macrophages derived from either OPTN wild-type (OPTN +/+) or knockout (OPTN -/-) mice (Skarnes et al., 2011) to further investigate the role of OPTN during HACE1-activated autophagy. As shown in Figure 4A, in OPTN +/+ macrophages, overexpression of HACE1, but not the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S, induced significantly more conversion of LC3 I into LC3 II in lipidated form, removal of p62 or oxidized proteins. However, in OPTN -/- macrophages, neither p62 nor the cellular oxidized proteins were eliminated to a greater extent than in control cells regardless of the expression of HACE1 or HACE1C876S. This strongly suggested that existence of endogenous OPTN is required for HACE1-activated autophagy (Figure 4A).Interestingly, in p62 -/- MEF cells, the HACE1-OPTN axis did not promote autophagic removal of oxidatively damaged proteins either. However, this could be reversed when wild-type human p62 was re-introduced into the cells (Figure 4B), suggesting that the HACE1-OPTN axis might accelerate cellular autophagic flux in a p62 dependent manner. Interestingly, even in the presence of p62, K193R mutation in OPTN markedly compromised the autophagy-promoting activity of the HACE1-OPTN axis, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on K193 of OPTN might functionally interact with p62. It is intriguing to ask whether HACE1-conjugate poly-Ub chain on K193 of OPTN would directly interact with p62, whose UBA domain was known to bind to K48 or K63-linked poly-Ub chains (Ciani et al., 2003).HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of Lys193 in OPTN promotes the formation of p62/SQSTM1-OPTN complexAs shown in Figure 4C, in OPTN +/+ MEF cells, endogenous HACE1, OPTN and p62 did physically interact to form a complex. However, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN with RNA interference abolished the interaction. Furthermore, removing poly-Ub chains on immunoprecipitated OPTN with deubiquitinating enzyme Usp2cc also disrupted OPTN-p62 interaction but not that for HACE1-OPTN, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might be critically involved into OPTN-p62 interaction (Figure 4D).As shown in Figure 5A, in lung cancer cells that overexpress wild-type HACE1 and OPTN, OPTN was ubiquitylated and interacted with endogenous p62. However, in cells over-expressing OPTNK193R and wild-type HACE1, much weaker or no interaction between OPTNK193R and p62 was detected, despite the fact that they had higher level of endogenous p62 protein. Meanwhile, in mouse p62 knockout embryonic cells (p62 -/- MEF) (Komatsu et al., 2007) expressing human HACE1, full-length p62 interacted with HACE1-ubiquitylated OPTN, which could be abolished by deletion of UBA domain in p62. Similarly, much weaker interaction was observed between OPTNK193R and the overexpressed p62. (Figure 5B). These data suggested that UBA domain of p62 and HACE1-conjugated Ub chains on Lys193 of OPTN were critically involved into OPTN and p62 interaction in vivo.As shown in Figure 5C, OPTN ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro interacted with UBA domain of p62, but the unmodified OPTN did not (Figure 5C). Meanwhile, there was little or no interaction observed between p62 and OPTNK193R, when the latter was marginally ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 5D). As shown in Figure 5E and 5F, only K48-linked poly-Ub chain that HACE1-conjugated onto OPTN interacted with the p62 in vitro while K27-linked one did not. This suggested that p62 preferential bound to ubiquitylated OPTN in K48 Ub linkage.The HACE1-OPTN axis accelerates degradation of p62, suppresses ROS production and mitigates oxidative DNA damage in human lung cancer cellsAutophagy receptor p62 is also a known substrate for selective autophagy (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010). Specifically, levels of endogenous p62 in mouse OPTN -/- macrophage cells were significantly higher than those in the wild-type cells, which could be reversed by re-introduction of wild-type OPTN (Figure 4A). Similar effect was also observed in CRL-5872 cells that express endogenous OPTN at low level, where level of endogenous p62 went down upon co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN (Figure 5A). However, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R did not reduce the level of endogenous p62, which strongly suggested that accelerated degradation of p62 was mainly dependent on HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of K193 in OPTN. In HEK293FT cells, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN also led to appreciable increase in static level of endogenous p62 protein (Figure 4D). Therefore, the co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN appeared to promote the interaction between autophagy receptors, OPTN and p62, and accelerates autophagic degradation of p62.Taken samples from those for Figure S3H, through IP with anti-DNP followed by quantitative mass spectra analysis, our data clearly indicated that co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN could significantly reduce the carbonylation of more than 60 cellular proteins in CRL-5872, including heat shock protein 70 KDa protein 8 (data not shown).Previous work demonstrated that p62 is also a positive regulator of cellular ROS (reactive oxygen species) production, and that ROS at elevated level triggers translocation of Nrf2 (nuclear factor [erythroid-derived 2]-like 2) into the nucleus, thus activating Nrf2-mediated p62 transcription (Komatsu et al., 2010). These findings suggest a feedback mechanism between p62 and intracellular ROS production. During the autophagy activated by the HACE-OPTN axis, accelerated removal of p62 and the oxidatively damaged proteins would significantly suppress ROS production. Indeed, production of ROS in cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN was less than 10 % percent of that in control cells (Figure S4A-F). Similar results were observed in DNA damage assays with cells expressing both HACE1 and OPTN (see Figure S4G).Excess of p62 is known to associate with multiple type of human cancer, and elimination of p62 has been well accepted as one of the major mechanisms through which autophagy suppresses tumorigenesis (Komatsu et al., 2010; Mathew et al., 2009). The HACE1-OPTN axis might suppress ROS production and mitigate oxidative DNA damage, most likely through promoting autophagic removal of p62 and the other oxidatively damaged proteins (Figure S3H).The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses anchorage-independent growth of human lung cancer cellsWe proceeded to investigate the potential tumor-suppressive effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Tumor colony formation assay was performed with lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or both, or their indicated mutants (Figure 6A-B; Figure S5A). Cancer cells expressing wild-type HACE1 formed approximately 58% fewer colonies in soft agar than did control cells transfected with empty vectors. Cells expressing the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S formed as almost efficiently as the controls did. This result is consistent with the previous observation that the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 is critical for its potent suppressive effect on the anchorage-independent growth of the cancer cells (Zhang et al., 2007). Overexpression of OPTN alone inhibited tumor proliferation by approximately 63%. This strongly suggested that OPTN might also function as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer cells, which was reminiscent of the previous finding that higher OPTN expression strongly correlated with better relapse-free survival in human lung cancer patients (Figure S3F).Strikingly, cancer cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN formed colonies at a frequency less than 10 % of that by control cells, suggesting that HACE1 and OPTN could synergistically suppress tumor growth. In contrast, cancer cells that co-expressed wild-type OPTN and the enzymatically inactive HACE1C876S formed 63 % more colonies than the controls. Similar results were observed with cancer cells that expressed wild-type HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN or p62 knocked down through RNA interference (Figure 6A, 6B; Figure S5A, S5E and S5F), suggesting that the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 is dependent on the presence of endogenous OPTN, p62 and the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 (Figure S5C and S5G).Interestingly, in the cancer cells that overexpressed wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, the inhibitory effect of HACE1 on tumor colony formation was partially abrogated (Figure 6A-B). In contrast, Lys-to-Arg substitution on every ubiquitylation site other than Lys193 of OPTN still synergistically suppressed tumor with HACE1. Therefore, ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN, which was demonstrated to be critical for HACE1-activated autophagy, also significantly contributed to HACE1-mediated suppression of tumor colony formation.The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses tumorigenicity of human lung cancer cells in nude miceSubsequently, a tumorigenicity model of cancer cells in nude mice was employed to further probe the tumor-suppressive effect of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. As shown in Figure S5C, the lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) stably expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or mutant forms of these proteins were injected into nude mice. Efficiency for tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in each group was assessed 21 days after the injection (Figure 6C, 6D). CRL-5872 cells expressing either exogenous HACE1 or OPTN alone formed tumors of sizes significantly (38% or 25%, respectively) smaller than those in the control group. Cancer cells with endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors approximately 87% larger than the controls, which again suggested tumor-suppressing function for OPTN. In cancer cells stably expressing both HACE1 and OPTN, the size of tumor formation was only one fifth of that of the control, indicating a synergistic tumor-suppressing effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Interestingly, cancer cells that expressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors in nude mice ~ 67% larger than that of the control.Remarkably, cancer cells expressing HACE1 with Lys-193-to-Arg substitution mutant, OPTNK193R, formed tumor ~129 % larger than that in the control. In contrast, cancer cells expressing HACE1 and OPTN that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitutions on all potential ubiquitylation sites except Lys193 in OPTN, OPTNK193only, formed tumors of ~51 percent smaller size than those of the control. This result highlighted the possibility that tumor-suppression by the HACE1-OPTN functional pair might be largely mediated by HACE1-conjugated poly-Ub chain on Lys193 residue of OPTN.The HACE1-OPTN axis also critically modulates cellular autophagy in the actual tumors in dependence on ubiquitylation of Lys193 OPTN, as assessed by assaying the increased formation of lipidated LC3 II and removal of carbonylated proteins (Figure 6E). Altogether, these data indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193 of OPTN, plays critical role in activating autophagy to suppress tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in vivo.Through immunohistochemistry microscopy analyses, we also examined the levels of endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins in human cancer samples, with those in adjacent normal tissues as controls. Indeed, HACE1 and OPTN appeared to be downregulated in multiple cancers, such as liver cancer (Figure 7A-D), stomach or lung cancer (Figure S6). The results further underscored the existence of a strong association between human malignancies and the deficiency of the HACE1-OPTN axis.

Endogenous OPTN is ubiquitylated in vivoPreviously, OPTN (Figure 1A) was found to be ubiquitylated and to undergo degradation, but the regulatory mechanisms are unknown. As shown in Figure 1B, endogenous OPTN in human HEK293FT cells is heavily modified by ubiquitylation, as assessed by immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-OPTN antibodies, followed by immunoblotting with anti-ubiquitin. Of note, the IP was performed in modified radioimmunoprecipitation (RIPA) buffer to remove the ubiquitylated autophagy cargos that might interact with the UBAN domain of OPTN. Moreover, since autophagy inhibitor Bafilomycin (Baf) rather than proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ) seemed to stabilize endogenous OPTN (Figure S1A), cells were treated with Baf prior to the IP using anti-OPTN. The high molecular weight signal of modified OPTN was eliminated after incubation with Usp2cc, the catalytic core of human USP2 (ubiquitin-specific protease 2), confirming that endogenous OPTN was indeed ubiquitylated in HEK293FT cells (Figure S1B).

Endogenous OPTN is ubiquitylated in vivo

Previously, OPTN (Figure 1A) was found to be ubiquitylated and to undergo degradation, but the regulatory mechanisms are unknown. As shown in Figure 1B, endogenous OPTN in human HEK293FT cells is heavily modified by ubiquitylation, as assessed by immunoprecipitation (IP) using anti-OPTN antibodies, followed by immunoblotting with anti-ubiquitin. Of note, the IP was performed in modified radioimmunoprecipitation (RIPA) buffer to remove the ubiquitylated autophagy cargos that might interact with the UBAN domain of OPTN. Moreover, since autophagy inhibitor Bafilomycin (Baf) rather than proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib (BTZ) seemed to stabilize endogenous OPTN (Figure S1A), cells were treated with Baf prior to the IP using anti-OPTN. The high molecular weight signal of modified OPTN was eliminated after incubation with Usp2cc, the catalytic core of human USP2 (ubiquitin-specific protease 2), confirming that endogenous OPTN was indeed ubiquitylated in HEK293FT cells (Figure S1B).

Tumor suppressor E3 Ub ligase HACE1 interacts with, and ubiquitylates OPTNWe next sought to identify the E3 Ub ligase responsible for ubiquitylation of OPTN, using yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening (Fields and Song, 1989). Human OPTN was employed as the bait to screen potential OPTN-interacting proteins from an Y2H prey library containing ORFs (open-reading frames) from human cDNAs encoding over 400 putative ubiquitin ligases or their substrate binding subunits. Positive colonies were selected and found to harbor the prey vector expressing the HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 Ub ligase (HACE1). HACE1-OPTN interaction was indicated by colony formation on yeast SD-4 (SD-Leu-Trp-His-Ura) selection media as well as plate assays for β-galactosidase activity (Figure 1C). HACE1, a member of the HECT family of Ub ligases, consists of an N-terminal stretch of six ankyrin repeats, the C-terminal HECT ubiquitin ligase domain, and a connecting linker sequence (Figure 1A).When using HACE1 as bait, Y2H screening also revealed that OPTN interacted with wild-type HACE1 as well as HACE1C876S, the E3 Ub ligase activity dead mutant (Figure 1D), suggesting that the Ub ligase activity is not required for such interaction. It was previously reported that genetic ablation of HACE1 promotes tumorigenesis in multiple tissues of mice, and down-regulation or mutation of HACE1 is associated with multiple human malignancies, which established HACE1 as a potent tumor suppressor (Zhang et al., 2007). However, the mechanism underlying the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 remains unknown.In vivo, both tagged and endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins seemed to indeed form a complex that could survive the multi-step procedure in co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP) assay (Figure 1E, 1F). GST pull-down assays showed that OPTN directly interacted with HACE1 in vitro, likely through the N-terminal ankyrin repeats of HACE1 (Figure 1G, 1H). Reciprocal pull-down assay also mapped the 411-456 residues in OPTN as the major HACE1-interaction region (HIR) (Figure 1A, 1I, 1J). HACE1 and OPTN, tagged respectively with GFP (Green fluorescence protein) and RFP (Red fluorescence protein), did co-localize mostly in extra-nuclear region of the cell (Figure S1C).To examine whether HACE1 actually catalyzes the ubiquitylation of OPTN, we assembled an in vitro ubiquitylation system that contained ATP, the E1 Ub-activating enzyme (Uba1), the E2 Ub conjugating enzyme (UbcH7), the substrate (OPTN) and the E3 ub ligase (HACE1). As shown in Figure 2A, wild-type HACE1 ubiquitylated OPTN in vitro, apparently without involving the UBAN domain of OPTN. HACE1-conjugated ubiquitin chains on OPTN were primarily in Lys 27 (K27) and Lys 48 (K48) Ub linkages in vivo, as Ub containing K27 or K48 as the only Lys residue was conjugated efficiently but Ub with K27R or K48R mutation was not (Figure 2B, 2C). Furthermore, knocking down endogenous HACE1 in HEK293 cells with short-hairpin RNA efficiently blocked the formation of polyubiquitin (poly-Ub) chains on OPTN (Figure S1E, S2A, S2B), suggesting that endogenous HACE1 might be the major E3 Ub ligase ubiquitylating OPTN in HEK293 cells.

Tumor suppressor E3 Ub ligase HACE1 interacts with, and ubiquitylates OPTN

We next sought to identify the E3 Ub ligase responsible for ubiquitylation of OPTN, using yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening (Fields and Song, 1989). Human OPTN was employed as the bait to screen potential OPTN-interacting proteins from an Y2H prey library containing ORFs (open-reading frames) from human cDNAs encoding over 400 putative ubiquitin ligases or their substrate binding subunits. Positive colonies were selected and found to harbor the prey vector expressing the HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 Ub ligase (HACE1). HACE1-OPTN interaction was indicated by colony formation on yeast SD-4 (SD-Leu-Trp-His-Ura) selection media as well as plate assays for β-galactosidase activity (Figure 1C). HACE1, a member of the HECT family of Ub ligases, consists of an N-terminal stretch of six ankyrin repeats, the C-terminal HECT ubiquitin ligase domain, and a connecting linker sequence (Figure 1A).When using HACE1 as bait, Y2H screening also revealed that OPTN interacted with wild-type HACE1 as well as HACE1C876S, the E3 Ub ligase activity dead mutant (Figure 1D), suggesting that the Ub ligase activity is not required for such interaction. It was previously reported that genetic ablation of HACE1 promotes tumorigenesis in multiple tissues of mice, and down-regulation or mutation of HACE1 is associated with multiple human malignancies, which established HACE1 as a potent tumor suppressor (Zhang et al., 2007). However, the mechanism underlying the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 remains unknown.

In vivo, both tagged and endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins seemed to indeed form a complex that could survive the multi-step procedure in co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP) assay (Figure 1E, 1F). GST pull-down assays showed that OPTN directly interacted with HACE1 in vitro, likely through the N-terminal ankyrin repeats of HACE1 (Figure 1G, 1H). Reciprocal pull-down assay also mapped the 411-456 residues in OPTN as the major HACE1-interaction region (HIR) (Figure 1A, 1I, 1J). HACE1 and OPTN, tagged respectively with GFP (Green fluorescence protein) and RFP (Red fluorescence protein), did co-localize mostly in extra-nuclear region of the cell (Figure S1C).

To examine whether HACE1 actually catalyzes the ubiquitylation of OPTN, we assembled an in vitro ubiquitylation system that contained ATP, the E1 Ub-activating enzyme (Uba1), the E2 Ub conjugating enzyme (UbcH7), the substrate (OPTN) and the E3 ub ligase (HACE1). As shown in Figure 2A, wild-type HACE1 ubiquitylated OPTN in vitro, apparently without involving the UBAN domain of OPTN. HACE1-conjugated ubiquitin chains on OPTN were primarily in Lys 27 (K27) and Lys 48 (K48) Ub linkages in vivo, as Ub containing K27 or K48 as the only Lys residue was conjugated efficiently but Ub with K27R or K48R mutation was not (Figure 2B, 2C). Furthermore, knocking down endogenous HACE1 in HEK293 cells with short-hairpin RNA efficiently blocked the formation of polyubiquitin (poly-Ub) chains on OPTN (Figure S1E, S2A, S2B), suggesting that endogenous HACE1 might be the major E3 Ub ligase ubiquitylating OPTN in HEK293 cells.

HACE1-mediated K48-linked poly-Ub chains targets OPTN for autophagic degradationHaving known that endogenous OPTN was stabilized by autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (Baf) but not as much by proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) (Figure S1A), we are particularly interested in what K48-linked poly-Ub chain would target OPTN for. As shown in Figure 2D, interestingly, K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN turned out to be slightly stabilized in cells treated with BTZ, but significantly accumulated when autophagy was inhibited upon Baf treatment. The K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN was also accumulated in autophagy deficient ATG7 -/- cells, suggesting that OPTN with K48-linked poly-Ub chains might be predominantly targeted for autophagy-dependent degradation. Autophagy activator rapamycin destabilized endogenous OPTN protein, while genetic ablation of ATG7 gene or treatment with autophagy inhibitor 3-Methyladenine (3-MA) had the opposite effect, suggesting that endogenous OPTN indeed undergo autophagic degradation (Figure 3A, 3B). These observations depart from the generally accepted notion that proteins with K48-linked poly-Ub chains are exclusively targeted to proteasome-dependent degradation (Chau et al., 1989; Deshaies and Joazeiro, 2009; Finley, 2009; Finley et al., 2004; Komander and Rape, 2012; Weissman et al., 2011). Notably, it has been reported that K48-linked ubiquitin conjugates accumulate when autophagy is impaired (Riley et al., 2010).

HACE1-mediated K48-linked poly-Ub chains targets OPTN for autophagic degradation

Having known that endogenous OPTN was stabilized by autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 (Baf) but not as much by proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) (Figure S1A), we are particularly interested in what K48-linked poly-Ub chain would target OPTN for. As shown in Figure 2D, interestingly, K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN turned out to be slightly stabilized in cells treated with BTZ, but significantly accumulated when autophagy was inhibited upon Baf treatment. The K48-linked polyubiquitylation of OPTN was also accumulated in autophagy deficient ATG7 -/- cells, suggesting that OPTN with K48-linked poly-Ub chains might be predominantly targeted for autophagy-dependent degradation. Autophagy activator rapamycin destabilized endogenous OPTN protein, while genetic ablation of ATG7 gene or treatment with autophagy inhibitor 3-Methyladenine (3-MA) had the opposite effect, suggesting that endogenous OPTN indeed undergo autophagic degradation (Figure 3A, 3B). These observations depart from the generally accepted notion that proteins with K48-linked poly-Ub chains are exclusively targeted to proteasome-dependent degradation (Chau et al., 1989; Deshaies and Joazeiro, 2009; Finley, 2009; Finley et al., 2004; Komander and Rape, 2012; Weissman et al., 2011). Notably, it has been reported that K48-linked ubiquitin conjugates accumulate when autophagy is impaired (Riley et al., 2010).

Lys193 in OPTN is one of the major sites for HACE1-mediated ubiquitylationAfter an in vitro ubiquitylation reaction, ubiquitylated OPTN was recovered (Figure S2C) and subjected to tryptic digestion, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Attachment of ubiquitin to the side chain of a Lysine (Lys, K) residue renders it resistant to trypsin cleavage, and tryptic digestion of ubiquitin (chains) attached to the site leaves a –Gly-Gly- group, originating from the C-terminus of ubiquitin, on the side chain of the modified Lys (Kim et al., 2011). Based on these signature features, ubiquitylation sites in OPTN were identified from MS/MS spectra. Altogether, a total of 12 Lys residues were found to be ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 2E; Figure S2D).We then asked which Lys residues in OPTN might be the major ubiquitylation sites in vivo. We generated OPTN mutants bearing single or multiple Lys-to-Arg (K-to-R) substitutions in every potential ubiquitylation site. As shown in Figure 2F, K-to-R substitutions on all the potential ubiquitylation sites indeed almost completely abolished the HACE1-catalyzed ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. Remarkably, Ub conjugation to OPTN mutant with Lys-193-to-Arg (K193R) substitution, OPTNK193R, was substantially reduced, compared with that of either wild-type OPTN or any mutant bearing single K-to-R substitutions on each of the other ubiquitylation sites (Figure 2G; Figure S2E, S2F). This result suggested that ubiquitylation on Lys193, which reside close to the LIR motif in OPTN (Figure 1A), might be functionally important. Therefore we proceeded to investigate the biological consequences of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193.

Lys193 in OPTN is one of the major sites for HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation

After an in vitro ubiquitylation reaction, ubiquitylated OPTN was recovered (Figure S2C) and subjected to tryptic digestion, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Attachment of ubiquitin to the side chain of a Lysine (Lys, K) residue renders it resistant to trypsin cleavage, and tryptic digestion of ubiquitin (chains) attached to the site leaves a –Gly-Gly- group, originating from the C-terminus of ubiquitin, on the side chain of the modified Lys (Kim et al., 2011). Based on these signature features, ubiquitylation sites in OPTN were identified from MS/MS spectra. Altogether, a total of 12 Lys residues were found to be ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 2E; Figure S2D).

We then asked which Lys residues in OPTN might be the major ubiquitylation sites in vivo. We generated OPTN mutants bearing single or multiple Lys-to-Arg (K-to-R) substitutions in every potential ubiquitylation site. As shown in Figure 2F, K-to-R substitutions on all the potential ubiquitylation sites indeed almost completely abolished the HACE1-catalyzed ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. Remarkably, Ub conjugation to OPTN mutant with Lys-193-to-Arg (K193R) substitution, OPTNK193R, was substantially reduced, compared with that of either wild-type OPTN or any mutant bearing single K-to-R substitutions on each of the other ubiquitylation sites (Figure 2G; Figure S2E, S2F). This result suggested that ubiquitylation on Lys193, which reside close to the LIR motif in OPTN (Figure 1A), might be functionally important. Therefore we proceeded to investigate the biological consequences of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193.

Lys193 in OPTN is not involved into the interaction between OPTN and LC3 IISince Lys193, a major site for HACE1-conjugated ubiquitylation on OPTN, resides close to the LIR (F178VEI181) of human OPTN, it was natural to ask whether above K193R mutation in OPTN would have any effect on the interaction between LC3 and OPTN. GST pull-down assay was thus performed between bacterially expressed LC3 and wild-type OPTN or the OPTNK193R mutant. As shown in Figure S2H, compared to that of wild-type OPTN, K193R mutation in OPTN seemed to have no appreciable effect on the interaction between GST-tagged LC3 and OPTN, suggesting that OPTNK193R might be structurally intact, at least in terms of its affinity to LC3.

Lys193 in OPTN is not involved into the interaction between OPTN and LC3 II

Since Lys193, a major site for HACE1-conjugated ubiquitylation on OPTN, resides close to the LIR (F178VEI181) of human OPTN, it was natural to ask whether above K193R mutation in OPTN would have any effect on the interaction between LC3 and OPTN. GST pull-down assay was thus performed between bacterially expressed LC3 and wild-type OPTN or the OPTNK193R mutant. As shown in Figure S2H, compared to that of wild-type OPTN, K193R mutation in OPTN seemed to have no appreciable effect on the interaction between GST-tagged LC3 and OPTN, suggesting that OPTNK193R might be structurally intact, at least in terms of its affinity to LC3.

OPTN and HACE1 are down-regulated in multiple human lung cancer cellsHECT family of ubiquitin ligases have been known to play multiple roles in cancer development (Bernassola et al., 2008; Rotin and Kumar, 2009). Specifically, HACE1 has been recognized as a potent tumor suppressor, as previous work has shown that HACE1 is inactivated or down-regulated in multiple types of human malignancies, such as Wilms’ tumor (Diskin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2007). In addition, sporadic tumors occurred frequently in various tissues of HACE1 knockout mice (Zhang et al., 2007). Impaired autophagy was also widely observed in human malignancies including lung cancers, with mechanism yet unknown (Moscat and Diaz-Meco, 2009).Interestingly, an analysis of a recently published dataset revealed a strong correlation between higher expression of OPTN and better relapse-free survival in 1715 lung cancer patients (Gyorffy et al.) (Figure S3F). Meanwhile, highly frequent mutations in OPTN or HACE1 gene were uncovered in thirteen different human cancer types, according to data extracted from TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) datasets (Cerami et al.; Gao et al., 2013) (Figure S3D, S3E). Taken together, these results strongly underscored the potential tumor-suppressing roles of OPTN and HACE1 in human malignancies including lung cancer.Therefore, we used lung cancer cells as a model to directly assess the potential association between lung cancer and down-regulation of OPTN and/or HACE1. We first surveyed the expression of OPTN and HACE1 in multiple lung cancer cell lines from ATCC (American Type Culture Collection). In these cells, the levels of OPTN protein appeared to be low in 3 lines. CRL-5872 cells were then selected for subsequent studies, as they expressed endogenous HACE1 and OPTN at fairly low level (Figure S3A-S3C). This would allow functional study of the exogenous wild-type HACE1, OPTN or their indicated mutants, free of potential interference from the endogenous counterparts.

OPTN and HACE1 are down-regulated in multiple human lung cancer cells

HECT family of ubiquitin ligases have been known to play multiple roles in cancer development (Bernassola et al., 2008; Rotin and Kumar, 2009). Specifically, HACE1 has been recognized as a potent tumor suppressor, as previous work has shown that HACE1 is inactivated or down-regulated in multiple types of human malignancies, such as Wilms’ tumor (Diskin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2007). In addition, sporadic tumors occurred frequently in various tissues of HACE1 knockout mice (Zhang et al., 2007). Impaired autophagy was also widely observed in human malignancies including lung cancers, with mechanism yet unknown (Moscat and Diaz-Meco, 2009).

Interestingly, an analysis of a recently published dataset revealed a strong correlation between higher expression of OPTN and better relapse-free survival in 1715 lung cancer patients (Gyorffy et al.) (Figure S3F). Meanwhile, highly frequent mutations in OPTN or HACE1 gene were uncovered in thirteen different human cancer types, according to data extracted from TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) datasets (Cerami et al.; Gao et al., 2013) (Figure S3D, S3E). Taken together, these results strongly underscored the potential tumor-suppressing roles of OPTN and HACE1 in human malignancies including lung cancer.

Therefore, we used lung cancer cells as a model to directly assess the potential association between lung cancer and down-regulation of OPTN and/or HACE1. We first surveyed the expression of OPTN and HACE1 in multiple lung cancer cell lines from ATCC (American Type Culture Collection). In these cells, the levels of OPTN protein appeared to be low in 3 lines. CRL-5872 cells were then selected for subsequent studies, as they expressed endogenous HACE1 and OPTN at fairly low level (Figure S3A-S3C). This would allow functional study of the exogenous wild-type HACE1, OPTN or their indicated mutants, free of potential interference from the endogenous counterparts.

HACE1-OPTN promotes the formation of LC3 puncta and lipidation of LC3II in human lung cancer cellsPrevious studies established OPTN as an autophagy receptor, and phosphorylation of OPTN by TBK1 on Ser177 was shown to promote autophagic clearance of Salmonella (Wild et al., 2011). Accordingly, we asked whether HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might impact cellular autophagic activity, through assessing through monitoring LC3-containing puncta, lipidation of LC3 (the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I]) and cellular autophagic flux (Klionsky et al., 2012).Consistently, only expression of wild-type HACE1, but not HACE1C876S, resulted in increased levels of phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (PE)-modified LC3 (LC3-II-PE), with concomitant increase in OPTN ubiquitylation (See the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I], Figure 3C). As shown in Figure 3D-3E, fluorescence microscopic analysis with the reporter cell line CRL-5872 stably expressing GFP-LC3 and subsequent quantitation revealed that overexpression of human HACE1 or OPTN alone induced the formation of the GFP-LC3 puncta, similar to, but to a lesser extent than that observed in cells treated with rapamycin, a known autophagy inducer. Co-expression of exogenous OPTN and HACE1 further enhanced the formation of GFP-LC3 puncta, whereas the enzymatically inactive HACE1 mutant, HACE1C876S, did not, suggesting the E3 Ub ligase activity of HACE1 was important for induction of puncta formation. Remarkably, this effect was almost abolished when OPTNK193R was co-expressed with HACE1, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 was critical for induction of LC3 puncta formation (Figure 3E). Consistent data were also obtained with endogenous LC3 as indicated by immunomicroscopy analysis using anti-LC3 antibodies (Figure S3J). Moreover, significantly fewer LC3 puncta were formed in the cells that overexpressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down with RNA interference (Figure 3JA), suggesting that HACE1-induced autophagy might be OPTN-dependent.Therefore, HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN appeared to activate autophagy.

HACE1-OPTN promotes the formation of LC3 puncta and lipidation of LC3II in human lung cancer cells

Previous studies established OPTN as an autophagy receptor, and phosphorylation of OPTN by TBK1 on Ser177 was shown to promote autophagic clearance of Salmonella (Wild et al., 2011). Accordingly, we asked whether HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might impact cellular autophagic activity, through assessing through monitoring LC3-containing puncta, lipidation of LC3 (the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I]) and cellular autophagic flux (Klionsky et al., 2012).

Consistently, only expression of wild-type HACE1, but not HACE1C876S, resulted in increased levels of phosphatidyl-ethanolamine (PE)-modified LC3 (LC3-II-PE), with concomitant increase in OPTN ubiquitylation (See the ratio of [LC3 II] to [LC3 I], Figure 3C). As shown in Figure 3D-3E, fluorescence microscopic analysis with the reporter cell line CRL-5872 stably expressing GFP-LC3 and subsequent quantitation revealed that overexpression of human HACE1 or OPTN alone induced the formation of the GFP-LC3 puncta, similar to, but to a lesser extent than that observed in cells treated with rapamycin, a known autophagy inducer. Co-expression of exogenous OPTN and HACE1 further enhanced the formation of GFP-LC3 puncta, whereas the enzymatically inactive HACE1 mutant, HACE1C876S, did not, suggesting the E3 Ub ligase activity of HACE1 was important for induction of puncta formation. Remarkably, this effect was almost abolished when OPTNK193R was co-expressed with HACE1, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 was critical for induction of LC3 puncta formation (Figure 3E). Consistent data were also obtained with endogenous LC3 as indicated by immunomicroscopy analysis using anti-LC3 antibodies (Figure S3J). Moreover, significantly fewer LC3 puncta were formed in the cells that overexpressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down with RNA interference (Figure 3JA), suggesting that HACE1-induced autophagy might be OPTN-dependent.

Therefore, HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN appeared to activate autophagy.

HACE1-OPTN promotes autophagic removal of p62/SQSTM1 and oxidatively damaged proteins in human lung cancer cellsAccumulation of protein carbonyl groups is a biomarker of cellular oxidative stress and compromise in cellular proteolytic capacity (Dalle-Donne et al., 2003). Cellular levels of oxidatively damaged proteins can be efficiently assessed by derivatizing the carbonyl groups with hydrazines such as DNPH (2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine), followed by immunoblotting with anti-DNP antibodies to visualize the carbonylated proteins. Meanwhile, the DNP group also has a characteristic absorbance at 370 nm, making possible a facile quantitative assay of the content of carbonyl groups on a pool of proteins. Normally, oxidatively damaged proteins are removed in timely manner, largely through autophagy, as their degradation could be promoted by rapamycin, but blocked by autophagy inhibitor 3-MA or Baf stabilized them (also Figure S3G). N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) effectively scavenges cellular oxidants, while pyocyanin (PCN) is a secondary metabolite from Pseudomonas aeruginosa that can drastically increase the oxidative flux of cellular proteins. Therefore, cellular protein oxidation can be reliably gauged through anti-DNP blotting, using cells treated with NAC or PCN as negative or positive controls, respectively.As shown in Figure 3F, overexpression of wild-type OPTN alone slightly decreased the total level of oxidized proteins in the lung cancer cells. Strikingly, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN reduced the cellular level of oxidized proteins so much that signal became barely detectable in anti-DNP blotting, which could be reversed by addition of Baf or knocking down HACE1. Further experiment with the ligase activity dead HACE1C876S or OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN is critical for removal of the carbonylated proteins during autophagy activated by HACE1-OPTN (Figure 3G, 3H). p62 along with oxidized proteins were accumulated in human lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) (Figure S3H). Similarly, when endogenous OPTN was knocked down with shRNA, overexpression of wild-type HACE1 alone did not increase removal of p62 or cellular oxidized proteins (Figure S3H). Interestingly, p62 and oxidized proteins remained high in cells overexpressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193 (Figure 5A, S6C). Taken together, these results suggested that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193, might be essential for activating autophagy, as determined by removal of oxidatively damaged proteins, the conversion of LC3 I into lipidated LC3 II, and the degradation of p62 (Figure 3C-3H; Figure S3H).

HACE1-OPTN promotes autophagic removal of p62/SQSTM1 and oxidatively damaged proteins in human lung cancer cells

Accumulation of protein carbonyl groups is a biomarker of cellular oxidative stress and compromise in cellular proteolytic capacity (Dalle-Donne et al., 2003). Cellular levels of oxidatively damaged proteins can be efficiently assessed by derivatizing the carbonyl groups with hydrazines such as DNPH (2, 4-dinitrophenylhydrazine), followed by immunoblotting with anti-DNP antibodies to visualize the carbonylated proteins. Meanwhile, the DNP group also has a characteristic absorbance at 370 nm, making possible a facile quantitative assay of the content of carbonyl groups on a pool of proteins. Normally, oxidatively damaged proteins are removed in timely manner, largely through autophagy, as their degradation could be promoted by rapamycin, but blocked by autophagy inhibitor 3-MA or Baf stabilized them (also Figure S3G). N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) effectively scavenges cellular oxidants, while pyocyanin (PCN) is a secondary metabolite from Pseudomonas aeruginosa that can drastically increase the oxidative flux of cellular proteins. Therefore, cellular protein oxidation can be reliably gauged through anti-DNP blotting, using cells treated with NAC or PCN as negative or positive controls, respectively.

As shown in Figure 3F, overexpression of wild-type OPTN alone slightly decreased the total level of oxidized proteins in the lung cancer cells. Strikingly, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN reduced the cellular level of oxidized proteins so much that signal became barely detectable in anti-DNP blotting, which could be reversed by addition of Baf or knocking down HACE1. Further experiment with the ligase activity dead HACE1C876S or OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN is critical for removal of the carbonylated proteins during autophagy activated by HACE1-OPTN (Figure 3G, 3H). p62 along with oxidized proteins were accumulated in human lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) (Figure S3H). Similarly, when endogenous OPTN was knocked down with shRNA, overexpression of wild-type HACE1 alone did not increase removal of p62 or cellular oxidized proteins (Figure S3H). Interestingly, p62 and oxidized proteins remained high in cells overexpressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193 (Figure 5A, S6C). Taken together, these results suggested that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193, might be essential for activating autophagy, as determined by removal of oxidatively damaged proteins, the conversion of LC3 I into lipidated LC3 II, and the degradation of p62 (Figure 3C-3H; Figure S3H).

HACE1 and OPTN form a functional axis to promote autophagy in a p62-dependent mannerWe next used macrophages derived from either OPTN wild-type (OPTN +/+) or knockout (OPTN -/-) mice (Skarnes et al., 2011) to further investigate the role of OPTN during HACE1-activated autophagy. As shown in Figure 4A, in OPTN +/+ macrophages, overexpression of HACE1, but not the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S, induced significantly more conversion of LC3 I into LC3 II in lipidated form, removal of p62 or oxidized proteins. However, in OPTN -/- macrophages, neither p62 nor the cellular oxidized proteins were eliminated to a greater extent than in control cells regardless of the expression of HACE1 or HACE1C876S. This strongly suggested that existence of endogenous OPTN is required for HACE1-activated autophagy (Figure 4A).Interestingly, in p62 -/- MEF cells, the HACE1-OPTN axis did not promote autophagic removal of oxidatively damaged proteins either. However, this could be reversed when wild-type human p62 was re-introduced into the cells (Figure 4B), suggesting that the HACE1-OPTN axis might accelerate cellular autophagic flux in a p62 dependent manner. Interestingly, even in the presence of p62, K193R mutation in OPTN markedly compromised the autophagy-promoting activity of the HACE1-OPTN axis, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on K193 of OPTN might functionally interact with p62. It is intriguing to ask whether HACE1-conjugate poly-Ub chain on K193 of OPTN would directly interact with p62, whose UBA domain was known to bind to K48 or K63-linked poly-Ub chains (Ciani et al., 2003).

HACE1 and OPTN form a functional axis to promote autophagy in a p62-dependent manner

We next used macrophages derived from either OPTN wild-type (OPTN +/+) or knockout (OPTN -/-) mice (Skarnes et al., 2011) to further investigate the role of OPTN during HACE1-activated autophagy. As shown in Figure 4A, in OPTN +/+ macrophages, overexpression of HACE1, but not the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S, induced significantly more conversion of LC3 I into LC3 II in lipidated form, removal of p62 or oxidized proteins. However, in OPTN -/- macrophages, neither p62 nor the cellular oxidized proteins were eliminated to a greater extent than in control cells regardless of the expression of HACE1 or HACE1C876S. This strongly suggested that existence of endogenous OPTN is required for HACE1-activated autophagy (Figure 4A).

Interestingly, in p62 -/- MEF cells, the HACE1-OPTN axis did not promote autophagic removal of oxidatively damaged proteins either. However, this could be reversed when wild-type human p62 was re-introduced into the cells (Figure 4B), suggesting that the HACE1-OPTN axis might accelerate cellular autophagic flux in a p62 dependent manner. Interestingly, even in the presence of p62, K193R mutation in OPTN markedly compromised the autophagy-promoting activity of the HACE1-OPTN axis, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on K193 of OPTN might functionally interact with p62. It is intriguing to ask whether HACE1-conjugate poly-Ub chain on K193 of OPTN would directly interact with p62, whose UBA domain was known to bind to K48 or K63-linked poly-Ub chains (Ciani et al., 2003).

HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of Lys193 in OPTN promotes the formation of p62/SQSTM1-OPTN complexAs shown in Figure 4C, in OPTN +/+ MEF cells, endogenous HACE1, OPTN and p62 did physically interact to form a complex. However, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN with RNA interference abolished the interaction. Furthermore, removing poly-Ub chains on immunoprecipitated OPTN with deubiquitinating enzyme Usp2cc also disrupted OPTN-p62 interaction but not that for HACE1-OPTN, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might be critically involved into OPTN-p62 interaction (Figure 4D).As shown in Figure 5A, in lung cancer cells that overexpress wild-type HACE1 and OPTN, OPTN was ubiquitylated and interacted with endogenous p62. However, in cells over-expressing OPTNK193R and wild-type HACE1, much weaker or no interaction between OPTNK193R and p62 was detected, despite the fact that they had higher level of endogenous p62 protein. Meanwhile, in mouse p62 knockout embryonic cells (p62 -/- MEF) (Komatsu et al., 2007) expressing human HACE1, full-length p62 interacted with HACE1-ubiquitylated OPTN, which could be abolished by deletion of UBA domain in p62. Similarly, much weaker interaction was observed between OPTNK193R and the overexpressed p62. (Figure 5B). These data suggested that UBA domain of p62 and HACE1-conjugated Ub chains on Lys193 of OPTN were critically involved into OPTN and p62 interaction in vivo.As shown in Figure 5C, OPTN ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro interacted with UBA domain of p62, but the unmodified OPTN did not (Figure 5C). Meanwhile, there was little or no interaction observed between p62 and OPTNK193R, when the latter was marginally ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 5D). As shown in Figure 5E and 5F, only K48-linked poly-Ub chain that HACE1-conjugated onto OPTN interacted with the p62 in vitro while K27-linked one did not. This suggested that p62 preferential bound to ubiquitylated OPTN in K48 Ub linkage.

HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of Lys193 in OPTN promotes the formation of p62/SQSTM1-OPTN complex

As shown in Figure 4C, in OPTN +/+ MEF cells, endogenous HACE1, OPTN and p62 did physically interact to form a complex. However, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN with RNA interference abolished the interaction. Furthermore, removing poly-Ub chains on immunoprecipitated OPTN with deubiquitinating enzyme Usp2cc also disrupted OPTN-p62 interaction but not that for HACE1-OPTN, suggesting that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN might be critically involved into OPTN-p62 interaction (Figure 4D).

As shown in Figure 5A, in lung cancer cells that overexpress wild-type HACE1 and OPTN, OPTN was ubiquitylated and interacted with endogenous p62. However, in cells over-expressing OPTNK193R and wild-type HACE1, much weaker or no interaction between OPTNK193R and p62 was detected, despite the fact that they had higher level of endogenous p62 protein. Meanwhile, in mouse p62 knockout embryonic cells (p62 -/- MEF) (Komatsu et al., 2007) expressing human HACE1, full-length p62 interacted with HACE1-ubiquitylated OPTN, which could be abolished by deletion of UBA domain in p62. Similarly, much weaker interaction was observed between OPTNK193R and the overexpressed p62. (Figure 5B). These data suggested that UBA domain of p62 and HACE1-conjugated Ub chains on Lys193 of OPTN were critically involved into OPTN and p62 interaction in vivo.

As shown in Figure 5C, OPTN ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro interacted with UBA domain of p62, but the unmodified OPTN did not (Figure 5C). Meanwhile, there was little or no interaction observed between p62 and OPTNK193R, when the latter was marginally ubiquitylated by HACE1 in vitro (Figure 5D). As shown in Figure 5E and 5F, only K48-linked poly-Ub chain that HACE1-conjugated onto OPTN interacted with the p62 in vitro while K27-linked one did not. This suggested that p62 preferential bound to ubiquitylated OPTN in K48 Ub linkage.

The HACE1-OPTN axis accelerates degradation of p62, suppresses ROS production and mitigates oxidative DNA damage in human lung cancer cellsAutophagy receptor p62 is also a known substrate for selective autophagy (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010). Specifically, levels of endogenous p62 in mouse OPTN -/- macrophage cells were significantly higher than those in the wild-type cells, which could be reversed by re-introduction of wild-type OPTN (Figure 4A). Similar effect was also observed in CRL-5872 cells that express endogenous OPTN at low level, where level of endogenous p62 went down upon co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN (Figure 5A). However, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R did not reduce the level of endogenous p62, which strongly suggested that accelerated degradation of p62 was mainly dependent on HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of K193 in OPTN. In HEK293FT cells, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN also led to appreciable increase in static level of endogenous p62 protein (Figure 4D). Therefore, the co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN appeared to promote the interaction between autophagy receptors, OPTN and p62, and accelerates autophagic degradation of p62.Taken samples from those for Figure S3H, through IP with anti-DNP followed by quantitative mass spectra analysis, our data clearly indicated that co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN could significantly reduce the carbonylation of more than 60 cellular proteins in CRL-5872, including heat shock protein 70 KDa protein 8 (data not shown).Previous work demonstrated that p62 is also a positive regulator of cellular ROS (reactive oxygen species) production, and that ROS at elevated level triggers translocation of Nrf2 (nuclear factor [erythroid-derived 2]-like 2) into the nucleus, thus activating Nrf2-mediated p62 transcription (Komatsu et al., 2010). These findings suggest a feedback mechanism between p62 and intracellular ROS production. During the autophagy activated by the HACE-OPTN axis, accelerated removal of p62 and the oxidatively damaged proteins would significantly suppress ROS production. Indeed, production of ROS in cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN was less than 10 % percent of that in control cells (Figure S4A-F). Similar results were observed in DNA damage assays with cells expressing both HACE1 and OPTN (see Figure S4G).Excess of p62 is known to associate with multiple type of human cancer, and elimination of p62 has been well accepted as one of the major mechanisms through which autophagy suppresses tumorigenesis (Komatsu et al., 2010; Mathew et al., 2009). The HACE1-OPTN axis might suppress ROS production and mitigate oxidative DNA damage, most likely through promoting autophagic removal of p62 and the other oxidatively damaged proteins (Figure S3H).

The HACE1-OPTN axis accelerates degradation of p62, suppresses ROS production and mitigates oxidative DNA damage in human lung cancer cells

Autophagy receptor p62 is also a known substrate for selective autophagy (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010). Specifically, levels of endogenous p62 in mouse OPTN -/- macrophage cells were significantly higher than those in the wild-type cells, which could be reversed by re-introduction of wild-type OPTN (Figure 4A). Similar effect was also observed in CRL-5872 cells that express endogenous OPTN at low level, where level of endogenous p62 went down upon co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTN (Figure 5A). However, co-expression of wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R did not reduce the level of endogenous p62, which strongly suggested that accelerated degradation of p62 was mainly dependent on HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of K193 in OPTN. In HEK293FT cells, knocking down HACE1 or OPTN also led to appreciable increase in static level of endogenous p62 protein (Figure 4D). Therefore, the co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN appeared to promote the interaction between autophagy receptors, OPTN and p62, and accelerates autophagic degradation of p62.

Taken samples from those for Figure S3H, through IP with anti-DNP followed by quantitative mass spectra analysis, our data clearly indicated that co-expression of HACE1 and OPTN could significantly reduce the carbonylation of more than 60 cellular proteins in CRL-5872, including heat shock protein 70 KDa protein 8 (data not shown).

Previous work demonstrated that p62 is also a positive regulator of cellular ROS (reactive oxygen species) production, and that ROS at elevated level triggers translocation of Nrf2 (nuclear factor [erythroid-derived 2]-like 2) into the nucleus, thus activating Nrf2-mediated p62 transcription (Komatsu et al., 2010). These findings suggest a feedback mechanism between p62 and intracellular ROS production. During the autophagy activated by the HACE-OPTN axis, accelerated removal of p62 and the oxidatively damaged proteins would significantly suppress ROS production. Indeed, production of ROS in cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN was less than 10 % percent of that in control cells (Figure S4A-F). Similar results were observed in DNA damage assays with cells expressing both HACE1 and OPTN (see Figure S4G).

Excess of p62 is known to associate with multiple type of human cancer, and elimination of p62 has been well accepted as one of the major mechanisms through which autophagy suppresses tumorigenesis (Komatsu et al., 2010; Mathew et al., 2009). The HACE1-OPTN axis might suppress ROS production and mitigate oxidative DNA damage, most likely through promoting autophagic removal of p62 and the other oxidatively damaged proteins (Figure S3H).

The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses anchorage-independent growth of human lung cancer cellsWe proceeded to investigate the potential tumor-suppressive effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Tumor colony formation assay was performed with lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or both, or their indicated mutants (Figure 6A-B; Figure S5A). Cancer cells expressing wild-type HACE1 formed approximately 58% fewer colonies in soft agar than did control cells transfected with empty vectors. Cells expressing the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S formed as almost efficiently as the controls did. This result is consistent with the previous observation that the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 is critical for its potent suppressive effect on the anchorage-independent growth of the cancer cells (Zhang et al., 2007). Overexpression of OPTN alone inhibited tumor proliferation by approximately 63%. This strongly suggested that OPTN might also function as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer cells, which was reminiscent of the previous finding that higher OPTN expression strongly correlated with better relapse-free survival in human lung cancer patients (Figure S3F).Strikingly, cancer cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN formed colonies at a frequency less than 10 % of that by control cells, suggesting that HACE1 and OPTN could synergistically suppress tumor growth. In contrast, cancer cells that co-expressed wild-type OPTN and the enzymatically inactive HACE1C876S formed 63 % more colonies than the controls. Similar results were observed with cancer cells that expressed wild-type HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN or p62 knocked down through RNA interference (Figure 6A, 6B; Figure S5A, S5E and S5F), suggesting that the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 is dependent on the presence of endogenous OPTN, p62 and the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 (Figure S5C and S5G).Interestingly, in the cancer cells that overexpressed wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, the inhibitory effect of HACE1 on tumor colony formation was partially abrogated (Figure 6A-B). In contrast, Lys-to-Arg substitution on every ubiquitylation site other than Lys193 of OPTN still synergistically suppressed tumor with HACE1. Therefore, ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN, which was demonstrated to be critical for HACE1-activated autophagy, also significantly contributed to HACE1-mediated suppression of tumor colony formation.

The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses anchorage-independent growth of human lung cancer cells

We proceeded to investigate the potential tumor-suppressive effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Tumor colony formation assay was performed with lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or both, or their indicated mutants (Figure 6A-B; Figure S5A). Cancer cells expressing wild-type HACE1 formed approximately 58% fewer colonies in soft agar than did control cells transfected with empty vectors. Cells expressing the catalytically inactive HACE1C876S formed as almost efficiently as the controls did. This result is consistent with the previous observation that the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 is critical for its potent suppressive effect on the anchorage-independent growth of the cancer cells (Zhang et al., 2007). Overexpression of OPTN alone inhibited tumor proliferation by approximately 63%. This strongly suggested that OPTN might also function as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer cells, which was reminiscent of the previous finding that higher OPTN expression strongly correlated with better relapse-free survival in human lung cancer patients (Figure S3F).

Strikingly, cancer cells expressing both wild-type HACE1 and OPTN formed colonies at a frequency less than 10 % of that by control cells, suggesting that HACE1 and OPTN could synergistically suppress tumor growth. In contrast, cancer cells that co-expressed wild-type OPTN and the enzymatically inactive HACE1C876S formed 63 % more colonies than the controls. Similar results were observed with cancer cells that expressed wild-type HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN or p62 knocked down through RNA interference (Figure 6A, 6B; Figure S5A, S5E and S5F), suggesting that the tumor-suppressive function of HACE1 is dependent on the presence of endogenous OPTN, p62 and the ubiquitin ligase activity of HACE1 (Figure S5C and S5G).

Interestingly, in the cancer cells that overexpressed wild-type HACE1 and OPTNK193R, the OPTN mutant that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitution on Lys193, the inhibitory effect of HACE1 on tumor colony formation was partially abrogated (Figure 6A-B). In contrast, Lys-to-Arg substitution on every ubiquitylation site other than Lys193 of OPTN still synergistically suppressed tumor with HACE1. Therefore, ubiquitylation on Lys193 of OPTN, which was demonstrated to be critical for HACE1-activated autophagy, also significantly contributed to HACE1-mediated suppression of tumor colony formation.

The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses tumorigenicity of human lung cancer cells in nude miceSubsequently, a tumorigenicity model of cancer cells in nude mice was employed to further probe the tumor-suppressive effect of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. As shown in Figure S5C, the lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) stably expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or mutant forms of these proteins were injected into nude mice. Efficiency for tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in each group was assessed 21 days after the injection (Figure 6C, 6D). CRL-5872 cells expressing either exogenous HACE1 or OPTN alone formed tumors of sizes significantly (38% or 25%, respectively) smaller than those in the control group. Cancer cells with endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors approximately 87% larger than the controls, which again suggested tumor-suppressing function for OPTN. In cancer cells stably expressing both HACE1 and OPTN, the size of tumor formation was only one fifth of that of the control, indicating a synergistic tumor-suppressing effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Interestingly, cancer cells that expressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors in nude mice ~ 67% larger than that of the control.Remarkably, cancer cells expressing HACE1 with Lys-193-to-Arg substitution mutant, OPTNK193R, formed tumor ~129 % larger than that in the control. In contrast, cancer cells expressing HACE1 and OPTN that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitutions on all potential ubiquitylation sites except Lys193 in OPTN, OPTNK193only, formed tumors of ~51 percent smaller size than those of the control. This result highlighted the possibility that tumor-suppression by the HACE1-OPTN functional pair might be largely mediated by HACE1-conjugated poly-Ub chain on Lys193 residue of OPTN.The HACE1-OPTN axis also critically modulates cellular autophagy in the actual tumors in dependence on ubiquitylation of Lys193 OPTN, as assessed by assaying the increased formation of lipidated LC3 II and removal of carbonylated proteins (Figure 6E). Altogether, these data indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193 of OPTN, plays critical role in activating autophagy to suppress tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in vivo.Through immunohistochemistry microscopy analyses, we also examined the levels of endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins in human cancer samples, with those in adjacent normal tissues as controls. Indeed, HACE1 and OPTN appeared to be downregulated in multiple cancers, such as liver cancer (Figure 7A-D), stomach or lung cancer (Figure S6). The results further underscored the existence of a strong association between human malignancies and the deficiency of the HACE1-OPTN axis.

The HACE1-OPTN axis suppresses tumorigenicity of human lung cancer cells in nude mice

Subsequently, a tumorigenicity model of cancer cells in nude mice was employed to further probe the tumor-suppressive effect of HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN in vivo. As shown in Figure S5C, the lung cancer cells (CRL-5872) stably expressing wild-type HACE1, OPTN or mutant forms of these proteins were injected into nude mice. Efficiency for tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in each group was assessed 21 days after the injection (Figure 6C, 6D). CRL-5872 cells expressing either exogenous HACE1 or OPTN alone formed tumors of sizes significantly (38% or 25%, respectively) smaller than those in the control group. Cancer cells with endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors approximately 87% larger than the controls, which again suggested tumor-suppressing function for OPTN. In cancer cells stably expressing both HACE1 and OPTN, the size of tumor formation was only one fifth of that of the control, indicating a synergistic tumor-suppressing effect of the HACE1-OPTN axis. Interestingly, cancer cells that expressed HACE1 but had endogenous OPTN knocked down formed tumors in nude mice ~ 67% larger than that of the control.

Remarkably, cancer cells expressing HACE1 with Lys-193-to-Arg substitution mutant, OPTNK193R, formed tumor ~129 % larger than that in the control. In contrast, cancer cells expressing HACE1 and OPTN that harbored Lys-to-Arg substitutions on all potential ubiquitylation sites except Lys193 in OPTN, OPTNK193only, formed tumors of ~51 percent smaller size than those of the control. This result highlighted the possibility that tumor-suppression by the HACE1-OPTN functional pair might be largely mediated by HACE1-conjugated poly-Ub chain on Lys193 residue of OPTN.

The HACE1-OPTN axis also critically modulates cellular autophagy in the actual tumors in dependence on ubiquitylation of Lys193 OPTN, as assessed by assaying the increased formation of lipidated LC3 II and removal of carbonylated proteins (Figure 6E). Altogether, these data indicated that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193 of OPTN, plays critical role in activating autophagy to suppress tumorigenicity of the cancer cells in vivo.

Through immunohistochemistry microscopy analyses, we also examined the levels of endogenous HACE1 and OPTN proteins in human cancer samples, with those in adjacent normal tissues as controls. Indeed, HACE1 and OPTN appeared to be downregulated in multiple cancers, such as liver cancer (Figure 7A-D), stomach or lung cancer (Figure S6). The results further underscored the existence of a strong association between human malignancies and the deficiency of the HACE1-OPTN axis.

DiscussionsThrough recruiting and delivering cargo to autophagosome, receptors are known to play pivotal roles in selective autophagy. However, the distinct domain structures of different autophagy receptors actually distinguish one receptor from another. For example, p62 and NBR1 are known to self-oligomerize through their N-terminal PB1 (Phox and Bem1p) domains, while the other receptors may not (Itakura and Mizushima, 2011; Kirkin et al., 2009b). p62 and NBR1 are thus critical in organizing autophagy receptor complex and targeting autophagy cargos to autophagosome, followed by autophagic degradation. We report here that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193, might activate autophagy through promoting the physical interaction between autophagy receptors, OPTN and p62. Therefore, besides the previously known interaction between LC3 and the individual autophagy receptors, selective autophagy also seemed to be controlled by delicately regulated interactions between autophagy receptors. Our data not only underscore the critical role of p62 in autophagy, but also provide mechanistic insight into the functional dynamics of autophagy receptors during selective autophagy. Particularly, our findings have strongly suggested the actual existence of a large complex of multiple autophagy receptors (encompassing p62 and OPTN), in which the autophagy receptors work concertedly to recruit more cargoes and target them for efficient autophagic degradation. This model was strongly supported by the observations that endogenous OPTN, p62 and HACE1 indeed form a complex and formation of such complex is dependent on HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN, mainly on its K193. In light of the central role of p62 in forming autophagic complex, it is conceivable that such interaction in vivo could significantly augment recruitment of the autophagic cargos to the autophagy receptor complex including both p62 and OPTN, before targeting to autophagosome. This might mechanistically account for how the overall cellular autophagic flux was promoted by the HACE1-OPTN axis. With the emerging roles of Ub signaling in regulating autophagy (Kuang et al., 2013; Tasaki et al., 2013), our work has revealed a mechanism through which the Ub system delicately regulates selective autophagy through controlling the formation of autophagy receptor complex.In this study, we report that the HACE1-OPTN axis accelerate removal of p62, carbonylated proteins as well as the total cellular autophagic flux regardless of cell types. Given wide-range of cellular functions that these proteins are involved in and the critical importance of oxidative stress in tumor (Xu et al., 2011), removal of these oxidatively damaged proteins along with p62 and reduced production of ROS (Reactive oxygen species) might thus mechanistically underlie the tumor suppression mediated by the HACE1-OPTN axis (Figure 7E).Of note, consistent with previous observations (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010; Mathew et al., 2009), our work have again shown that autophagy receptors such as p62 and OPTN are, on one hand, required for autophagy, but also themselves undergo autophagic degradation. These seemingly paradoxical phenomena exactly highlight the multiple roles that autophagy receptors function in autophagy: as autophagy cargo carriers, regulators as well as substrates of autophagy.Given the fact that OPTN is critically implicated into neurological functions and host-microbe interactions (Mankouri et al., 2010; Maruyama et al., 2010; Wild et al., 2011; Ying and Yue, 2012), and the HACE1-OPTN axis activates autophagy in disregard of cell types, our findings might thus be of broad significance. Particularly, with the strong association between human malignancies and the deficiency of HACE1 or OPTN (Diskin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2007), targeting the HACE1-OPTN axis may thus open an avenue for therapeutic intervention in cancers.

Discussions

Through recruiting and delivering cargo to autophagosome, receptors are known to play pivotal roles in selective autophagy. However, the distinct domain structures of different autophagy receptors actually distinguish one receptor from another. For example, p62 and NBR1 are known to self-oligomerize through their N-terminal PB1 (Phox and Bem1p) domains, while the other receptors may not (Itakura and Mizushima, 2011; Kirkin et al., 2009b). p62 and NBR1 are thus critical in organizing autophagy receptor complex and targeting autophagy cargos to autophagosome, followed by autophagic degradation. We report here that HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation of OPTN, particularly that taking place on Lys193, might activate autophagy through promoting the physical interaction between autophagy receptors, OPTN and p62. Therefore, besides the previously known interaction between LC3 and the individual autophagy receptors, selective autophagy also seemed to be controlled by delicately regulated interactions between autophagy receptors. Our data not only underscore the critical role of p62 in autophagy, but also provide mechanistic insight into the functional dynamics of autophagy receptors during selective autophagy. Particularly, our findings have strongly suggested the actual existence of a large complex of multiple autophagy receptors (encompassing p62 and OPTN), in which the autophagy receptors work concertedly to recruit more cargoes and target them for efficient autophagic degradation. This model was strongly supported by the observations that endogenous OPTN, p62 and HACE1 indeed form a complex and formation of such complex is dependent on HACE1-mediated ubiquitylation on OPTN, mainly on its K193. In light of the central role of p62 in forming autophagic complex, it is conceivable that such interaction in vivo could significantly augment recruitment of the autophagic cargos to the autophagy receptor complex including both p62 and OPTN, before targeting to autophagosome. This might mechanistically account for how the overall cellular autophagic flux was promoted by the HACE1-OPTN axis. With the emerging roles of Ub signaling in regulating autophagy (Kuang et al., 2013; Tasaki et al., 2013), our work has revealed a mechanism through which the Ub system delicately regulates selective autophagy through controlling the formation of autophagy receptor complex.

In this study, we report that the HACE1-OPTN axis accelerate removal of p62, carbonylated proteins as well as the total cellular autophagic flux regardless of cell types. Given wide-range of cellular functions that these proteins are involved in and the critical importance of oxidative stress in tumor (Xu et al., 2011), removal of these oxidatively damaged proteins along with p62 and reduced production of ROS (Reactive oxygen species) might thus mechanistically underlie the tumor suppression mediated by the HACE1-OPTN axis (Figure 7E).

Of note, consistent with previous observations (Komatsu and Ichimura, 2010; Mathew et al., 2009), our work have again shown that autophagy receptors such as p62 and OPTN are, on one hand, required for autophagy, but also themselves undergo autophagic degradation. These seemingly paradoxical phenomena exactly highlight the multiple roles that autophagy receptors function in autophagy: as autophagy cargo carriers, regulators as well as substrates of autophagy.

Given the fact that OPTN is critically implicated into neurological functions and host-microbe interactions (Mankouri et al., 2010; Maruyama et al., 2010; Wild et al., 2011; Ying and Yue, 2012), and the HACE1-OPTN axis activates autophagy in disregard of cell types, our findings might thus be of broad significance. Particularly, with the strong association between human malignancies and the deficiency of HACE1 or OPTN (Diskin et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2007), targeting the HACE1-OPTN axis may thus open an avenue for therapeutic intervention in cancers.

Experimental ProceduresReagents and plasmid constructionSee Supplemental information for details.Yeast two-hybrid screenThe yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening was carried out to screen for E3 ub ligases that may ubiquitylate OPTN. Using OPTN or HACE1 as bait, HACE1 interacts with OPTN in yeast. OPTN and HACE1 or HACE1C876S co-transformed into yeast strain Mav203 can activate the expression of β-glycosidaseIn vitro and in vivo ubiquitylation assaysIn vitro ubiquitylation assays were performed as described before (Kim et al., 2014; Li et al., 2009). Immunoprecipitation with anti-OPTN, followed by anti-Ubiquitin immunoblotting, was performed in RIPA buffer to check the ubiquitylation status of endogenous OPTN. See supplemental experimental procedures for details.Mass spectra and mutagenesis analysesMass spectra (MS) and mutagenesis analyses, were performed to determine the sites of the poly-Ub chains that HACE1 conjugates to OPTN.Growth-independent colony formation and tumorigenicity assaysHuman lung cancer cells (CRL-5872), co-transfected with HACE1, OPTN or their mutants were subjected to colony formation assay on soft agar or tumorigenicity experiments in nude mice. Soft agar colony formation assays were carried out as described before (Li et al., 2010). Tumorigenicity assay of the lung cancer cells in nude mice was performed in CRL-5872 cells. After infection with the lentivirus or retrovirus, the infected CRL-5872 cells were then selected and maintained in puromycin (2.5 μg/ml). CRL-5872 stably cell lines were trypsinized, and counted. 100 μl aliquots of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 1 × 106 cells were mixed with Matrigel (cell suspension : Matrigel = 1 : 1) were implanted subcutaneously into 5-week-old female nude mice according to standard procedures (n = 6 mice per group). 21 days after injection, the mice were euthanized with carbon dioxide or and tumor masses were isolated and tumor weight measured.Autophagy assay and detection of oxidatively damaged proteinsFormation of GFP-LC3 puncta, the level of lipidated LC3, level of oxidatively damaged proteins, the production of radical oxidative species (ROS), DNA damage, autophagic turnover of p62 were assayed in CRL-5872 cells. CRL-5872 cells were transfected with genes of interest, and ROS production was detected using the total ROS detection kit (ENZO ENZ-51011) as described before (Tarpey and Fridovich, 2001). Protein oxidation was determined by OxyBlot Protein Oxidation Detection Kit (Millipore), according to the manufacturer’s instruction.OPTN knockout Mice and animal handlingThe OPTN -/- mice were generated in the European Conditional Mouse Mutagenesis Program (EUCOMM) (Skarnes et al., 2011) and distributed by University of Oulu, Finland. All animals were handled following the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).Clinical SpecimensThe liver and stomach cancer tissues were collected from patients in Zhongshan Hospital, Medical College of Fudan University (Shanghai). The lung cancer tissue microarrays (Number: HLug-NSCLC150PT-01), which contained samples from 75 cases of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in Taizhou Hospital (Zhejiang), were provided by Shanghai Outdo Biotech Co.. Informed consents were obtained from all subjects in accordance with the protocol approved by the individual institutional Ethic Committees.Isolation of murine peritoneal macrophagesMurine peritoneal macrophages isolated as described before (Zhang et al., 2008) with slight modifications.Statistical MethodsData were analyzed by using Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc). Unpaired T-test was performed using GraphPad Prism version 5.00 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA, www.graphpad.com. Results are presented as means ± S.E.M.Full methods and any associated references are available in the online supplemental information.

Experimental Procedures

Reagents and plasmid constructionSee Supplemental information for details.

Reagents and plasmid construction

See Supplemental information for details.

Yeast two-hybrid screenThe yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening was carried out to screen for E3 ub ligases that may ubiquitylate OPTN. Using OPTN or HACE1 as bait, HACE1 interacts with OPTN in yeast. OPTN and HACE1 or HACE1C876S co-transformed into yeast strain Mav203 can activate the expression of β-glycosidase

Yeast two-hybrid screen

The yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening was carried out to screen for E3 ub ligases that may ubiquitylate OPTN. Using OPTN or HACE1 as bait, HACE1 interacts with OPTN in yeast. OPTN and HACE1 or HACE1C876S co-transformed into yeast strain Mav203 can activate the expression of β-glycosidase

In vitro and in vivo ubiquitylation assaysIn vitro ubiquitylation assays were performed as described before (Kim et al., 2014; Li et al., 2009). Immunoprecipitation with anti-OPTN, followed by anti-Ubiquitin immunoblotting, was performed in RIPA buffer to check the ubiquitylation status of endogenous OPTN. See supplemental experimental procedures for details.

In vitro and in vivo ubiquitylation assays

In vitro ubiquitylation assays were performed as described before (Kim et al., 2014; Li et al., 2009). Immunoprecipitation with anti-OPTN, followed by anti-Ubiquitin immunoblotting, was performed in RIPA buffer to check the ubiquitylation status of endogenous OPTN. See supplemental experimental procedures for details.

Mass spectra and mutagenesis analysesMass spectra (MS) and mutagenesis analyses, were performed to determine the sites of the poly-Ub chains that HACE1 conjugates to OPTN.

Mass spectra and mutagenesis analyses

Mass spectra (MS) and mutagenesis analyses, were performed to determine the sites of the poly-Ub chains that HACE1 conjugates to OPTN.

Growth-independent colony formation and tumorigenicity assaysHuman lung cancer cells (CRL-5872), co-transfected with HACE1, OPTN or their mutants were subjected to colony formation assay on soft agar or tumorigenicity experiments in nude mice. Soft agar colony formation assays were carried out as described before (Li et al., 2010). Tumorigenicity assay of the lung cancer cells in nude mice was performed in CRL-5872 cells. After infection with the lentivirus or retrovirus, the infected CRL-5872 cells were then selected and maintained in puromycin (2.5 μg/ml). CRL-5872 stably cell lines were trypsinized, and counted. 100 μl aliquots of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 1 × 106 cells were mixed with Matrigel (cell suspension : Matrigel = 1 : 1) were implanted subcutaneously into 5-week-old female nude mice according to standard procedures (n = 6 mice per group). 21 days after injection, the mice were euthanized with carbon dioxide or and tumor masses were isolated and tumor weight measured.

Growth-independent colony formation and tumorigenicity assays

Human lung cancer cells (CRL-5872), co-transfected with HACE1, OPTN or their mutants were subjected to colony formation assay on soft agar or tumorigenicity experiments in nude mice. Soft agar colony formation assays were carried out as described before (Li et al., 2010). Tumorigenicity assay of the lung cancer cells in nude mice was performed in CRL-5872 cells. After infection with the lentivirus or retrovirus, the infected CRL-5872 cells were then selected and maintained in puromycin (2.5 μg/ml). CRL-5872 stably cell lines were trypsinized, and counted. 100 μl aliquots of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 1 × 106 cells were mixed with Matrigel (cell suspension : Matrigel = 1 : 1) were implanted subcutaneously into 5-week-old female nude mice according to standard procedures (n = 6 mice per group). 21 days after injection, the mice were euthanized with carbon dioxide or and tumor masses were isolated and tumor weight measured.

Autophagy assay and detection of oxidatively damaged proteinsFormation of GFP-LC3 puncta, the level of lipidated LC3, level of oxidatively damaged proteins, the production of radical oxidative species (ROS), DNA damage, autophagic turnover of p62 were assayed in CRL-5872 cells. CRL-5872 cells were transfected with genes of interest, and ROS production was detected using the total ROS detection kit (ENZO ENZ-51011) as described before (Tarpey and Fridovich, 2001). Protein oxidation was determined by OxyBlot Protein Oxidation Detection Kit (Millipore), according to the manufacturer’s instruction.

Autophagy assay and detection of oxidatively damaged proteins

Formation of GFP-LC3 puncta, the level of lipidated LC3, level of oxidatively damaged proteins, the production of radical oxidative species (ROS), DNA damage, autophagic turnover of p62 were assayed in CRL-5872 cells. CRL-5872 cells were transfected with genes of interest, and ROS production was detected using the total ROS detection kit (ENZO ENZ-51011) as described before (Tarpey and Fridovich, 2001). Protein oxidation was determined by OxyBlot Protein Oxidation Detection Kit (Millipore), according to the manufacturer’s instruction.

OPTN knockout Mice and animal handlingThe OPTN -/- mice were generated in the European Conditional Mouse Mutagenesis Program (EUCOMM) (Skarnes et al., 2011) and distributed by University of Oulu, Finland. All animals were handled following the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

OPTN knockout Mice and animal handling

The OPTN -/- mice were generated in the European Conditional Mouse Mutagenesis Program (EUCOMM) (Skarnes et al., 2011) and distributed by University of Oulu, Finland. All animals were handled following the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).

Clinical SpecimensThe liver and stomach cancer tissues were collected from patients in Zhongshan Hospital, Medical College of Fudan University (Shanghai). The lung cancer tissue microarrays (Number: HLug-NSCLC150PT-01), which contained samples from 75 cases of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in Taizhou Hospital (Zhejiang), were provided by Shanghai Outdo Biotech Co.. Informed consents were obtained from all subjects in accordance with the protocol approved by the individual institutional Ethic Committees.

Clinical Specimens

The liver and stomach cancer tissues were collected from patients in Zhongshan Hospital, Medical College of Fudan University (Shanghai). The lung cancer tissue microarrays (Number: HLug-NSCLC150PT-01), which contained samples from 75 cases of human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in Taizhou Hospital (Zhejiang), were provided by Shanghai Outdo Biotech Co.. Informed consents were obtained from all subjects in accordance with the protocol approved by the individual institutional Ethic Committees.

Isolation of murine peritoneal macrophagesMurine peritoneal macrophages isolated as described before (Zhang et al., 2008) with slight modifications.

Isolation of murine peritoneal macrophages

Murine peritoneal macrophages isolated as described before (Zhang et al., 2008) with slight modifications.

Statistical MethodsData were analyzed by using Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc). Unpaired T-test was performed using GraphPad Prism version 5.00 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA, www.graphpad.com. Results are presented as means ± S.E.M.Full methods and any associated references are available in the online supplemental information.

Statistical Methods

Data were analyzed by using Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc). Unpaired T-test was performed using GraphPad Prism version 5.00 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA, www.graphpad.com. Results are presented as means ± S.E.M.

Full methods and any associated references are available in the online supplemental information.

Supplementary Material01

Supplementary Material
