---
pmid: '19805293'
title: CBP and p300 are cytoplasmic E4 polyubiquitin ligases for p53.
authors:
- Shi D
- Pop MS
- Kulikov R
- Love IM
- Kung AL
- Grossman SR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2752525
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904305106
---

# CBP and p300 are cytoplasmic E4 polyubiquitin ligases for p53.
**Authors:** Shi D, Pop MS, Kulikov R, Love IM, Kung AL, Grossman SR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0904305106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0904305106)
**PMC:** [PMC2752525](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2752525/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16275-80. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0904305106. Epub 2009 Sep 4.

CBP and p300 are cytoplasmic E4 polyubiquitin ligases for p53.

Shi D(1), Pop MS, Kulikov R, Love IM, Kung AL, Grossman SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School and 
University of Massachusetts Memorial Cancer Center, 364 Plantation Street, 
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18427. Kung, Andrew [corrected 
to Kung, Andrew L].

p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) act as multifunctional regulators of p53 via 
acetylase and polyubiquitin ligase (E4) activities. Prior work in vitro has 
shown that the N-terminal 595 aa of p300 encode both generic ubiquitin ligase 
(E3) and p53-directed E4 functions. Analysis of p300 or CBP-deficient cells 
revealed that both coactivators were required for endogenous p53 
polyubiquitination and the normally rapid turnover of p53 in unstressed cells. 
Unexpectedly, p300/CBP ubiquitin ligase activities were absent in nuclear 
extracts and exclusively cytoplasmic. Consistent with the cytoplasmic 
localization of its E3/E4 activity, CBP deficiency specifically stabilized 
cytoplasmic, but not nuclear p53. The N-terminal 616 aa of CBP, which includes 
the conserved Zn(2+)-binding C/H1-TAZ1 domain, was the minimal domain sufficient 
to destabilize p53 in vivo, and it included within an intrinsic E3 
autoubiquitination activity and, in a two-step E4 assay, exhibited robust E4 
activity for p53. Cytoplasmic compartmentalization of p300/CBP's ubiquitination 
function reconciles seemingly opposed functions and explains how a futile cycle 
is avoided-cytoplasmic p300/CBP E4 activities ubiquitinate and destabilize p53, 
while physically separate nuclear p300/CBP activities, such as p53 acetylation, 
activate p53.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0904305106
PMCID: PMC2752525
PMID: 19805293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) act as multifunctional regulators of p53 via acetylase and polyubiquitin ligase (E4) activities. Prior work in vitro has shown that the N-terminal 595 aa of p300 encode both generic ubiquitin ligase (E3) and p53-directed E4 functions. Analysis of p300 or CBP-deficient cells revealed that both coactivators were required for endogenous p53 polyubiquitination and the normally rapid turnover of p53 in unstressed cells. Unexpectedly, p300/CBP ubiquitin ligase activities were absent in nuclear extracts and exclusively cytoplasmic. Consistent with the cytoplasmic localization of its E3/E4 activity, CBP deficiency specifically stabilized cytoplasmic, but not nuclear p53. The N-terminal 616 aa of CBP, which includes the conserved Zn 2+ -binding C/H1-TAZ1 domain, was the minimal domain sufficient to destabilize p53 in vivo, and it included within an intrinsic E3 autoubiquitination activity and, in a two-step E4 assay, exhibited robust E4 activity for p53. Cytoplasmic compartmentalization of p300/CBP's ubiquitination function reconciles seemingly opposed functions and explains how a futile cycle is avoided—cytoplasmic p300/CBP E4 activities ubiquitinate and destabilize p53, while physically separate nuclear p300/CBP activities, such as p53 acetylation, activate p53.

Discussion

p300 and its paralog CBP have been identified as physiological regulators of p53 ubiquitination and stability. Depletion of CBP or p300 resulted in p53 stabilization, and CBP and p300 were both required for physiologic p53 polyubiquitination. The CBP N terminus (1–616) was found to encode a p53 destabilization function in vivo, and residues 1–616 and 1–451, respectively, constitute minimal functional E4 and E3 domains within CBP. CBP and p300 E3 activities were only observed from cytoplasmic fractions, and p53-mono-Ub and MUM conjugates accumulated in the cytoplasm of CBP silenced cells. The degradation of cytoplasmic p53 was specifically altered by CBP silencing, consistent with the cytoplasmic localization of CBP E4 function in vivo.

The N terminus of p300 harbors its E3/E4 activity ( 14 ), and the same region of CBP encodes its E3/E4 activity and shares significant areas of sequence conservation ( 18 , 30 ). Within this region of p300/CBP is a cys-his-rich region, but no signatures for RING, HECT, U-box, or PHD domains can be found. Based on findings with the A20, Rabex-5, and E4F1 proteins ( 10 , 17 , 31 ), a generic Zn 2+ -binding region (cys- or cys-his-rich) can encode an active E3, with no clear sequence or structural homology to the Zn 2+ -binding RING E3 domain. Perhaps more directly relevant, the evolutionarily related HAT P/CAF was recently shown to encode a noncanonical E3 that targets MDM2 ( 21 ). In this case, the protein domain responsible for the activity contains no structural motifs found in known E3 proteins ( 21 ).

Subcellular fractionation revealed that p300/CBP E3 activities are limited to the cytoplasm and presumably account for the activity that converts mono-Ub/MUM p53 conjugates to polyubiquitinated unstable p53 in the cytoplasm. The mechanism of localization of p300/CBP E3 activity to the cytoplasm cannot yet be explained. Either a cytoplasmic-specific modification of p300/CBP or p300/CBP-interacting factor activates the activity or an interacting factor or modification in the nucleus represses it. The spatial separation of p300/CBP's E3/E4 activity from their nuclear HAT functions is intriguing and solves the seeming paradox of how these two presumed opposing regulatory functions exist within the same molecules ( 32 ).

This work raises a number of questions critical to p53, ubiquitin/proteasome, and cancer biology. How the plethora of p53 E3s, and now E4s, are coordinated to achieve p53 homeostasis remains unclear, although it is likely that the subcellular localization of these enzymes will be of critical importance to understanding their roles. The biochemical mechanism by which CBP/p300 recognizes ubiquitinated, and not native, p53 for further ubiquitination is also presently not understood. The simplest explanation for the preferred recognition of ubiquitinated substrate would be the existence of a Ub recognition motif within the p300/CBP N-termini—as is seen in the Rabex-5 atypical E3 ( 31 ), although no such domain is readily recognized in p300/CBP by homology search. Finally, the implications of these findings for cancer biology and therapy are potentially significant. As MDM2 is now a bona fide clinically relevant drug target for cancer therapy ( 33 ), other enzymes in the p53 stability regulation pathway, such as the p300/CBP E4 domain, might also be effectively targeted in human cancers.
