---
pmid: '10604997'
title: Bovine and human insulin activate CD8+-autoreactive CTL expressing both type
  1 and type 2 cytokines in C57BL/6 mice.
authors:
- Ma H
- Ke Y
- Li Q
- Kapp JA
journal: J Immunol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.86
---

# Bovine and human insulin activate CD8+-autoreactive CTL expressing both type 1 and type 2 cytokines in C57BL/6 mice.
**Authors:** Ma H, Ke Y, Li Q, Kapp JA
**Journal:** J Immunol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.86](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.86)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2000 Jan 1;164(1):86-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.86.

Bovine and human insulin activate CD8+-autoreactive CTL expressing both type 1 
and type 2 cytokines in C57BL/6 mice.

Ma H(1), Ke Y, Li Q, Kapp JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Winship Cancer Center, Department of Cell 
Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

CD8+ T cells down-regulate a variety of immune responses. For example, porcine 
and human insulin do not stimulate Abs in C57BL/6 mice because CD8+ T cells 
inhibit CD4+ helper T cells. By contrast, bovine insulin induces Ab in C57BL/6 
mice, and removal of CD8+ T cells does not alter this response. This raises the 
question of whether porcine, but not bovine, insulin activates CD8+ T cells or 
whether both insulins activate CD8+ T cells but CD4+ helper T cells are 
differentially inhibited by them. In this study, we show that insulin-specific 
CD8+ CTL can be cultured from C57BL/6 mice primed with either bovine or human 
insulin in CFA. Thus, exogenous Ags, besides OVA, induce CD8+ CTL when 
administered in an adjuvant, suggesting this is a typical response. These CTL 
are H-2Kb restricted and produce IL-5, IL-10, IFN-gamma, and small amounts of 
IL-4, which is distinct from IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha that are typically secreted 
by virus-specific CTL. Moreover, the CTL primed with either bovine or human 
insulin recognize an A-chain peptide that is identical to the mouse insulin 
sequence. That foreign proteins, which are closely related to self-proteins, 
activated autoreactive, CD8+ T cells in vivo is a novel finding. It raises the 
possibility that self-reactive CTL may be activated by cross-reacting Ags and 
once activated they might participate in autoimmunity. These results also 
suggest that down-regulation of insulin-specific responses by autoreactive CD8+ 
T cells is most likely due to the differential sensitivity of bovine and human 
insulin-specific CD4+ T cells.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.86
PMID: 10604997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
