---
pmid: '16364912'
title: Localization of the coactivator Cdh1 and the cullin subunit Apc2 in a cryo-electron
  microscopy model of vertebrate APC/C.
authors:
- Dube P
- Herzog F
- Gieffers C
- Sander B
- Riedel D
- Müller SA
- Engel A
- Peters JM
- Stark H
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.008
---

# Localization of the coactivator Cdh1 and the cullin subunit Apc2 in a cryo-electron microscopy model of vertebrate APC/C.
**Authors:** Dube P, Herzog F, Gieffers C, Sander B, Riedel D, Müller SA, Engel A, Peters JM, Stark H
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.008)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Dec 22;20(6):867-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.008.

Localization of the coactivator Cdh1 and the cullin subunit Apc2 in a 
cryo-electron microscopy model of vertebrate APC/C.

Dube P(1), Herzog F, Gieffers C, Sander B, Riedel D, Müller SA, Engel A, Peters 
JM, Stark H.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Goettingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2006 Jan;10(1):4-5. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2005.12.010.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a ubiquitin ligase with 
essential functions in mitosis, meiosis, and G1 phase of the cell cycle. APC/C 
recognizes substrates via coactivator proteins such as Cdh1, and bound 
substrates are ubiquitinated by E2 enzymes that interact with a hetero-dimer of 
the RING subunit Apc11 and the cullin Apc2. We have obtained three-dimensional 
(3D) models of human and Xenopus APC/C by angular reconstitution and random 
conical tilt (RCT) analyses of negatively stained cryo-electron microscopy 
(cryo-EM) preparations, have determined the masses of these particles by 
scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), and have mapped the locations 
of Cdh1 and Apc2. These proteins are located on the same side of the asymmetric 
APC/C, implying that this is where substrates are ubiquitinated. We have further 
identified a large flexible domain in APC/C that adopts a different orientation 
upon Cdh1 binding. Cdh1 may thus activate APC/C both by recruiting substrates 
and by inducing conformational changes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.11.008
PMID: 16364912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
