---
pmid: '16981698'
title: GSKIP is homologous to the Axin GSK3beta interaction domain and functions as
  a negative regulator of GSK3beta.
authors:
- Chou HY
- Howng SL
- Cheng TS
- Hsiao YL
- Lieu AS
- Loh JK
- Hwang SL
- Lin CC
- Hsu CM
- Wang C
- Lee CI
- Lu PJ
- Chou CK
- Huang CY
- Hong YR
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi061147r
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# GSKIP is homologous to the Axin GSK3beta interaction domain and functions as a negative regulator of GSK3beta.
**Authors:** Chou HY, Howng SL, Cheng TS, Hsiao YL, Lieu AS, Loh JK, Hwang SL, Lin CC, Hsu CM, Wang C, Lee CI, Lu PJ, Chou CK, Huang CY, Hong YR
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi061147r](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi061147r)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2006 Sep 26;45(38):11379-89. doi: 10.1021/bi061147r.

GSKIP is homologous to the Axin GSK3beta interaction domain and functions as a 
negative regulator of GSK3beta.

Chou HY(1), Howng SL, Cheng TS, Hsiao YL, Lieu AS, Loh JK, Hwang SL, Lin CC, Hsu 
CM, Wang C, Lee CI, Lu PJ, Chou CK, Huang CY, Hong YR.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemistry, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan, ROC.

Although prominent FRAT/GBP exhibits a limited degree of homology to Axin, the 
binding sites on GSK3 for FRAT/GBP and Axin may overlap to prevent the effect of 
FRAT/GBP in stabilizing beta-catenin in the Wnt pathway. Using a yeast 
two-hybrid screen, we identified a novel protein, GSK3beta interaction protein 
(GSKIP), which binds to GSK3beta. We have defined a 25-amino acid region in the 
C-terminus of GSKIP that is highly similar to the GSK3beta interaction domain 
(GID) of Axin. Using an in vitro kinase assay, our results indicate that GSKIP 
is a good GSK3beta substrate, and both the full-length protein and a C-terminal 
fragment of GSKIP can block phosphorylation of primed and nonprimed substrates 
in different fashions. Similar to Axin GID(381-405) and FRATtide, synthesized 
GSKIPtide is also shown to compete with and/or block the phosphorylation of Axin 
and beta-catenin by GSK3beta. Furthermore, our data indicate that overexpression 
of GSKIP induces beta-catenin accumulation in the cytoplasm and nucleus as 
visualized by immunofluorescence. A functional assay also demonstrates that 
GSKIP-transfected cells have a significant effect on the transactivity of Tcf-4. 
Collectively, we define GSKIP as a naturally occurring protein that is 
homologous with the GSK3beta interaction domain of Axin and is able to 
negatively regulate GSK3beta of the Wnt signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1021/bi061147r
PMID: 16981698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
