---
pmid: '39874878'
title: Exploring the mechanisms of cadmium tolerance and bioaccumulation in a soil
  amoeba.
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Zhang L
- Wang Z
- Wu C
- Liu F
- Shu L
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178637
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Exploring the mechanisms of cadmium tolerance and bioaccumulation in a soil amoeba.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Zhang L, Wang Z, Wu C, Liu F, Shu L
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178637](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178637)

## Abstract

1. Sci Total Environ. 2025 Feb 15;965:178637. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178637.  Epub 2025 Jan 27.

Exploring the mechanisms of cadmium tolerance and bioaccumulation in a soil 
amoeba.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang L(1), Wang Z(1), Wu C(1), Liu F(1), Shu L(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Environmental Pollution Control and Remediation Technology, State Key 
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Environmental Pollution Control and Remediation Technology, State Key 
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China. 
Electronic address: shulf@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Cadmium (Cd) pollution is a global concern. Protists represent a prevalent yet 
understudied group in soil ecosystems, but our understanding of how protists 
interact with Cd remains limited. This study investigates the interaction 
between Cd and the soil amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum, focusing on its 
resistance, accumulation, and molecular mechanisms. We found that D. discoideum 
amoebae exhibit strong Cd resistance with an EC50 (half maximal effective 
concentration) of 899.2 mg/kg and demonstrates significant Cd enrichment 
capabilities, achieving concentrations up to 1094.70 ± 310.95 mg/kg in stalks 
and a bioconcentration factor (BCF) of 7.30. Transcriptomic analysis revealed 
enriched pathways related to DNA replication and identified key genes involved 
in metal transport, detoxification, and stress response, including abc4, abc16, 
mms19, gcsA, ucpB, and sodA. Notably, microRNA (miRNA) regulation was found to 
play a critical role in modulating the expression of these genes. Our findings 
provide novel insights into the Cd enrichment potential of D. discoideum amoebae 
and elucidate its mechanisms of heavy metal resistance, highlighting the 
regulatory role of miRNAs. This study not only advances our understanding of 
protist-Cd interactions but also opens new avenues for the bioremediation of 
heavy metal-contaminated soils, where soil amoebae could serve as an effective 
agent due to their high bioaccumulation factor and rapid growth cycle.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.178637
PMID: 39874878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing financial interest.
