---
pmid: '8538347'
title: Hypertension in the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess due to mutation
  of the 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene.
authors:
- Stewart PM
- Krozowski ZS
- Gupta A
- Milford DV
- Howie AJ
- Sheppard MC
- Whorwood CB
journal: Lancet
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)90211-1
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Hypertension in the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess due to mutation of the 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene.
**Authors:** Stewart PM, Krozowski ZS, Gupta A, Milford DV, Howie AJ, Sheppard MC, Whorwood CB
**Journal:** Lancet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(96)90211-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(96)90211-1)

## Abstract

1. Lancet. 1996 Jan 13;347(8994):88-91. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)90211-1.

Hypertension in the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess due to 
mutation of the 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene.

Stewart PM(1), Krozowski ZS, Gupta A, Milford DV, Howie AJ, Sheppard MC, 
Whorwood CB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, 
Edgbaston, UK.

BACKGROUND: 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11 beta-HSD) catalyses the 
interconversion of hormonally active cortisol to inactive cortisone and is vital 
for dictating specificity for the mineralocorticoid receptor. Thus, in patients 
with congenital deficiency of 11 beta-HSD (the syndrome of apparent 
mineralocorticoid excess, AME), cortisol and not aldosterone acts as a 
mineralocorticoid, resulting in hypertension and hypokalaemia with suppression 
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis. Two isoforms of human 11 beta-HSD 
have been described, but it is the NAD-dependent type 2 isoform (11 beta-HSD2), 
first characterised in placental tissue, that is expressed in the 
mineralocorticoid target tissues, kidney and colon. We have analysed the 11 
beta-HSD2 gene as a candidate gene in explaining the molecular basis of AME.
METHODS: By exon-specific PCR-amplification of the 11 beta-HSD2 gene in a 
consanguineous kindred with AME, we found a point mutation (C1228T) in two 
affected siblings, and also in placental DNA obtained from a stillbirth 
pregnancy.
FINDINGS: The mutation in exon 5 of the 11 beta-HSD2 gene resulted in a 
premature stop site at codon 374 instead of a normal arginine (R374X), with the 
deletion of 32 aminoacids from the C-terminus of the 11 beta-HSD2 enzyme 
protein. Both parents, who are phenotypically normal, are heterozygote for the 
C1228T mutation in keeping with an autosomal recessive form of inheritance. 
NAD-dependent 11 beta-HSD activity was severely attenuated in the stillbirth 
placenta compared with control placental tissue, and no 11 beta-HSD 
immunostaining was observed in this placenta with antisera derived against a 
C-terminal 11 beta-HSD2 peptide sequence.
INTERPRETATION: AME is due to a mutation in the 11 beta-HSD2 gene, and is an 
example of human hypertension arising from a single gene defect.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)90211-1
PMID: 8538347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
