---
pmid: '20185822'
title: DAXX is a new AIRE-interacting protein.
authors:
- Meloni A
- Fiorillo E
- Corda D
- Incani F
- Serra ML
- Contini A
- Cao A
- Rosatelli MC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2857146
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.037747
---

# DAXX is a new AIRE-interacting protein.
**Authors:** Meloni A, Fiorillo E, Corda D, Incani F, Serra ML, Contini A, Cao A, Rosatelli MC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.037747](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.037747)
**PMC:** [PMC2857146](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2857146/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13012-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.037747. Epub 
2010 Feb 25.

DAXX is a new AIRE-interacting protein.

Meloni A(1), Fiorillo E, Corda D, Incani F, Serra ML, Contini A, Cao A, 
Rosatelli MC.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, 09121 Cagliari, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 25;285(26):20421. Meloni, Allesandra [corrected to 
Meloni, Alessandra].

The AIRE protein plays a remarkable role as a regulator of central tolerance by 
controlling the promiscuous expression of tissue-specific antigens in thymic 
medullary epithelial cells. Defects in the AIRE gene cause the autoimmune 
polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy, a rare disease frequent in 
Iranian Jews, Finns, and Sardinian population. To this day, the precise function 
of the AIRE protein in regulating transcription and its interacting proteins has 
yet to be entirely clarified. The knowledge of novel AIRE interactors and their 
precise role will improve our knowledge of its biological activity and address 
some of the foremost autoimmunity-related questions. In this study, we have used 
a yeast two-hybrid system to identify AIRE-interacting proteins. This approach 
led us to the discovery of a new AIRE-interacting protein called DAXX. The 
protein is known to be a multifunctional adaptor with functions both in 
apoptosis and in transcription regulation pathways. The interaction between AIRE 
and DAXX has been validated by in vivo coimmunoprecipitation analysis and 
colocalization study in mammalian cells. The interaction has been further 
confirmed by showing in transactivation assays that DAXX exerts a strong 
repressive role on the transcriptional activity of AIRE.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.037747
PMCID: PMC2857146
PMID: 20185822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
