---
pmid: '12730603'
title: Decapping and decay of messenger RNA occur in cytoplasmic processing bodies.
authors:
- Sheth U
- Parker R
journal: Science
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1876714
doi: 10.1126/science.1082320
---

# Decapping and decay of messenger RNA occur in cytoplasmic processing bodies.
**Authors:** Sheth U, Parker R
**Journal:** Science (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1082320](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1082320)
**PMC:** [PMC1876714](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1876714/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2003 May 2;300(5620):805-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1082320.

Decapping and decay of messenger RNA occur in cytoplasmic processing bodies.

Sheth U(1), Parker R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology & Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 May 2;300(5620):753-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1084512.

A major pathway of eukaryotic messenger RNA (mRNA) turnover begins with 
deadenylation, followed by decapping and 5' to 3' exonucleolytic decay. We 
provide evidence that mRNA decapping and 5' to 3' degradation occur in discrete 
cytoplasmic foci in yeast, which we call processing bodies (P bodies). First, 
proteins that activate or catalyze decapping are concentrated in P bodies. 
Second, inhibiting mRNA turnover before decapping leads to loss of P bodies; 
however, inhibiting turnover at, or after, decapping, increases the abundance 
and size of P bodies. Finally, mRNA degradation intermediates are localized to P 
bodies. These results define the flux of mRNAs between polysomes and P bodies as 
a critical aspect of cytoplasmic mRNA metabolism and a possible site for 
regulation of mRNA degradation.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1082320
PMCID: PMC1876714
PMID: 12730603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
