---
pmid: '8186255'
title: Determination of the catalytic site of creatine kinase by site-directed mutagenesis.
authors:
- Lin L
- Perryman MB
- Friedman D
- Roberts R
- Ma TS
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0167-4838(94)90077-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Determination of the catalytic site of creatine kinase by site-directed mutagenesis.
**Authors:** Lin L, Perryman MB, Friedman D, Roberts R, Ma TS
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0167-4838(94)90077-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-4838(94)90077-9)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 May 18;1206(1):97-104. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4838(94)90077-9.

Determination of the catalytic site of creatine kinase by site-directed 
mutagenesis.

Lin L(1), Perryman MB, Friedman D, Roberts R, Ma TS.

Author information:
(1)Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX.

Site-directed mutagenesis was used to alter the amino-acid residues at the 
presumed catalytic site Cys-283 and ATP binding site Asp-340 of human creatine 
kinase B cDNA. In addition, a highly conserved arginine residue, Arg-292, was 
also mutated. Transfection of 0.1 to 1 microgram of recombinant plasmid into COS 
cells produced increasing creatine kinase activity in the cell lysate. The 
expression of mutant Cys283-Tyr and Cys283-Ser resulted in complete abolition of 
homodimer BB isoform enzymatic activity without alteration of the capacity for 
dimerization. Expression of mutants Arg292-His, Arg292-Leu, and Arg292-Gln 
produced non-functional homodimers, whereas expression of mutant Arg292-Lys 
produced a homodimer with enzymatic activity that was 42% of the enzymatic 
activity of the wild type. Expression of the Asp340-Glu mutant creatine kinase 
did not alter enzyme activity as compared to the wild type. Following 
heterodimerization, there was inhibition of the normal subunit by the mutant 
subunit, for both the BB and the MB dimer. The results showed residues Cys-283 
and Arg-292 are essential for enzyme catalysis. The best fit model for the dimer 
is one in which there is close apposition of the two catalytic sites. The 
interaction of the individual subunits during dimerization provides a molecular 
approach for dominant negative modulation of the creatine kinase isozyme system 
in future genetic manipulative experiments.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4838(94)90077-9
PMID: 8186255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
