---
pmid: '15623507'
title: PIG-V involved in transferring the second mannose in glycosylphosphatidylinositol.
authors:
- Kang JY
- Hong Y
- Ashida H
- Shishioh N
- Murakami Y
- Morita YS
- Maeda Y
- Kinoshita T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413867200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# PIG-V involved in transferring the second mannose in glycosylphosphatidylinositol.
**Authors:** Kang JY, Hong Y, Ashida H, Shishioh N, Murakami Y, Morita YS, Maeda Y, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413867200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413867200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 11;280(10):9489-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413867200. Epub
2004  Dec 28.

PIG-V involved in transferring the second mannose in 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol.

Kang JY(1), Hong Y, Ashida H, Shishioh N, Murakami Y, Morita YS, Maeda Y, 
Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a glycolipid that anchors many proteins to 
the eukaryotic cell surface. The biosynthetic pathway of GPI is mediated by 
sequential additions of sugars and other components to phosphatidylinositol. 
Four mannoses in the GPI are transferred from dolichol-phosphate-mannose 
(Dol-P-Man) and are linked through different glycosidic linkages. Therefore, 
four Dol-P-Man-dependent mannosyltransferases, GPI-MT-I, -MT-II, -MT-III, and 
-MT-IV for the first, second, third, and fourth mannoses, respectively, are 
required for generation of GPI. GPI-MT-I (PIG-M), GPI-MT-III (PIG-B), and 
GPI-MT-IV (SMP3) were previously reported, but GPI-MT-II remains to be 
identified. Here we report the cloning of PIG-V involved in transferring the 
second mannose in the GPI anchor. Human PIG-V encodes a 493-amino acid, 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resident protein with eight putative transmembrane 
regions. Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein encoded in open reading frame YBR004c, 
which we termed GPI18, has 25% amino acid identity to human PIG-V. Viability of 
the yeast gpi18 deletion mutant was restored by human PIG-V cDNA. PIG-V has two 
functionally important conserved regions facing the ER lumen. Taken together, we 
suggest that PIG-V is the second mannosyltransferase in GPI anchor biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413867200
PMID: 15623507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
