---
pmid: '24022490'
title: CR1-mediated ATP release by human red blood cells promotes CR1 clustering and
  modulates the immune transfer process.
authors:
- Melhorn MI
- Brodsky AS
- Estanislau J
- Khoory JA
- Illigens B
- Hamachi I
- Kurishita Y
- Fraser AD
- Nicholson-Weller A
- Dolmatova E
- Duffy HS
- Ghiran IC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3829426
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486035
---

# CR1-mediated ATP release by human red blood cells promotes CR1 clustering and modulates the immune transfer process.
**Authors:** Melhorn MI, Brodsky AS, Estanislau J, Khoory JA, Illigens B, Hamachi I, Kurishita Y, Fraser AD, Nicholson-Weller A, Dolmatova E, Duffy HS, Ghiran IC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.486035](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.486035)
**PMC:** [PMC3829426](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3829426/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31139-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486035. Epub 
2013 Sep 10.

CR1-mediated ATP release by human red blood cells promotes CR1 clustering and 
modulates the immune transfer process.

Melhorn MI(1), Brodsky AS, Estanislau J, Khoory JA, Illigens B, Hamachi I, 
Kurishita Y, Fraser AD, Nicholson-Weller A, Dolmatova E, Duffy HS, Ghiran IC.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Allergy and Inflammation.

Humans and other higher primates are unique among mammals in using complement 
receptor 1 (CR1, CD35) on red blood cells (RBC) to ligate complement-tagged 
inflammatory particles (immune complexes, apoptotic/necrotic debris, and 
microbes) in the circulation for quiet transport to the sinusoids of spleen and 
liver where resident macrophages remove the particles, but allow the RBC to 
return unharmed to the circulation. This process is called immune-adherence 
clearance. In this study we found using luminometric- and fluorescence-based 
methods that ligation of CR1 on human RBC promotes ATP release. Our data show 
that CR1-mediated ATP release does not depend on Ca(2+) or enzymes previously 
shown to mediate an increase in membrane deformability promoted by CR1 ligation. 
Furthermore, ATP release following CR1 ligation increases the mobility of the 
lipid fraction of RBC membranes, which in turn facilitates CR1 clustering, and 
thereby enhances the binding avidity of complement-opsonized particles to the 
RBC CR1. Finally, we have found that RBC-derived ATP has a stimulatory effect on 
phagocytosis of immune-adherent immune complexes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486035
PMCID: PMC3829426
PMID: 24022490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
