---
pmid: '24781523'
title: PP2A delays APC/C-dependent degradation of separase-associated but not free
  securin.
authors:
- Hellmuth S
- Böttger F
- Pan C
- Mann M
- Stemmann O
journal: EMBO J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4193920
doi: 10.1002/embj.201488098
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# PP2A delays APC/C-dependent degradation of separase-associated but not free securin.
**Authors:** Hellmuth S, Böttger F, Pan C, Mann M, Stemmann O
**Journal:** EMBO J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/embj.201488098](https://doi.org/10.1002/embj.201488098)
**PMC:** [PMC4193920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4193920/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2014 May 16;33(10):1134-47. doi: 10.1002/embj.201488098. Epub 2014 Apr
 29.

PP2A delays APC/C-dependent degradation of separase-associated but not free 
securin.

Hellmuth S(1), Böttger F(2), Pan C(3), Mann M(3), Stemmann O(2).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany.
(2)Chair of Genetics, University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany 
franziska.boettger@ki.se olaf.stemmann@uni-bayreuth.de.
(3)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of 
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

The universal triggering event of eukaryotic chromosome segregation is cleavage 
of centromeric cohesin by separase. Prior to anaphase, most separase is kept 
inactive by association with securin. Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) constitutes 
another binding partner of human separase, but the functional relevance of this 
interaction has remained enigmatic. We demonstrate that PP2A stabilizes 
separase-associated securin by dephosphorylation, while phosphorylation of free 
securin enhances its polyubiquitylation by the ubiquitin ligase APC/C and 
proteasomal degradation. Changing PP2A substrate phosphorylation sites to 
alanines slows degradation of free securin, delays separase activation, 
lengthens early anaphase, and results in anaphase bridges and DNA damage. In 
contrast, separase-associated securin is destabilized by introduction of 
phosphorylation-mimetic aspartates or extinction of separase-associated PP2A 
activity. G2- or prometaphase-arrested cells suffer from unscheduled activation 
of separase when endogenous securin is replaced by aspartate-mutant securin. 
Thus, PP2A-dependent stabilization of separase-associated securin prevents 
precocious activation of separase during checkpoint-mediated arrests with basal 
APC/C activity and increases the abruptness and fidelity of sister chromatid 
separation in anaphase.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1002/embj.201488098
PMCID: PMC4193920
PMID: 24781523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The universal triggering event of eukaryotic chromosome segregation is cleavage of centromeric cohesin by separase. Prior to anaphase, most separase is kept inactive by association with securin. Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) constitutes another binding partner of human separase, but the functional relevance of this interaction has remained enigmatic. We demonstrate that PP2A stabilizes separase-associated securin by dephosphorylation, while phosphorylation of free securin enhances its polyubiquitylation by the ubiquitin ligase APC/C and proteasomal degradation. Changing PP2A substrate phosphorylation sites to alanines slows degradation of free securin, delays separase activation, lengthens early anaphase, and results in anaphase bridges and DNA damage. In contrast, separase-associated securin is destabilized by introduction of phosphorylation-mimetic aspartates or extinction of separase-associated PP2A activity. G2- or prometaphase-arrested cells suffer from unscheduled activation of separase when endogenous securin is replaced by aspartate-mutant securin. Thus, PP2A-dependent stabilization of separase-associated securin prevents precocious activation of separase during checkpoint-mediated arrests with basal APC/C activity and increases the abruptness and fidelity of sister chromatid separation in anaphase.

Introduction

In eukaryotes, other than in prokaryotes, the duplication and segregation of the genetic material are separated in time, taking place during S- and M-phase, respectively. This decoupling is made possible because the two sister chromatids of each chromosome are paired and thus treated as one unit beginning from the time of their generation in S-phase until their segregation in mitosis. Sister chromatid cohesion is mediated by the multi-protein complex cohesin. Its long coiled-coil subunits Smc1 and Smc3 together with the kleisin Scc1 (Rad21) form a tripartite ring, 50 nm in diameter, that provides a topological linkage by entrapping both DNA double strands (Haering et al , 2008 ). In early metazoan mitosis, cohesin rings at chromosome arms are removed by prophase pathway signaling which triggers the phosphorylation-dependent opening of the Smc3-Scc1 gate (Buheitel & Stemmann, 2013 ; Eichinger et al , 2013 ). However, sister chromatid cohesion is maintained because protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is recruited by shugoshin 1 (Sgo1) to centromeric cohesin and keeps it in a dephosphorylated state (Watanabe, 2005 ). At metaphase-to-anaphase transition, the Scc1 subunit of remaining cohesin is cleaved by separase and sister chromatids spring apart (Uhlmann et al , 2000 ). Separase is a large Cys-endopeptidase with a conserved C-terminal catalytic domain. It is encoded by an essential gene and represents the universal trigger of eukaryotic anaphase (Kumada et al , 2006 ; Wirth et al , 2006 ). Hyper- or hypo-activity of separase results in premature separation of sister chromatids or chromosome non-disjunction, respectively (Huang et al , 2005 ; Holland & Taylor, 2006 ; Boos et al , 2008 ). Separase also cleaves centrosomal cohesin and pericentrin-B (kendrin), which promotes centriole disengagement and licensing of subsequent centrosome duplication (Schockel et al , 2011 ; Lee & Rhee, 2012 ; Matsuo et al , 2012 ). The well-tuned regulation of separase activity is therefore crucial to ensure a stable inheritance of genomic information and to prevent aneuploidies that might otherwise result in cell death or malignant transformation.

Prior to anaphase onset, vertebrate separase is inhibited by mutually exclusive association with Cdk1-cyclin B1 or securin (Gorr et al , 2005 ; Stemmann et al , 2006 ). Cdk1-cyclin B1 is the master regulatory kinase of mitosis and phosphorylates a multitude of proteins. Its activation and inactivation, respectively, is necessary and sufficient for entry into and exit from mitosis. For unknown reasons, the relevance of Cdk1-cyclin B1 versus securin for the inhibition of separase varies in different cells and developmental states. For example, murine post-migratory primordial germ cells and early embryos chiefly rely on Cdk1-cyclin B1 to control separase, whereas in mouse female meiosis II and cultured human cancer cells, most of the protease is held in check by association with securin (Gorr et al , 2005 ; Huang et al , 2008 , 2009 ; Nabti et al , 2008 ). Separase is activated at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition when both securin and cyclin B1 are degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The corresponding ubiquitin ligase is a multi-subunit RING E3, the anaphase-promoting complex or cyclosome (APC/C), in conjunction with Cdc20, its mitosis specific co-activator (Peters, 2006 ). Cdc20 (but also Cdh1, a related co-activator of interphase APC/C) recognizes a motif of the minimal consensus sequence R-x-x-L, the so-called destruction box (or D-box), located close to the N-terminus of securin and cyclin B1. Securin (but not cyclin B1) contains an additional N-terminal motif called KEN-box, which is named after its core amino acid sequence and also binds to Cdc20 (and Cdh1). APC/C Cdc20 activity is controlled by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), which, in metazoans, is of prime importance for timing of mitosis and chromosome segregation fidelity (Lara-Gonzalez et al , 2012 ). As long as chromosomes have not yet properly attached to spindle microtubules, this essential surveillance mechanism generates a diffusible ‘wait-anaphase’ signal at kinetochores, which inhibits APC/C Cdc20 .

Despite our knowledge of the basic SAC-APC/C-separase axis, other aspects of separase regulation remain poorly understood. For example, it has recently been noted that, relative to total securin, the separase-bound fraction is proteolysed more slowly (Shindo et al , 2012 ). However, both the putative function and the underlying mechanism of this phenomenon are unknown. Largely unresolved is also the question of why higher eukaryotic separase cleaves itself upon liberation from its inhibitors (Waizenegger et al , 2000 ; Herzig et al , 2002 ). In vitro this auto-cleavage does not influence the proteolytic activity or the re-inhibition of separase by securin or Cdk1-cyclin B1 (Stemmann et al , 2001 ; Waizenegger et al , 2002 ; Zou et al , 2002 ). Finally, PP2A was identified as another binding partner of human separase (Holland et al , 2007 ). The separase-PP2A complex seems to exist throughout most of the cell cycle and dissociates only transiently upon auto-cleavage of separase in anaphase until re-synthesis of full-length protease in the next G1 phase. Despite these initial characterizations, the in vivo relevance of the separase-PP2A complex formation remains again largely enigmatic. PP2A is a heterotrimeric serine/threonine phosphatase consisting of a scaffolding A subunit, a catalytic C subunit, and a variable regulatory B subunit that mediates subcellular targeting and substrate specificity (Janssens et al , 2005 ). Of the four subfamilies of B subunits that exist (B, B′, B″, and B‴), it is B′ (also called PR56) in all its isoforms which is found in association with separase (Holland et al , 2007 ).

Here, we show that PP2A restricts separase activity. It does so by dephosphorylation of separase-bound securin, thereby stabilizing it relative to the free, phosphorylated pool of securin. This function of PP2A not only prevents precocious activation of separase in cells that are arrested in G2- or prometaphase. It also ensures that virtually all excess securin is degraded before the separase-associated pool is targeted. In this way, PP2A prevents repeated activation and re-inhibition of separase and increases the overall abruptness and fidelity of anaphase.

Mimicking constitutive securin phosphorylation results in premature activation of separase

Does selective destabilization of separase-associated securin by phosphorylation mimicking also have any cellular consequences? We performed video microscopy as before, which demonstrated that ectopic securin-4D expression by itself did not affect mitotic timing (Fig 6 A). Endogenous securin might suppress potential phenotypes by replacing precociously proteolysed securin-4D. Therefore, we combined knockdown of endogenous securin with induction of the (siRNA resistant) transgene (Fig 6 B). Consistent with separase-bound securin now being degraded as quickly as free securin (Fig 2 B), the replacement of endogenous securin by securin-4D resulted in a modest shortening of metaphase relative to the WT control (Fig 6 A). However, despite the slightly earlier advent of anaphase, cells segregated their chromosomes surprisingly normal (data not shown).

Each time a separase-associated securin molecule is degraded, the corresponding separase molecule will briefly become active before being re-inhibited by excessive, free securin. Given that the securin-4D variant has a higher turn-over rate on separase than WT securin, unscheduled cohesin cleavage is expected to be enhanced in cells expressing the former as compared to the latter. To test whether this might cause problems over time, we assessed how well sister chromatid cohesion was maintained in a prometaphase arrest. Replacement of endogenous securin by securin-4D indeed caused partial or complete loss of cohesion in 14% of the cells after 3 h in taxol and in 30% after 9 h (Fig 6 C). At these time points, control cells, in which endogenous securin was either replaced by transgenic securin-WT or left undepleted, displayed on average merely 4 and 8% premature sister chromatid separation, respectively. While precocious loss of cohesion was further enhanced by simultaneous CHX treatment, importantly, it did not essentially require inhibition of translation and even occurred without visible decline of securin-4D (Fig 6 C and D). Thus, the PP2A-dependent stabilization of the separase-securin complex is crucial to prevent transient activation of the cohesin-cleaving protease in SAC-arrested cells.

Finally, we asked whether replacing endogenous securin by securin-4D might also cause problems in cells that are arrested in G2 phase. Because separase is excluded from the nucleus (Sun et al , 2006 ), cleavage of chromosomal cohesin cannot serve as an indicator of separase activity in these interphasic cells. However, separase not only triggers sister chromatid separation in anaphase but also centriole disengagement in late mitosis/early G1 (Tsou & Stearns, 2006 ; Schockel et al , 2011 ). Indeed, cells arrested by DRB or RO undergo unscheduled centriole disengagement in an APC/C- and separase-dependent manner (Prosser et al , 2012 ). Synchronization by consecutive treatments with thymidine and DRB or RO were combined with transfection of siRNA against endogenous securin (or GL2 as a control) and induction of transgenic securin-WT or securin-4D (Fig 7 A and D, Supplementary Fig S1B). After different times in DRB or RO, cells were harvested and centriole engagement status was quantified by immunofluorescence microscopy of isolated centrosomes stained for the markers centrin-2 (distal) and C-Nap1 (proximal). These analyses not only confirmed the recent findings by the Fry and Morrison laboratories (Prosser et al , 2012 ) but also revealed that substitution of WT securin by the 4D variant aggravates the premature centriole disengagement phenotype. Specifically, cells which expressed securin-4D but lacked the endogenous anaphase inhibitor suffered from 22% centriole disengagement after 5 h in DRB, while the corresponding WT control displayed only 10% disengagement (Fig 7 B). Similarly, after 10 h in RO, cells that lacked endogenous securin exhibited 27% versus 11% centriole disengagement, respectively, if they expressed transgenic securin-4D instead of securin-WT (Fig 7 C). Despite the omission of CHX in these experiments, securin-4D (but not securin-WT) visibly dropped in abundance once cells were incubated for 5 h in DRB or 14 h in RO (Fig 7 A and D). However, the pronounced centriole disengagement in securin-4D-expressing cells lacking endogenous securin became apparent earlier, that is, prior to a detectable drop of securin-4D levels, which is consistent with the observation made on prometaphase-arrested cells (Fig 6 D). We conclude that elevating the turnover of separase-associated securin by mimicking its constitutive phosphorylation is associated with premature activation of separase and cellular defects during checkpoint-mediated cell cycle arrests.

Discussion

Here, we report that separase-associated securin is longer-lived than free securin, a finding that is consistent with a recent study by Hirota and co-workers (Shindo et al , 2012 ). We expand these findings and provide evidence that differences in phosphorylation status form the basis for this difference in stability. Phosphorylation, which may in part be inflicted by CaMKII, turns free securin into a better UPS substrate. In contrast, the B′56 isoform of PP2A keeps separase-associated securin in a dephosphorylated state, thereby selectively stabilizing this protease-bound pool of the anaphase inhibitor.

Separase-bound securin exhibits a greater half-life than free securin even in G2-arrested cells, in which Cdk1-cyclin B1 activity is low. Furthermore, the four phosphorylation sites mapped herein are not followed by a proline on the +1 position and hence do not match the consensus sequence of Cdk1 substrates. Both notions suggest that securin is phosphorylated on degradation-promoting positions not by Cdk1 but rather by other kinases. CaMKII might represent one such kinase. In vitro it efficiently phosphorylates securin-WT (but not securin-4A) and enhances the APC/C Cdc20 -dependent multi-ubiquitylation of this anaphase inhibitor. In vivo CaMKII might accelerate the destruction of free securin. Given that Ser-87, but not the other three identified phosphorylation sites match the consensus sequence of CaMKII substrates, it appears likely that additional kinases (and possibly a different set in G2 than in mitosis) contribute to the modulation of securin's overall stability. Based on a scansite analysis (Obenauer et al , 2003 ), it might be worth testing whether protein kinase C delta can target Thr-66 of securin (percentile 0.521). Securin is poorly conserved in sequence and exhibits, for example, merely 38% identity (10% gaps) between Homo sapiens and Xenopus laevis . The divergence within the structurally disordered N-terminal half is even higher and includes most phosphorylation sites. This raises the question whether the preferential destruction of phosphorylated securin is conserved. Beginning to address this issue, we studied the degradation kinetics of human securin-4A and securin-4D in Xenopus egg extract and found the phosphorylation-mimetic variant to be less stable—similar to the situation in human cells (Supplementary Fig S6). Thus, the ubiquitin-proteasome system of the frog interprets the additional negative charges within the N-terminal half of human securin just like its human counterpart. This observation argues that the more rapid degradation of phosphorylated versus dephosphorylated securin might indeed be conserved among vertebrates.

Preferred degradation of phosphorylated substrates is usually a hallmark of SCF-type ubiquitin ligases. In fact, it has even been reported that UV irradiation results in SCF βTrCP -dependent degradation of securin which requires the binding of the F-box protein βTrCP to an unconventional recognition motif (DDAYPE) centered around position 110 of human securin (Limon-Mortes et al , 2008 ). However, for the proteolysis of phosphorylated securin under the conditions tested herein, the APC/C remains the crucial E3. This is strongly suggested by the following lines of evidence: (i) When OAA is used to force Xenopus egg extracts or HeLa cells into a pseudo-anaphase state, WT securin is readily degraded. APC/C's recognition sites within securin, the KEN- and D-box, can be inactivated by point mutations that do not affect any phosphorylation sites, the OAA-induced hyperphosphorylation of securin, or the integrity of the aforementioned DDAYPE motif. Yet, this exchange of 5 amino acids renders securin completely stable in the presence of OAA. (ii) The same securin-mKEN/mDB is also fully resistant to degradation during a ZM-induced release of pre-synchronized metaphase cells into anaphase, a taxol-induced prometaphase arrest, or a DNA-damage-induced G2 arrest. (iii) siRNA-mediated depletion of Cdc20, the essential co-activator of mitotic APC/C, greatly stabilized securin in prometa- and anaphase cells. (iv) APC/C Cdc20 -dependent polyubiquitylation of securin is strongly boosted by both CaMKII-dependent phosphorylation and introduction of phosphorylation-mimetic acidic residues. Thus, while we did not address and therefore cannot exclude a minor contribution of SCF βTrCP to securin degradation, our analyses clearly underline that the preferred proteolysis of phosphorylated securin is largely, if not entirely, dependent on APC/C. Our findings are consistent with those of Clarke and co-workers who reported that the efficient APC/C-dependent clearance of Mcl-1 from mitotically arrested cells likewise requires prior phosphorylation of this anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member (Harley et al , 2010 ).

How can the effects in the in vitro ubiquitylation assay be explained at the mechanistic level? Phosphorylation of securin might increase its affinity toward the APC/C, thereby increasing the processivity of ubiquitin chain formation and, thus, the kinetics of degradation (Rape et al , 2006 ). Cdc20 and Cdh1 share a WD40 domain that folds into a structurally conserved seven-bladed β-propeller and specifically binds the KEN and D-Box. A recent crystal structure of S. cerevisiae Cdh1 in complex with a pseudo-substrate revealed that a conserved basic residue within the WD40 domain faces position +6 (P6) of the D-box (with the Arg of RxxL representing P1), which nicely explains why in APC/C substrates an acidic amino acid is most commonly found at this position (He et al , 2013 ). Interestingly, P6 of human securin's D-box corresponds to Thr-66. Phosphorylation at this position might therefore stabilize the interaction by giving rise to a salt bridge with the juxtaposed basic residue of APC/C's co-activator. Alternatively or in addition, the enhanced processivity of chain formation might be due to phosphorylation of securin accelerating the frequently rate-limiting initiation of ubiquitylation (Williamson et al , 2011 ). Interestingly, Ser-87 and Ser-89 lie within the so-called initiation motif of securin that is targeted by UbcH10 (Williamson et al , 2011 ). Given that initiation efficiency can control the timing of substrate degradation, it is tempting to speculate that phosphorylation of these residues improves the strength of securin's initiation motif. Future experiments will have to clarify whether phosphorylation increases the securin-APC/C affinity or the rate of ubiquitylation initiation or both, and they will have to dissect the relative contributions of the individual phosphorylations at the four different positions within securin's N-terminal half.

As illustrated by the effects of securin-4A expression, abolishing the preferential degradation of free securin dampens the otherwise fitful anaphase and results in aggravated lagging of chromosomes followed by DNA damage. How can these phenotypes be rationalized? If APC/C activity is limiting, then the extended lingering of free securin will competitively delay the degradation of separase-bound securin (Supplementary Fig S7A). Alternatively or in addition to this, surplus securin will re-inhibit any separase which has just been freed, thereby increasing the effective size of the separase-associated pool (Supplementary Fig S7A, gray arrow). Consistent with this second mode of action, the share of securin-4A in the separase-bound securin pool transiently increases after APC/C activation and prior to its complete extinction (Supplementary Fig S7B). Both competitive inhibition of APC/C and re-inhibition of separase are largely prevented by the actual removal of free securin prior to degradation of the separase-bound fraction, thus resulting in a more synchronized, switch-like activation of separase that likely improves the overall fidelity of sister chromatid separation. Another circumstance might add to the abruptness of anaphase onset: Once released from its inhibitor(s), separase immediately undergoes auto-cleavage which abrogates PP2A binding (Supplementary Fig S8A) (Holland et al , 2007 ). Therefore, any persisting free securin that sequesters previously activated separase is expected to stay phosphorylated and, thus, subject to accelerated degradation (Supplementary Fig S8B). It is therefore tempting to speculate that one function of auto-cleavage might be to minimize re-inhibition of separase at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition by traces of free securin that have so far evaded destruction. Interestingly, the sharpness of the metaphase-to-anaphase transition in S. cerevisiae is also modulated by a phosphorylation-dependent change of securin degradation kinetics. Curiously however, proteolysis of the budding yeast securin is slowed by its (in this case Cdk1-dependent) phosphorylation and sped up by dephosphorylation which occurs only upon activation of Cdc14 phosphatase in early anaphase (Holt et al , 2008 ). Thus, although the involved kinases, phosphatases, and mechanisms differ, the fine-tuning of late mitotic events by the impact of securin phosphorylation on its APC/C-dependent degradation kinetics is conserved from yeast to man.

At first sight, the expression of securin in excess of separase and the dephosphorylation-dependent stabilization of separase-associated securin seem inconsistent with a sharp metaphase-to-anaphase transition. As outlined above, these characteristics would indeed spoil the anaphase switch if it was not for the preferential degradation of free securin. So why does the cell afford these measures to begin with? Our in vivo analyses suggest that preventing unscheduled basal activation of separase during checkpoint-mediated arrests is the answer to this question. This can be illustrated by the exchange of endogenous securin with securin-4D, which exhibits an increased turnover even at times of low APC/C activity. This property of the phosphorylation-mimicking variant suffices to cause premature centriole disengagement and precocious sister separation, respectively, in G2- and prometaphase-arrested cells.

Why PP2A teams up with separase has long remained enigmatic. Our observations now strongly suggest that this interaction constitutes an additional layer of separase regulation that operates through securin and helps to fine-tune the metaphase-to-anaphase transition. Its main purpose, however, is to prevent the unscheduled unleashing of separase's essential but dangerous proteolytic activity.
