---
pmid: '27059959'
title: Sphingosine-1-phosphate Phosphatase 2 Regulates Pancreatic Islet β-Cell Endoplasmic
  Reticulum Stress and Proliferation.
authors:
- Taguchi Y
- Allende ML
- Mizukami H
- Cook EK
- Gavrilova O
- Tuymetova G
- Clarke BA
- Chen W
- Olivera A
- Proia RL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4933255
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.728170
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, N.I.H., Intramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sphingosine-1-phosphate Phosphatase 2 Regulates Pancreatic Islet β-Cell Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Proliferation.
**Authors:** Taguchi Y, Allende ML, Mizukami H, Cook EK, Gavrilova O, Tuymetova G, Clarke BA, Chen W, Olivera A, Proia RL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.728170](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.728170)
**PMC:** [PMC4933255](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4933255/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jun 3;291(23):12029-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.728170. Epub 
2016 Apr 8.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate Phosphatase 2 Regulates Pancreatic Islet β-Cell 
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Proliferation.

Taguchi Y(1), Allende ML(1), Mizukami H(2), Cook EK(1), Gavrilova O(3), 
Tuymetova G(1), Clarke BA(1), Chen W(4), Olivera A(5), Proia RL(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Genetics of Development and Disease Branch.
(2)the Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Hirosaki University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8562, Japan.
(3)Mouse Metabolism Core Laboratory, and.
(4)Genomics Core, NIDDK, and.
(5)the Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, NIAID, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892 and.
(6)From the Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, proia@nih.gov.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a sphingolipid metabolite that regulates basic 
cell functions through metabolic and signaling pathways. Intracellular 
metabolism of S1P is controlled, in part, by two homologous S1P phosphatases 
(SPPases), 1 and 2, which are encoded by the Sgpp1 and Sgpp2 genes, 
respectively. SPPase activity is needed for efficient recycling of sphingosine 
into the sphingolipid synthesis pathway. SPPase 1 is important for skin 
homeostasis, but little is known about the functional role of SPPase 2. To 
identify the functions of SPPase 2 in vivo, we studied mice with the Sgpp2 gene 
deleted. In contrast to Sgpp1(-/-) mice, Sgpp2(-/-) mice had normal skin and 
were viable into adulthood. Unexpectedly, WT mice expressed Sgpp2 mRNA at high 
levels in pancreatic islets when compared with other tissues. Sgpp2(-/-) mice 
had normal pancreatic islet size; however, they exhibited defective adaptive 
β-cell proliferation that was demonstrated after treatment with either a 
high-fat diet or the β-cell-specific toxin, streptozotocin. Importantly, β-cells 
from untreated Sgpp2(-/-) mice showed significantly increased expression of 
proteins characteristic of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response compared 
with β-cells from WT mice, indicating a basal islet defect. Our results show 
that Sgpp2 deletion causes β-cell endoplasmic reticulum stress, which is a known 
cause of β-cell dysfunction, and reveal a juncture in the sphingolipid recycling 
pathway that could impact the development of diabetes.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.728170
PMCID: PMC4933255
PMID: 27059959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a sphingolipid metabolite that regulates basic cell functions through metabolic and signaling pathways. Intracellular metabolism of S1P is controlled, in part, by two homologous S1P phosphatases (SPPases), 1 and 2, which are encoded by the Sgpp1 and Sgpp2 genes , respectively. SPPase activity is needed for efficient recycling of sphingosine into the sphingolipid synthesis pathway. SPPase 1 is important for skin homeostasis, but little is known about the functional role of SPPase 2. To identify the functions of SPPase 2 in vivo , we studied mice with the Sgpp2 gene deleted. In contrast to Sgpp1 −/− mice, Sgpp2 −/− mice had normal skin and were viable into adulthood. Unexpectedly, WT mice expressed Sgpp2 mRNA at high levels in pancreatic islets when compared with other tissues. Sgpp2 −/− mice had normal pancreatic islet size; however, they exhibited defective adaptive β-cell proliferation that was demonstrated after treatment with either a high-fat diet or the β-cell-specific toxin, streptozotocin. Importantly, β-cells from untreated Sgpp2 −/− mice showed significantly increased expression of proteins characteristic of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response compared with β-cells from WT mice, indicating a basal islet defect. Our results show that Sgpp2 deletion causes β-cell endoplasmic reticulum stress, which is a known cause of β-cell dysfunction, and reveal a juncture in the sphingolipid recycling pathway that could impact the development of diabetes.

Introduction

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) 3 is a potent bioactive lipid produced from the degradation of plasma membrane sphingolipids ( 1 – 3 ). As a signaling molecule, S1P exerts effects in a variety of biological processes through interactions with both extracellular receptors and intracellular targets. As an intracellular metabolic intermediate, S1P is readily metabolized to other bioactive sphingolipids, such as ceramide and sphingosine, as well as to other lipids ( Fig. 1 A ).

S1P and its metabolites control basic cell functions, such as proliferation, apoptosis, and migration, and are involved in several pathologic conditions, including inflammation, metabolic disease, and cancer ( 1 , 2 ). Thus, insight into S1P metabolism and how this regulates its functional activity is of key importance in understanding the role of S1P in biology and disease.

S1P is produced by the sphingosine kinase-dependent phosphorylation of sphingosine, which is created as a degradation product of ceramide ( 4 ). Within cells, S1P is degraded through two pathways, either by irreversible cleavage by S1P lyase ( 5 ) or by dephosphorylation by specific S1P phosphatases (SPPases) (also known as S1P phosphohydrolases) ( 6 ). When cleaved by S1P lyase ( Sgpl1 ), phosphoethanolamine and hexadecenal are produced, which are then transferred as substrates from the sphingolipid pathway to the glycerophospholipid pathway.

In an alternative catabolic route catalyzed by S1P phosphatases, the resulting sphingosine product can be derivatized with a fatty acid by ceramide synthase to produce ceramide by the sphingolipid salvage or recycling pathway ( 7 ). The metabolism of S1P constitutes a key point in the sphingolipid pathway in which substrate may either leave or be retained within the pathway, thus regulating the homeostatic flux of three bioactive sphingolipid metabolites: S1P, sphingosine, and ceramide.

In mammals, two homologous genes, Sgpp1 and Sgpp2 , encode the specific S1P phosphastases ( 8 , 9 ) that belong to the superfamily of lipid phosphatases ( 6 , 10 , 11 ). Unlike the other lipid phosphatases in the family, which have broad substrate specificity, the SPPases are unique in that they are highly specific for sphingoid base phosphates. Both isozymes reside in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and have similar activities and substrate specificities, although they are differentially expressed in tissues ( 8 , 9 ). Deletion of the Sgpp1 gene encoding SPPase 1 in mice has been found to elevate S1P specifically in keratinocytes, triggering premature keratinocyte differentiation and leading to ichthyosis and death within a few days after birth ( 12 ). Little is known about the in vivo function of SPPase 2.

To identify physiologic functions of SPPase 2, we have generated and studied mice with a deletion of the Sgpp2 gene. Unexpectedly, these mutant mice exhibited decreased adaptive β-cell proliferation. In addition, the β-cells in Sgpp2 −/− mice were found to display significantly increased expression of markers of ER stress, which is known to cause β-cell dysfunction and is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetes ( 13 , 14 ). These results reveal for the first time that SPPase 2 is an important factor in regulating β-cell ER stress and proliferation.

Discussion

Our understanding of how the regulation of intracellular S1P metabolism affects biological processes is limited, prompting us to examine the consequences of Sgpp2 deletion in mice. In contrast to the newborn lethality and skin abnormalities found with the deletion of the homologous Sgpp1 gene ( 12 ), Sgpp2 −/− mice were viable and without any apparent skin defects at birth or during adulthood. However, we identified an unexpected pancreatic islet defect in Sgpp2 −/− mice. Because the two S1P phosphatase enzymes are catalytically very similar and have the same subcellular location ( 9 , 26 ), this divergence in the phenotypes may point to alternative regulation of the two genes, depending on physiological context. This notion is in line with the differential tissue mRNA expression of Sgpp1 and Sgpp2 ( 8 , 9 ) and the highly divergent expression of the two genes in response to inflammatory stimuli ( 27 ).

Although Sgpp2 was deleted globally in the Sgpp2 −/− mice that we developed, no difference was observed in the bulk circulating levels of its substrate, S1P, in their plasma or islets compared with those of WT mice. The normal S1P levels would indicate that extracellular S1P signaling in the Sgpp2 −/− mice was not altered. The lack of detectable accumulation of S1P in the absence of Sgpp2 in vivo may be a result of the multiple pathways available for S1P degradation. Excess S1P may be shunted into the alternative lyase degradation pathway or degraded through compensatory mechanisms involving the catalytically similar SPPase 1 or other lipid phosphatase activities that are present in the Sgpp2 −/− mice.

Mice adaptively respond with heightened proliferation of β-cells after treatment with an HFD diet or STZ-induced islet damage ( 23 ). The Sgpp2 −/− mice were defective under both conditions, suggesting the presence of a basal defect in Sgpp2 −/− mice affecting the ability of their β-cells to adaptively proliferate. Importantly, in the absence of any treatment, β-cells from Sgpp2 −/− mice exhibited markers indicating an elevated basal ER stress response. Higher levels of ER stress compromise β-cell function, survival, and proliferation ( 21 , 28 , 29 ). Thus, the lack of an enzyme thought to negatively regulate the levels of a pro-proliferative lipid signal, S1P, causes ER stress and, instead, compromises proliferation. How might the lack of Sgpp2 induce ER stress in β-cells? Depletion of SPPase activity through knockdown of the homologous Sgpp1 gene has previously been shown to elevate ER stress responses in diverse types of cultured cells ( 30 ). In that study, the major pathways of the UPR (via IREα, ATF6, and PERK) were activated by the depletion of SPPase. Concomitantly, AKT was also activated, possibly countering ER stress-induced pro-apoptotic signaling. These effects were attributed directly to elevated intracellular S1P levels. Our results indicate that a similar ER stress response to that observed subsequent to Sgpp1 knockdown in cultured cells ( 30 ) may occur in β-cells in vivo when Sgpp2 is deleted. We did not observe an elevated level of S1P in Sgpp2 −/− mouse islets when compared with those of WT mice, which may reflect a rapid flux of substrate through the metabolic pathway.

The ER is the site of sphingolipid de novo synthesis and sphingolipid recycling pathways ( 4 ). Dysregulation of sphingolipid metabolism is known to induce ER stress. For example, in yeast, dysregulation of de novo sphingolipid synthesis by depletion of the Orm proteins, which regulate the first step in the de novo synthesis pathway, causes constitutive activation of the UPR ( 31 ). Disruption of ceramide synthesis, by depletion of ceramide synthase 2, also leads to activation of the UPR ( 32 ). SPPase activity is required for efficient recycling of sphingoid bases into the ceramide synthesis pathway ( 7 ). In some mammalian cells, recycling can account for more than half of complex sphingolipid synthesis ( 33 ). Because sphingolipid levels are tightly regulated, disabling the recycling pathway by deletion of Sgpp2 may elevate the activity of the de novo pathway in order to maintain sphingolipid homeostasis. Elevation of the de novo sphingolipid pathway in β-cells can lead to lipotoxicity ( 34 ), a source of elevated ER stress ( 28 ).

Our results show that disabling an enzyme within the sphingolipid recycling pathway provokes a stress response in β-cells, indicating that they are extremely sensitive to perturbations in the sphingolipid metabolism pathway. Type 2 diabetes is characterized by peripheral insulin resistance, β-cell dysfunction, and loss of β-cell mass. Dysfunctional sphingolipid metabolism is known to cause peripheral insulin resistance ( 35 – 37 ). The present study now extends our understanding of the importance of sphingolipid metabolism in diabetes susceptibility by identifying Sgpp2 as a gene controlling adaptive β-cell mass expansion.
