---
pmid: '20599664'
title: A novel role for cardiac ankyrin repeat protein Ankrd1/CARP as a co-activator
  of the p53 tumor suppressor protein.
authors:
- Kojic S
- Nestorovic A
- Rakicevic L
- Belgrano A
- Stankovic M
- Divac A
- Faulkner G
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.029
---

# A novel role for cardiac ankyrin repeat protein Ankrd1/CARP as a co-activator of the p53 tumor suppressor protein.
**Authors:** Kojic S, Nestorovic A, Rakicevic L, Belgrano A, Stankovic M, Divac A, Faulkner G
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.029)

## Abstract

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Oct 1;502(1):60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.029. 
Epub 2010 Jul 3.

A novel role for cardiac ankyrin repeat protein Ankrd1/CARP as a co-activator of 
the p53 tumor suppressor protein.

Kojic S(1), Nestorovic A, Rakicevic L, Belgrano A, Stankovic M, Divac A, 
Faulkner G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, University of 
Belgrade, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia. snezanakojic@eunet.rs

The muscle ankyrin repeat protein (MARP) family member Ankrd1/CARP is a part of 
the titin-mechanosensory signaling complex in the sarcomere and in response to 
stretch it translocates to the nucleus where it participates in the regulation 
of cardiac genes as a transcriptional co-repressor. Several studies have focused 
on its structural role in muscle, but its regulatory role is still poorly 
understood. To gain more insight into the regulatory function of Ankrd1/CARP we 
searched for transcription factors that could interact and modulate its 
activity. Using protein array methodology we identified the tumor suppressor 
protein p53 as an Ankrd1/CARP interacting partner and confirmed their 
interaction both in vivo and in vitro. We demonstrate a novel role for 
Ankrd1/CARP as a transcriptional co-activator, moderately up regulating p53 
activity. Furthermore, we show that p53 operates as an upstream effector of 
Ankrd1/CARP, by up regulating the proximal ANKRD1 promoter. Our findings suggest 
that, besides acting as a transcriptional co-repressor, Ankrd1/CARP could have a 
stimulatory effect on gene expression in cultured skeletal muscle cells. It is 
probable that Ankrd1/CARP has a role in the propagation of signals initiated by 
myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) during myogenesis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.06.029
PMID: 20599664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
