---
pmid: '17699727'
title: 'A novel animal model to investigate fractionated radiotherapy-induced alimentary
  mucositis: the role of apoptosis, p53, nuclear factor-kappaB, COX-1, and COX-2.'
authors:
- Yeoh AS
- Gibson RJ
- Yeoh EE
- Bowen JM
- Stringer AM
- Giam KA
- Keefe DM
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0113
---

# A novel animal model to investigate fractionated radiotherapy-induced alimentary mucositis: the role of apoptosis, p53, nuclear factor-kappaB, COX-1, and COX-2.
**Authors:** Yeoh AS, Gibson RJ, Yeoh EE, Bowen JM, Stringer AM, Giam KA, Keefe DM
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0113](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0113)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 Aug;6(8):2319-27. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0113.

A novel animal model to investigate fractionated radiotherapy-induced alimentary 
mucositis: the role of apoptosis, p53, nuclear factor-kappaB, COX-1, and COX-2.

Yeoh AS(1), Gibson RJ, Yeoh EE, Bowen JM, Stringer AM, Giam KA, Keefe DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Royal Adelaide Hospital, South Australia, 
Australia. ann.yeoh@imvs.sa.gov.au

Radiation-induced mucositis is a common and serious side effect of radiotherapy. 
Molecular mechanisms of mucosal injury, however, are still poorly understood and 
extremely difficult to study in humans. A novel Dark Agouti rat model using 
fractionated radiotherapy to induce mucositis has been developed to investigate 
the occurrence of alimentary mucosal injury. Twenty-four Dark Agouti rats were 
randomly assigned to receive either fractionated radiotherapy or no 
radiotherapy. The irradiated rats received a fractionated course of abdominal 
radiotherapy at 45 Gy/18 fractions/6 weeks treating thrice weekly (i.e., at a 
radiation dose of 2.5 Gy per fraction). After each week of radiation, a group of 
irradiated rats was killed. Histomorphology and mucin distribution in the 
alimentary tract was investigated. The terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling assay was used to examine apoptosis 
in the colon and jejunum, and intestinal morphometry was used to assess villus 
length, crypt length, and mitotic crypt count. Immunohistochemistry of p53, 
nuclear factor-kappaB, cyclooxygenase (COX)-1, and COX-2 was also done. The 
fractionated radiotherapy course induced alimentary mucositis from week 1, with 
more severe injury seen in the small intestine. The hallmark appearance of 
apoptosis was present in the crypts of the small and large intestine. In the 
jejunum and colon, goblet cell disorganization and degeneration was obvious and 
crypt mitotic counts were severely depleted throughout the treatment. Expression 
of p53, nuclear factor-kappaB, COX-1, and COX-2 was increased in the irradiated 
intestinal sections. Fractionated radiation-induced alimentary mucositis has 
been effectively documented in the Dark Agouti rat for the first time. Further 
studies investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying radiation-induced 
mucositis are planned to ultimately achieve anti-mucotoxic-targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-0113
PMID: 17699727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
