---
pmid: '2446322'
title: 'Isolation and characterization of cDNAs encoding the heavy chain of human
  inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (I alpha TI): unambiguous evidence for multipolypeptide
  chain structure of I alpha TI.'
authors:
- Salier JP
- Diarra-Mehrpour M
- Sesboue R
- Bourguignon J
- Benarous R
- Ohkubo I
- Kurachi S
- Kurachi K
- Martin JP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC299524
doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.23.8272
---

# Isolation and characterization of cDNAs encoding the heavy chain of human inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (I alpha TI): unambiguous evidence for multipolypeptide chain structure of I alpha TI.
**Authors:** Salier JP, Diarra-Mehrpour M, Sesboue R, Bourguignon J, Benarous R, Ohkubo I, Kurachi S, Kurachi K, Martin JP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.84.23.8272](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.84.23.8272)
**PMC:** [PMC299524](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC299524/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Dec;84(23):8272-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.84.23.8272.

Isolation and characterization of cDNAs encoding the heavy chain of human 
inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (I alpha TI): unambiguous evidence for 
multipolypeptide chain structure of I alpha TI.

Salier JP(1), Diarra-Mehrpour M, Sesboue R, Bourguignon J, Benarous R, Ohkubo I, 
Kurachi S, Kurachi K, Martin JP.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U-295, U.E.R. de 
Medecine-Pharmacie, Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, France.

Human inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor (I alpha TI) is a plasma glycoprotein of Mr 
180,000, which has been described as a single polypeptide chain. Recently, 
however, we proposed that I alpha TI might be composed of a heavy (H) chain (Mr 
= 95,000) and a light (L) chain (Mr = 40,000) synthesized by two separate mRNAs. 
In the present study we have characterized cDNAs for the H chain of I alpha TI. 
These cDNAs collectively covered two sequences (977 and 1450 base pairs in 
length) with single open reading frames. The deduced amino acid sequences were 
highly homologous to each other and well matched with partial amino acid 
sequences obtained from purified serum I alpha TI. RNA blot analyses of liver 
RNAs with H- or L-chain cDNAs as probes clearly identified two distinct mRNAs of 
3.3 and 1.3 kilobases, which corresponded to H or L chain, respectively. 
Poly(A)+ RNAs hybrid-selected with H-chain cDNAs coded for polypeptide chains of 
Mr 90,000-95,000. These results unambiguously establish that I alpha TI is made 
of multipolypeptides, possibly including one H and two L chains. The H chain 
contains potential calcium-binding sites and also regions homologous to the 
proposed reactive site for thiol-proteinase inhibitors. These data indicate that 
I alpha TI is a complex, multifunctional protein. mRNAs for both the H and L 
chains were found only in liver.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.23.8272
PMCID: PMC299524
PMID: 2446322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
