---
pmid: '34626873'
title: MicroRNA-155 and antiviral immune responses.
authors:
- Jafarzadeh A
- Naseri A
- Shojaie L
- Nemati M
- Jafarzadeh S
- Bannazadeh Baghi H
- Hamblin MR
- Akhlagh SA
- Mirzaei H
journal: Int Immunopharmacol
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108188
---

# MicroRNA-155 and antiviral immune responses.
**Authors:** Jafarzadeh A, Naseri A, Shojaie L, Nemati M, Jafarzadeh S, Bannazadeh Baghi H, Hamblin MR, Akhlagh SA, Mirzaei H
**Journal:** Int Immunopharmacol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108188](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108188)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2021 Dec;101(Pt A):108188. doi: 
10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108188. Epub 2021 Oct 6.

MicroRNA-155 and antiviral immune responses.

Jafarzadeh A(1), Naseri A(2), Shojaie L(3), Nemati M(4), Jafarzadeh S(5), 
Bannazadeh Baghi H(6), Hamblin MR(7), Akhlagh SA(8), Mirzaei H(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Kerman University of Medical 
Sciences, Kerman, Iran; Immunology of Infectious Diseases Research Center, 
Research Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran. Electronic address: Jafarzadeh14@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Immunology, Islamic Azadi university of Zahedan, Zahedan, Iran.
(3)Research Center for Liver Diseases, Keck School of Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Rafsanjan University of Medical 
Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran; Department of Hematology and Laboratory Sciences, 
School of Para-Medicine, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(5)Student Research Committee, School of Medicine, Kerman University of Medical 
Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(6)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Tabriz 
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(7)Laser Research Centre, Faculty of Health Science, University of Johannesburg, 
Doornfontein 2028, South Africa.
(8)School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. 
Electronic address: Amirakhlagh@hotmail.com.
(9)Research Center for Biochemistry and Nutrition in Metabolic Diseases, 
Institute for Basic Sciences, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, 
Iran; Student Research Committee, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, Kashan, 
Iran. Electronic address: mirzaei-h@kaums.ac.ir.

The microRNA, miR-155 regulates both adaptive and innate immune responses. In 
viral infections, miR-155 can affect both innate immunity (interferon response, 
natural killer cell activity, and macrophage polarization) and adaptive immunity 
(including generation of anti-viral antibodies, CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes, 
Th17, Th2, Th1, Tfh and Treg cells). In many viral infections, the proper and 
timely regulation of miR-155 expression is critical for the induction of an 
effective anti-virus immune response and viral clearance without any harmful 
immunopathologic consequences. MiR-155 may also exert pro-viral effects, mainly 
through the inhibition of the anti-viral interferon response. Thus, dysregulated 
expression of miR-155 can result in virus persistence and disruption of the 
normal response to viral infections. This review provides a thorough discussion 
of the role of miR-155 in immune responses and immunopathologic reactions during 
viral infections, and highlights its potential as a therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2021.108188
PMID: 34626873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
