---
pmid: '18835031'
title: A short Nur77-derived peptide converts Bcl-2 from a protector to a killer.
authors:
- Kolluri SK
- Zhu X
- Zhou X
- Lin B
- Chen Y
- Sun K
- Tian X
- Town J
- Cao X
- Lin F
- Zhai D
- Kitada S
- Luciano F
- O'Donnell E
- Cao Y
- He F
- Lin J
- Reed JC
- Satterthwait AC
- Zhang XK
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2667967
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.002
---

# A short Nur77-derived peptide converts Bcl-2 from a protector to a killer.
**Authors:** Kolluri SK, Zhu X, Zhou X, Lin B, Chen Y, Sun K, Tian X, Town J, Cao X, Lin F, Zhai D, Kitada S, Luciano F, O'Donnell E, Cao Y, He F, Lin J, Reed JC, Satterthwait AC, Zhang XK
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.002)
**PMC:** [PMC2667967](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2667967/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2008 Oct 7;14(4):285-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.002.

A short Nur77-derived peptide converts Bcl-2 from a protector to a killer.

Kolluri SK(1), Zhu X, Zhou X, Lin B, Chen Y, Sun K, Tian X, Town J, Cao X, Lin 
F, Zhai D, Kitada S, Luciano F, O'Donnell E, Cao Y, He F, Lin J, Reed JC, 
Satterthwait AC, Zhang XK.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Center, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, 
USA.

Bcl-2 can be converted into a proapoptotic molecule by nuclear receptor Nur77. 
However, the development of Bcl-2 converters as anticancer therapeutics has not 
been explored. Here we report the identification of a Nur77-derived 
Bcl-2-converting peptide with 9 amino acids (NuBCP-9) and its enantiomer, which 
induce apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro and in animals. The apoptotic effect 
of NuBCPs and their activation of Bax are not inhibited but rather potentiated 
by Bcl-2. NuBCP-9 and its enantiomer bind to the Bcl-2 loop, which shares the 
characteristics of structurally adaptable regions with many cancer-associated 
and signaling proteins. NuBCP-9s act as molecular switches to dislodge the Bcl-2 
BH4 domain, exposing its BH3 domain, which in turn blocks the activity of 
antiapoptotic Bcl-X(L).

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.09.002
PMCID: PMC2667967
PMID: 18835031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
