---
pmid: '26275350'
title: The nuclear localization pattern and interaction partners of GTF2IRD1 demonstrate
  a role in chromatin regulation.
authors:
- Carmona-Mora P
- Widagdo J
- Tomasetig F
- Canales CP
- Cha Y
- Lee W
- Alshawaf A
- Dottori M
- Whan RM
- Hardeman EC
- Palmer SJ
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1591-0
---

# The nuclear localization pattern and interaction partners of GTF2IRD1 demonstrate a role in chromatin regulation.
**Authors:** Carmona-Mora P, Widagdo J, Tomasetig F, Canales CP, Cha Y, Lee W, Alshawaf A, Dottori M, Whan RM, Hardeman EC, Palmer SJ
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-015-1591-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-015-1591-0)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2015 Oct;134(10):1099-115. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1591-0. Epub
2015  Aug 15.

The nuclear localization pattern and interaction partners of GTF2IRD1 
demonstrate a role in chromatin regulation.

Carmona-Mora P(1), Widagdo J(2), Tomasetig F(1), Canales CP(1), Cha Y(1), Lee 
W(1), Alshawaf A(3), Dottori M(3), Whan RM(4), Hardeman EC(1), Palmer SJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Cellular and Genetic Medicine Unit, School of Medical Sciences, UNSW 
Australia, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia.
(2)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
4072, Australia.
(3)Centre for Neural Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
3010, Australia.
(4)Biomedical Imaging Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, UNSW 
Australia, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia.
(5)Cellular and Genetic Medicine Unit, School of Medical Sciences, UNSW 
Australia, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia. s.palmer@unsw.edu.au.

GTF2IRD1 is one of the three members of the GTF2I gene family, clustered on 
chromosome 7 within a 1.8 Mb region that is prone to duplications and deletions 
in humans. Hemizygous deletions cause Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) and 
duplications cause WBS duplication syndrome. These copy number variations 
disturb a variety of developmental systems and neurological functions. Human 
mapping data and analyses of knockout mice show that GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I underpin 
the craniofacial abnormalities, mental retardation, visuospatial deficits and 
hypersociability of WBS. However, the cellular role of the GTF2IRD1 protein is 
poorly understood due to its very low abundance and a paucity of reagents. Here, 
for the first time, we show that endogenous GTF2IRD1 has a punctate pattern in 
the nuclei of cultured human cell lines and neurons. To probe the functional 
relationships of GTF2IRD1 in an unbiased manner, yeast two-hybrid libraries were 
screened, isolating 38 novel interaction partners, which were validated in 
mammalian cell lines. These relationships illustrate GTF2IRD1 function, as the 
isolated partners are mostly involved in chromatin modification and 
transcriptional regulation, whilst others indicate an unexpected role in 
connection with the primary cilium. Mapping of the sites of protein interaction 
also indicates key features regarding the evolution of the GTF2IRD1 protein. 
These data provide a visual and molecular basis for GTF2IRD1 nuclear function 
that will lead to an understanding of its role in brain, behaviour and human 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-015-1591-0
PMID: 26275350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
