---
pmid: '22020126'
title: MYST protein acetyltransferase activity requires active site lysine autoacetylation.
authors:
- Yuan H
- Rossetto D
- Mellert H
- Dang W
- Srinivasan M
- Johnson J
- Hodawadekar S
- Ding EC
- Speicher K
- Abshiru N
- Perry R
- Wu J
- Yang C
- Zheng YG
- Speicher DW
- Thibault P
- Verreault A
- Johnson FB
- Berger SL
- Sternglanz R
- McMahon SB
- Côté J
- Marmorstein R
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3252582
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.382
---

# MYST protein acetyltransferase activity requires active site lysine autoacetylation.
**Authors:** Yuan H, Rossetto D, Mellert H, Dang W, Srinivasan M, Johnson J, Hodawadekar S, Ding EC, Speicher K, Abshiru N, Perry R, Wu J, Yang C, Zheng YG, Speicher DW, Thibault P, Verreault A, Johnson FB, Berger SL, Sternglanz R, McMahon SB, Côté J, Marmorstein R
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.382](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.382)
**PMC:** [PMC3252582](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3252582/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Jan 4;31(1):58-70. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.382. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

MYST protein acetyltransferase activity requires active site lysine 
autoacetylation.

Yuan H(1), Rossetto D, Mellert H, Dang W, Srinivasan M, Johnson J, Hodawadekar 
S, Ding EC, Speicher K, Abshiru N, Perry R, Wu J, Yang C, Zheng YG, Speicher DW, 
Thibault P, Verreault A, Johnson FB, Berger SL, Sternglanz R, McMahon SB, Côté 
J, Marmorstein R.

Author information:
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The MYST protein lysine acetyltransferases are evolutionarily conserved 
throughout eukaryotes and acetylate proteins to regulate diverse biological 
processes including gene regulation, DNA repair, cell-cycle regulation, stem 
cell homeostasis and development. Here, we demonstrate that MYST protein 
acetyltransferase activity requires active site lysine autoacetylation. The 
X-ray crystal structures of yeast Esa1 (yEsa1/KAT5) bound to a bisubstrate 
H4K16CoA inhibitor and human MOF (hMOF/KAT8/MYST1) reveal that they are 
autoacetylated at a strictly conserved lysine residue in MYST proteins 
(yEsa1-K262 and hMOF-K274) in the enzyme active site. The structure of hMOF also 
shows partial occupancy of K274 in the unacetylated form, revealing that the 
side chain reorients to a position that engages the catalytic glutamate residue 
and would block cognate protein substrate binding. Consistent with the 
structural findings, we present mass spectrometry data and biochemical 
experiments to demonstrate that this lysine autoacetylation on yEsa1, hMOF and 
its yeast orthologue, ySas2 (KAT8) occurs in solution and is required for 
acetylation and protein substrate binding in vitro. We also show that this 
autoacetylation occurs in vivo and is required for the cellular functions of 
these MYST proteins. These findings provide an avenue for the 
autoposttranslational regulation of MYST proteins that is distinct from other 
acetyltransferases but draws similarities to the phosphoregulation of protein 
kinases.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.382
PMCID: PMC3252582
PMID: 22020126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
