---
pmid: '20350779'
title: NF-kappaB promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration and invasion
  of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
authors:
- Maier HJ
- Schmidt-Strassburger U
- Huber MA
- Wiedemann EM
- Beug H
- Wirth T
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003
---

# NF-kappaB promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration and invasion of pancreatic carcinoma cells.
**Authors:** Maier HJ, Schmidt-Strassburger U, Huber MA, Wiedemann EM, Beug H, Wirth T
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Lett. 2010 Sep 28;295(2):214-28. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003.
Epub  2010 Mar 29.

NF-kappaB promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migration and invasion of 
pancreatic carcinoma cells.

Maier HJ(1), Schmidt-Strassburger U, Huber MA, Wiedemann EM, Beug H, Wirth T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Ulm, Germany.

The transcription factor NF-kappaB is constitutively active in pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. Here we explore the contribution of NF-kappaB to the malignant 
phenotype of pancreatic cancer cells in addition to its anti-apoptotic role. 
Block of NF-kappaB signalling by non-destructible IkappaBalpha rendered cells 
resistant to TGF-beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In 
contrast, NF-kappaB activation by TNF-alpha or expression of constitutively 
active IKK2 induced an EMT-phenotype with up-regulation of vimentin and ZEB1, 
and down-regulation of E-cadherin. EMT could also be induced in cells with 
defective TGF-beta signalling. Functional assays demonstrated reduced or 
strongly enhanced migration and invasion upon NF-kappaB inhibition or 
activation, respectively.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.03.003
PMID: 20350779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
