---
pmid: '26433201'
title: Transcription factors WRKY70 and WRKY11 served as regulators in rhizobacterium
  Bacillus cereus AR156-induced systemic resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato
  DC3000 in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Jiang CH
- Huang ZY
- Xie P
- Gu C
- Li K
- Wang DC
- Yu YY
- Fan ZH
- Wang CJ
- Wang YP
- Guo YH
- Guo JH
journal: J Exp Bot
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv445
---

# Transcription factors WRKY70 and WRKY11 served as regulators in rhizobacterium Bacillus cereus AR156-induced systemic resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Jiang CH, Huang ZY, Xie P, Gu C, Li K, Wang DC, Yu YY, Fan ZH, Wang CJ, Wang YP, Guo YH, Guo JH
**Journal:** J Exp Bot (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jxb/erv445](https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erv445)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Bot. 2016 Jan;67(1):157-74. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv445. Epub 2015 Oct 3.

Transcription factors WRKY70 and WRKY11 served as regulators in rhizobacterium 
Bacillus cereus AR156-induced systemic resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv. 
tomato DC3000 in Arabidopsis.

Jiang CH(1), Huang ZY(1), Xie P(1), Gu C(1), Li K(1), Wang DC(1), Yu YY(1), Fan 
ZH(1), Wang CJ(2), Wang YP(3), Guo YH(4), Guo JH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of China Engineering 
Center of Bioresource Pesticide in Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210095, People's 
Republic of China Key Laboratory of Monitoring and Management of Crop Diseases 
and Pest Insects, Ministry of Agriculture; Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of 
China.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of China Engineering 
Center of Bioresource Pesticide in Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210095, People's 
Republic of China Key Laboratory of Monitoring and Management of Crop Diseases 
and Pest Insects, Ministry of Agriculture; Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of 
China Plant Protection Station of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning 
Guangxi 530022, People's Republic of China.
(3)Huaiyin Institute of Technology, Huai'an 223003, People's Republic of China.
(4)Agriculture Institute, Hebei University of Engineering, Handan 056021, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, College of Plant Protection, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of China Engineering 
Center of Bioresource Pesticide in Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210095, People's 
Republic of China Key Laboratory of Monitoring and Management of Crop Diseases 
and Pest Insects, Ministry of Agriculture; Nanjing 210095, People's Republic of 
China jhguo@njau.edu.cn.

The activation of both the SA and JA/ETsignalling pathways may lead to more 
efficient general and broad resistance to Pst DC3000 by non-pathogenic 
rhizobacteria. However, the mechanisms that govern this simultaneous activation 
are unclear. Using Arabidopsis as a model system, two transcription factors, 
WRKY11 and WRKY70, were identified as important regulators involved in Induced 
Systemic Resistance (ISR) triggered by Bacillus cereus AR156. The results 
revealed that AR156 treatment significantly stimulated the transcription of 
WRKY70, but suppressed that of WRKY11 in Arabidopsis leaves. Furthermore, they 
were shown to be required for AR156 enhancing the activation of cellular defence 
responses and the transcription level of the plant defence response gene. 
Overexpression of the two transcription factors in Arabidopsis also showed that 
they were essential for AR156 to elicit ISR. AR156-triggered ISR was completely 
abolished in the double mutant of the two transcription factors, but still 
partially retained in the single mutants, indicating that the regulation of the 
two transcription factors depend on two different pathways. The target genes of 
the two transcription factors and epistasis analysis suggested that WRKY11 
regulated AR156-triggered ISR through activating the JA signalling pathway, and 
WRKY70 regulated the ISR through activating the SA signalling pathway. In 
addition, both WRKY11 and WRKY70 modulated AR156-triggered ISR in a 
NPR1-dependent manner. In conclusion, WRKY11 and WRKY70 played an important role 
in regulating the signalling transduction pathways involved in AR156-triggered 
ISR. This study is the first to illustrate the mechanism by which a single 
rhizobacterium elicits ISR by simultaneously activating both the SA and JA/ET 
signalling pathways.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jxb/erv445
PMID: 26433201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
