---
pmid: '7961644'
title: Dioxin binding activities of polymorphic forms of mouse and human arylhydrocarbon
  receptors.
authors:
- Ema M
- Ohe N
- Suzuki M
- Mimura J
- Sogawa K
- Ikawa S
- Fujii-Kuriyama Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Dioxin binding activities of polymorphic forms of mouse and human arylhydrocarbon receptors.
**Authors:** Ema M, Ohe N, Suzuki M, Mimura J, Sogawa K, Ikawa S, Fujii-Kuriyama Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 4;269(44):27337-43.

Dioxin binding activities of polymorphic forms of mouse and human 
arylhydrocarbon receptors.

Ema M(1), Ohe N, Suzuki M, Mimura J, Sogawa K, Ikawa S, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, 
Japan.

The genetic difference in the susceptibility of mice to environmental toxicities 
induced by dioxin and related chemicals is governed by polymorphism of the 
arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) (Poland, A., and Knutson, C. (1982) Annu. Rev. 
Pharmacol. Toxicol. 22, 517-554). cDNA cloning of AhR cDNA from responder 
(C57BL/6) and non-responder (DBA/2J) mice allowed us to analyze the structure 
and function of these AhRs. Both of the AhRs, which were expressed in COS-7 
cells transfected with their expression plasmids, showed a clear 9 S complex 
with 2,3,7,8-[3H]tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in a linear glycerol 
gradient centrifugation, consistent with the result of the endogenously 
expressed AhR in Hepa-1 cells. This result provides the first direct evidence 
that the cDNA-encoded protein binds the ligand specifically. Scatchard plot 
analysis revealed that the dissociation constant (Kd) of C57BL AhR for TCDD is 
0.27 nM, while that of DBA AhR is elevated up to six times that high. Chimeric 
plasmids between the two cDNAs and site-directed mutagenesis revealed two 
critical alterations responsible for the reduced ligand binding activity: an 
Ala375 to Val alteration and an elongated carboxyl-terminal sequence due to a T 
to C mutation at the first letter of the termination codon of C57BL AhR. Two 
variants with reduced and intermediate ligand binding activity were also found 
in human AhRs with amino acid alterations equivalent to those of the DBA AhR. 
Importance of the amino acid at position 381 of human AhR (equivalent to 
position 375 of mouse AhR) in the ligand binding was confirmed by the fact that 
the mutation of Val381 to Asp completely abolished the ligand binding activity 
of human AhR.

PMID: 7961644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
