---
pmid: '18331722'
title: A mutual inhibition between APC/C and its substrate Mes1 required for meiotic
  progression in fission yeast.
authors:
- Kimata Y
- Trickey M
- Izawa D
- Gannon J
- Yamamoto M
- Yamano H
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.010
---

# A mutual inhibition between APC/C and its substrate Mes1 required for meiotic progression in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Kimata Y, Trickey M, Izawa D, Gannon J, Yamamoto M, Yamano H
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.010)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):446-54. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.010.

A mutual inhibition between APC/C and its substrate Mes1 required for meiotic 
progression in fission yeast.

Kimata Y(1), Trickey M, Izawa D, Gannon J, Yamamoto M, Yamano H.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Control Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, The Chart, 
Oxted, Surrey RH8 0TL, United Kingdom.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a cell-cycle-regulated 
essential E3 ubiquitin ligase; however, very little is known about its meiotic 
regulation. Here we show that fission yeast Mes1 is a substrate of the APC/C as 
well as an inhibitor, allowing autoregulation of the APC/C in meiosis. Both 
traits require a functional destruction box (D box) and KEN box. We show that 
Mes1 directly binds the WD40 domain of the Fizzy family of APC/C activators. 
Intriguingly, expression of nonubiquitylatable Mes1 blocks cells in metaphase I 
with high levels of APC/C substrates, suggesting that ubiquitylation of Mes1 is 
required for partial degradation of cyclin B in meiosis I by alleviating Mes1 
inhibitory function. Consistently, a ternary complex, APC/C-Fizzy/Cdc20-Mes1, is 
stabilized by inhibiting Mes1 ubiquitylation. These results demonstrate that the 
fine-tuning of the APC/C activity, by a substrate that is also an inhibitor, is 
required for the precise coordination and transition through meiosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2007.12.010
PMID: 18331722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
