---
pmid: '12140560'
title: E3 ubiquitin ligase that recognizes sugar chains.
authors:
- Yoshida Y
- Chiba T
- Tokunaga F
- Kawasaki H
- Iwai K
- Suzuki T
- Ito Y
- Matsuoka K
- Yoshida M
- Tanaka K
- Tai T
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature00890
---

# E3 ubiquitin ligase that recognizes sugar chains.
**Authors:** Yoshida Y, Chiba T, Tokunaga F, Kawasaki H, Iwai K, Suzuki T, Ito Y, Matsuoka K, Yoshida M, Tanaka K, Tai T
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature00890](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature00890)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2002 Jul 25;418(6896):438-42. doi: 10.1038/nature00890.

E3 ubiquitin ligase that recognizes sugar chains.

Yoshida Y(1), Chiba T, Tokunaga F, Kawasaki H, Iwai K, Suzuki T, Ito Y, Matsuoka 
K, Yoshida M, Tanaka K, Tai T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Immunology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

N-glycosylation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) has a central role 
in protein quality control. Here we report that N-glycan serves as a signal for 
degradation by the Skp1-Cullin1-Fbx2-Roc1 (SCF(Fbx2)) ubiquitin ligase complex. 
The F-box protein Fbx2 (ref. 4) binds specifically to proteins attached to 
N-linked high-mannose oligosaccharides and subsequently contributes to 
ubiquitination of N-glycosylated proteins. Pre-integrin beta 1 is a target of 
Fbx2; these two proteins interact in the cytosol after inhibition of the 
proteasome. In addition, expression of the mutant Fbx2 Delta F, which lacks the 
F-box domain that is essential for forming the SCF complex, appreciably blocks 
degradation of typical substrates of the ER-associated degradation pathway. Our 
results indicate that SCF(Fbx2) ubiquitinates N-glycosylated proteins that are 
translocated from the ER to the cytosol by the quality control mechanism.

DOI: 10.1038/nature00890
PMID: 12140560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
