---
pmid: '28712724'
title: Acylglycerol Kinase Mutated in Sengers Syndrome Is a Subunit of the TIM22 Protein
  Translocase in Mitochondria.
authors:
- Vukotic M
- Nolte H
- König T
- Saita S
- Ananjew M
- Krüger M
- Tatsuta T
- Langer T
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.013
---

# Acylglycerol Kinase Mutated in Sengers Syndrome Is a Subunit of the TIM22 Protein Translocase in Mitochondria.
**Authors:** Vukotic M, Nolte H, König T, Saita S, Ananjew M, Krüger M, Tatsuta T, Langer T
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.013)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Aug 3;67(3):471-483.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.013. Epub
 2017 Jul 14.

Acylglycerol Kinase Mutated in Sengers Syndrome Is a Subunit of the TIM22 
Protein Translocase in Mitochondria.

Vukotic M(1), Nolte H(1), König T(1), Saita S(1), Ananjew M(1), Krüger M(1), 
Tatsuta T(1), Langer T(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress 
Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine 
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress 
Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Center for Molecular Medicine 
(CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Electronic address: 
thomas.langer@uni-koeln.de.

Mutations in mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase (AGK) cause Sengers syndrome, 
which is characterized by cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and skeletal 
myopathy. AGK generates phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid, bioactive 
phospholipids involved in lipid signaling and the regulation of tumor 
progression. However, the molecular mechanisms of the mitochondrial pathology 
remain enigmatic. Determining its mitochondrial interactome, we have identified 
AGK as a constituent of the TIM22 complex in the mitochondrial inner membrane. 
AGK assembles with TIMM22 and TIMM29 and supports the import of a subset of 
multi-spanning membrane proteins. The function of AGK as a subunit of the TIM22 
complex does not depend on its kinase activity. However, enzymatically active 
AGK is required to maintain mitochondrial cristae morphogenesis and the 
apoptotic resistance of cells. The dual function of AGK as lipid kinase and 
constituent of the TIM22 complex reveals that disturbances in both phospholipid 
metabolism and mitochondrial protein biogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis 
of Sengers syndrome.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.06.013
PMID: 28712724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
