---
pmid: '2482295'
title: Molecular cloning of the cDNA for ligatin.
authors:
- Jakoi ER
- Brown AL
- Ho YS
- Snyderman R
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.93.2.227
---

# Molecular cloning of the cDNA for ligatin.
**Authors:** Jakoi ER, Brown AL, Ho YS, Snyderman R
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.93.2.227](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.93.2.227)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 1989 Jun;93 ( Pt 2):227-32. doi: 10.1242/jcs.93.2.227.

Molecular cloning of the cDNA for ligatin.

Jakoi ER(1), Brown AL, Ho YS, Snyderman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710.

We describe the first isolation and sequence of a partial cDNA clone encoding 
ligatin, a trafficking receptor for phosphoglycoproteins. The clone was isolated 
from a human U937 promonocyte lambda gt11 cDNA library using rabbit antiserum to 
rat ileal ligatin. RNA blot hybridization revealed that the intact receptor 
transcript in human cells is 2.4 kilobases (kb). DNA sequencing together with 
expression of protein fusion products in Escherichia coli demonstrated that the 
cloned segment begins with a 1.2 kb open reading frame potentially encoding a 
7.5 x 10(3) Mr section of the 10 x 10(3) Mr receptor followed by a 3' tail of 
948 bases. The 225 bases of coding sequence correspond to the carboxyl region of 
ligatin and contain a potential acceptor site for asparagine-linked 
glycosylation. Neither a poly(A) sequence nor polyadenylation signal was found 
at the 3' end of the clone. In the 3' untranslated region there is a paired 
consensus sequence (TGAGnnnTTTTTCA) that is analogous to a conserved 12 
base-pair sequence present in clusters in several growth-controlled mRNAs, 
including those for c-fos and beta-actin. The identity of this clone as ligatin 
was confirmed immunologically using antisera to an encoded fusion protein and 
three independent regions of its derived sequence. In addition, one of these 
antibodies produced a punctate immunofluorescence pattern within the cytosol of 
U937 cells in a similar fashion to anti-ligatin serum.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.93.2.227
PMID: 2482295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
