---
pmid: '18393360'
title: c-Myc represses FOXO3a-mediated transcription of the gene encoding the p27(Kip1)
  cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor.
authors:
- Chandramohan V
- Mineva ND
- Burke B
- Jeay S
- Wu M
- Shen J
- Yang W
- Hann SR
- Sonenshein GE
journal: J Cell Biochem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jcb.21765
---

# c-Myc represses FOXO3a-mediated transcription of the gene encoding the p27(Kip1) cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor.
**Authors:** Chandramohan V, Mineva ND, Burke B, Jeay S, Wu M, Shen J, Yang W, Hann SR, Sonenshein GE
**Journal:** J Cell Biochem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcb.21765](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcb.21765)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Aug 15;104(6):2091-106. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21765.

c-Myc represses FOXO3a-mediated transcription of the gene encoding the p27(Kip1) 
cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor.

Chandramohan V(1), Mineva ND, Burke B, Jeay S, Wu M, Shen J, Yang W, Hann SR, 
Sonenshein GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical School, 715 Albany 
Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The p27(Kip1) (p27) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor and c-Myc oncoprotein play 
essential roles in control of cell cycle progression and apoptosis. Induction of 
p27 (CDKN1B) gene transcription by Forkhead box O proteins such as FOXO3a leads 
to growth arrest and apoptosis. Previously, we observed that B cell receptor 
(surface IgM) engagement of WEHI 231 immature B lymphoma cells with an anti-IgM 
antibody results in activation of FOXO3a, growth arrest and apoptosis. As 
ectopic c-Myc expression in these cells prevented anti-IgM induction of p27 and 
cell death, we hypothesized that c-Myc represses FOXO3a-mediated transcription. 
Here we show that c-Myc inhibits FOXO3a-mediated activation of the p27 promoter 
in multiple cell lines. The mechanism of this repression was explored using a 
combination of co-immunoprecipitation, oligonucleotide precipitation, and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. The studies demonstrate a functional 
association of FOXO3a and c-Myc on a proximal Forkhead binding element in the 
p27 promoter. This association involves the Myc box II domain of c-Myc and the 
N-terminal DNA-binding portion of FOXO3a. Analysis of publicly available 
microarray datasets showed an inverse pattern of c-MYC and p27 RNA expression in 
primary acute myeloid leukemia, prostate cancer and tongue squamous cell 
carcinoma samples. The inhibition of FOXO3a-mediated activation of the p27 gene 
by the high aberrant expression of c-Myc in many tumor cells likely contributes 
to their uncontrolled proliferation and invasive phenotype.

DOI: 10.1002/jcb.21765
PMID: 18393360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
