---
reference_id: PMID:28302725
title: Ankyrin repeat and zinc-finger domain-containing 1 mutations are associated with infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease.
authors:
- van Haaften-Visser DY
- Harakalova M
- Mocholi E
- van Montfrans JM
- Elkadri A
- Rieter E
- Fiedler K
- van Hasselt PM
- Triffaux EMM
- van Haelst MM
- Nijman IJ
- Kloosterman WP
- Nieuwenhuis EES
- Muise AM
- Cuppen E
- Houwen RHJ
- Coffer PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.772038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin repeat and zinc-finger domain-containing 1 mutations are associated with infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** van Haaften-Visser DY, Harakalova M, Mocholi E, van Montfrans JM, Elkadri A, Rieter E, Fiedler K, van Hasselt PM, Triffaux EMM, van Haelst MM, Nijman IJ, Kloosterman WP, Nieuwenhuis EES, Muise AM, Cuppen E, Houwen RHJ, Coffer PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.772038](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.772038)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 May 12;292(19):7904-7920. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.772038. Epub
 2017 Mar 16.

Ankyrin repeat and zinc-finger domain-containing 1 mutations are associated with 
infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease.

van Haaften-Visser DY(1)(2), Harakalova M(3), Mocholi E(2), van Montfrans JM(1), 
Elkadri A(4)(5), Rieter E(2), Fiedler K(4)(5), van Hasselt PM(1), Triffaux 
EMM(2), van Haelst MM(3), Nijman IJ(3), Kloosterman WP(3), Nieuwenhuis EES(1), 
Muise AM(4)(5), Cuppen E(6), Houwen RHJ(1), Coffer PJ(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital.
(2)the Regenerative Medicine Center and Center for Molecular Medicine, and.
(3)the Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)the Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario 
M5G 1X8, Canada.
(5)the SickKids Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center and Cell Biology Program, 
Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, 
Canada, and.
(6)the Hubrecht Institute, KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CT 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)From the Division of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, 
p.j.coffer@umcutrecht.nl.

Infantile-onset inflammatory bowel disease (IO IBD) is an invalidating illness 
with an onset before 2 years of age and has a complex pathophysiology in which 
genetic factors are important. Homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencing 
in an IO IBD patient and subsequent sequencing of the candidate gene in 12 
additional IO IBD patients revealed two patients with two mutated ankyrin repeat 
and zinc-finger domain-containing 1 (ANKZF1) alleles (homozygous ANKZF1 R585Q 
mutation and compound heterozygous ANKZF1 E152K and V32_Q87del mutations, 
respectively) and two patients with one mutated ANKZF1 allele. Although the 
function of ANKZF1 in mammals had not been previously evaluated, we show that 
ANKZF1 has an indispensable role in the mitochondrial response to cellular 
stress. ANKZF1 is located diffusely in the cytoplasm and translocates to the 
mitochondria upon cellular stress. ANKZF1 depletion reduces mitochondrial 
integrity and mitochondrial respiration under conditions of cellular stress. The 
ANKZF1 mutations identified in IO IBD patients with two mutated ANKZF1 alleles 
result in dysfunctional ANKZF1, as shown by an increased level of apoptosis in 
patients' lymphocytes, a decrease in mitochondrial respiration in patient 
fibroblasts with a homozygous ANKZF1 R585Q mutation, and an inability of ANKZF1 
R585Q and E152K to rescue the phenotype of yeast deficient in Vms1, the yeast 
homologue of ANKZF1. These data indicate that loss-of-function mutations in 
ANKZF1 result in deregulation of mitochondrial integrity, and this may play a 
pathogenic role in the development of IO IBD.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.772038
PMCID: PMC5427269
PMID: 28302725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article