---
pmid: '11835580'
title: DNA topoisomerase II is essential for preimplantation mouse development.
authors:
- St Pierre J
- Wright DJ
- Rowe TC
- Wright SJ
journal: Mol Reprod Dev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/mrd.10015
---

# DNA topoisomerase II is essential for preimplantation mouse development.
**Authors:** St Pierre J, Wright DJ, Rowe TC, Wright SJ
**Journal:** Mol Reprod Dev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mrd.10015](https://doi.org/10.1002/mrd.10015)

## Abstract

1. Mol Reprod Dev. 2002 Mar;61(3):347-57. doi: 10.1002/mrd.10015.

DNA topoisomerase II is essential for preimplantation mouse development.

St Pierre J(1), Wright DJ, Rowe TC, Wright SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Dayton, Dayton 45469-2320, Ohio.

Topoisomerase II (topo II) is an essential enzyme that alters DNA topology. This 
activity is important for a variety of chromosome functions including DNA 
replication, transcription, recombination, and chromosome condensation and 
segregation. Previously we localized topo II in mouse gametes and 
preimplantation embryos using isoform-specific antibodies demonstrating the 
presence of the enzyme in oocytes and embryos, but not sperm. To probe functions 
of topo II during preimplantation development, we treated mouse zygotes with 100 
nM teniposide, and assessed embryo morphology and DNA replication. Teniposide 
blocked cleavage in 69% embryos; the remainder cleaved once but had abnormal 
nuclei. Teniposide-treated embryos were devoid of topo II immunofluorescence. 
Teniposide also prevented DNA replication, implicating topo II in this process. 
Embryos treated with a 2 hr pulse of teniposide recovered and developed to the 
blastocyst stage, indicating 100 nM teniposide did not induce apoptosis. To more 
specifically analyze topo IIalpha function, we treated zygotes with topo 
IIalpha-targeted antisense oligodeoxynucleotides. Most zygotes arrested at the 
2-cell stage while controls developed into blastocysts indicating topo IIalpha 
is essential for preimplantation development. The absence of topo IIalpha, but 
not beta immunofluorescence in antisense-treated embryos confirms the 
specificity and impact of the treatment. In addition, topo IIalpha is newly 
synthesized at the 2-cell stage. These results establish an essential function 
for topo II in mouse preimplantation embryonic development.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mrd.10015
PMID: 11835580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
