---
pmid: '8258338'
title: IgE-binding molecules (Mac-2/epsilon BP) expressed by human eosinophils. Implication
  in IgE-dependent eosinophil cytotoxicity.
authors:
- Truong MJ
- Gruart V
- Liu FT
- Prin L
- Capron A
- Capron M
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.1830231228
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# IgE-binding molecules (Mac-2/epsilon BP) expressed by human eosinophils. Implication in IgE-dependent eosinophil cytotoxicity.
**Authors:** Truong MJ, Gruart V, Liu FT, Prin L, Capron A, Capron M
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.1830231228](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.1830231228)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 1993 Dec;23(12):3230-5. doi: 10.1002/eji.1830231228.

IgE-binding molecules (Mac-2/epsilon BP) expressed by human eosinophils. 
Implication in IgE-dependent eosinophil cytotoxicity.

Truong MJ(1), Gruart V, Liu FT, Prin L, Capron A, Capron M.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Immunologie et de Biologie Parasitaire, Unité Mixte INSERM U 
167--CNRS 624, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Macrophage cell-surface protein 2 (Mac-2), a galactose specific S-type lectin 
identified in inflammatory macrophages, presents a high degree of homology with 
the rat IgE-binding protein (epsilon BP). In the present study, we show by 
different experimental approaches that human eosinophils can express 
Mac-2/epsilon BP. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that a large proportion of 
eosinophilic patients expressing binding sites for IgE on their eosinophil 
membrane, were able to bind anti-Mac-2 monoclonal antibody (mAb). Northern blot 
performed with eosinophil RNA hybridized with the human Mac-2 or epsilon BP cDNA 
probes revealed that eosinophils presented a unique transcript at 1.2 kb. 
Immunoprecipitation of eosinophil extracts with anti-Mac-2 mAb revealed the 
presence of a molecule of 29 kDa corresponding to Mac-2 protein, as well as one 
additional molecule of 15 kDa, absent from control alveolar macrophages. The 
function of these molecules was investigated in a radiolabeled IgE binding 
assay. Anti-Mac-2 mAb as well as galactose and lactose saccharides significantly 
inhibited the binding of radiolabeled human myeloma IgE protein to eosinophils. 
Moreover, the dose-dependent inhibition by anti-Mac-2 mAb of IgE-dependent 
eosinophil-mediated cytotoxicity towards parasite targets indicated the role of 
these IgE-binding molecules in the function of human eosinophils. These results 
suggest that in addition to transmembrane receptors, lectin-type molecules can 
participate in the IgE-dependent effector function of eosinophils.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.1830231228
PMID: 8258338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
