---
pmid: '17264081'
title: Molecular basis of RNA recognition by the embryonic polarity determinant MEX-5.
authors:
- Pagano JM
- Farley BM
- McCoig LM
- Ryder SP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700079200
---

# Molecular basis of RNA recognition by the embryonic polarity determinant MEX-5.
**Authors:** Pagano JM, Farley BM, McCoig LM, Ryder SP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M700079200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M700079200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 23;282(12):8883-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700079200. Epub
2007  Jan 30.

Molecular basis of RNA recognition by the embryonic polarity determinant MEX-5.

Pagano JM(1), Farley BM, McCoig LM, Ryder SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Embryonic development requires maternal proteins and RNA. In Caenorhabditis 
elegans, a gradient of CCCH tandem zinc finger (TZF) proteins coordinates axis 
polarization and germline differentiation. These proteins govern expression from 
maternal mRNAs by an unknown mechanism. Here we show that the TZF protein MEX-5, 
a primary anterior determinant, is an RNA-binding protein that recognizes linear 
RNA sequences with high affinity but low specificity. The minimal binding site 
is a tract of six or more uridines within a 9-13-nucleotide window. This 
sequence is remarkably abundant in the 3'-untranslated region of C. elegans 
transcripts, demonstrating that MEX-5 alone cannot specify mRNA target 
selection. In contrast, human TZF homologs tristetraprolin and ERF-2 bind with 
high specificity to UUAUUUAUU elements. We show that mutation of a single amino 
acid in each MEX-5 zinc finger confers tristetraprolin-like specificity to this 
protein. We propose that divergence of this discriminator residue modulates the 
RNA-binding specificity in this protein class. This residue is variable in 
nematode TZF proteins, but is invariant in other metazoans. Therefore, the 
divergence of TZF proteins and their critical role in early development is 
likely a nematode-specific adaptation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M700079200
PMID: 17264081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
