---
pmid: '23775072'
title: Translation initiation requires cell division cycle 123 (Cdc123) to facilitate
  biogenesis of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2).
authors:
- Perzlmaier AF
- Richter F
- Seufert W
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3724614
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472290
---

# Translation initiation requires cell division cycle 123 (Cdc123) to facilitate biogenesis of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2).
**Authors:** Perzlmaier AF, Richter F, Seufert W
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.472290](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.472290)
**PMC:** [PMC3724614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3724614/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 26;288(30):21537-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472290. Epub 
2013 Jun 17.

Translation initiation requires cell division cycle 123 (Cdc123) to facilitate 
biogenesis of the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2).

Perzlmaier AF(1), Richter F, Seufert W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, 
Germany.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2) is central to the onset of 
protein synthesis and its modulation in response to physiological demands. eIF2, 
a heterotrimeric G-protein, is activated by guanine nucleotide exchange to 
deliver the initiator methionyl-tRNA to the ribosome. Here we report that 
assembly of the eIF2 complex in vivo depends on Cdc123, a cell proliferation 
protein conserved among eukaryotes. Mutations of CDC123 in budding yeast reduced 
the association of eIF2 subunits, diminished polysome levels, and increased GCN4 
expression indicating that Cdc123 is critical for eIF2 activity. Cdc123 bound 
the unassembled eIF2γ subunit, but not the eIF2 complex, and the C-terminal 
domain III region of eIF2γ was both necessary and sufficient for Cdc123 binding. 
Alterations of the binding site revealed a strict correlation between Cdc123 
binding, the biological function of eIF2γ, and its ability to assemble with 
eIF2α and eIF2β. Interestingly, high levels of Cdc123 neutralized the assembly 
defect and restored the biological function of an eIF2γ mutant. Moreover, the 
combined overexpression of eIF2 subunits rescued an otherwise inviable cdc123 
deletion mutant. Thus, Cdc123 is a specific eIF2 assembly factor indispensable 
for the onset of protein synthesis. Human Cdc123 is encoded by a disease risk 
locus, and, therefore, eIF2 biogenesis control by Cdc123 may prove relevant for 
normal cell physiology and human health. This work identifies a novel step in 
the eukaryotic translation initiation pathway and assigns a biochemical function 
to a protein that is essential for growth and viability of eukaryotic cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472290
PMCID: PMC3724614
PMID: 23775072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
