---
pmid: '19276089'
title: Secretory Carrier Membrane Protein 2 Regulates Cell-surface Targeting of Brain-enriched
  Na+/H+ Exchanger NHE5.
authors:
- Diering GH
- Church J
- Numata M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2679489
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807055200
---

# Secretory Carrier Membrane Protein 2 Regulates Cell-surface Targeting of Brain-enriched Na+/H+ Exchanger NHE5.
**Authors:** Diering GH, Church J, Numata M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M807055200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M807055200)
**PMC:** [PMC2679489](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2679489/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 15;284(20):13892-13903. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807055200.
Epub  2009 Mar 10.

Secretory Carrier Membrane Protein 2 Regulates Cell-surface Targeting of 
Brain-enriched Na+/H+ Exchanger NHE5.

Diering GH(1), Church J(2), Numata M(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(2)Cellular and Physiological Sciences, The University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(3)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada. Electronic address: 
mnumata@interchange.ubc.ca.

NHE5 is a brain-enriched Na(+)/H(+) exchanger that dynamically shuttles between 
the plasma membrane and recycling endosomes, serving as a mechanism that acutely 
controls the local pH environment. In the current study we show that secretory 
carrier membrane proteins (SCAMPs), a group of tetraspanning integral membrane 
proteins that reside in multiple secretory and endocytic organelles, bind to 
NHE5 and co-localize predominantly in the recycling endosomes. In vitro 
protein-protein interaction assays revealed that NHE5 directly binds to the N- 
and C-terminal cytosolic extensions of SCAMP2. Heterologous expression of SCAMP2 
but not SCAMP5 increased cell-surface abundance as well as transporter activity 
of NHE5 across the plasma membrane. Expression of a deletion mutant lacking the 
SCAMP2-specific N-terminal cytosolic domain, and a mini-gene encoding the 
N-terminal extension, reduced the transporter activity. Although both Arf6 and 
Rab11 positively regulate NHE5 cell-surface targeting and NHE5 activity across 
the plasma membrane, SCAMP2-mediated surface targeting of NHE5 was reversed by 
dominant-negative Arf6 but not by dominant-negative Rab11. Together, these 
results suggest that SCAMP2 regulates NHE5 transit through recycling endosomes 
and promotes its surface targeting in an Arf6-dependent manner.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M807055200
PMCID: PMC2679489
PMID: 19276089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
