---
pmid: '26759377'
title: HSF-1 is involved in regulation of ascaroside pheromone biosynthesis by heat
  stress in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Joo HJ
- Park S
- Kim KY
- Kim MY
- Kim H
- Park D
- Paik YK
journal: Biochem J
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20150938
---

# HSF-1 is involved in regulation of ascaroside pheromone biosynthesis by heat stress in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Joo HJ, Park S, Kim KY, Kim MY, Kim H, Park D, Paik YK
**Journal:** Biochem J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20150938](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20150938)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2016 Mar 15;473(6):789-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150938. Epub 2016 Jan
12.

HSF-1 is involved in regulation of ascaroside pheromone biosynthesis by heat 
stress in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Joo HJ(1), Park S(2), Kim KY(3), Kim MY(3), Kim H(1), Park D(1), Paik YK(4).

Author information:
(1)Yonsei Proteome Research Center, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, 
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Integrated Omics for Biomedical Science, Yonsei University, 50 
Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, 
Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea.
(4)Yonsei Proteome Research Center, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, 
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea Department of Integrated Omics for 
Biomedical Science, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, 
Republic of Korea Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 03722, 
Republic of Korea paikyk@yonsei.ac.kr.

The nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans survives by adapting to environmental 
stresses such as temperature extremes by increasing the concentrations of 
ascaroside pheromones, termed ascarosides or daumones, which signal early C. 
elegans larvae to enter a non-aging dauer state for long-term survival. It is 
well known that production of ascarosides is stimulated by heat stress, 
resulting in enhanced dauer formation by which worms can adapt to environmental 
insults. However, the molecular mechanism by which ascaroside pheromone 
biosynthesis is stimulated by heat stress remains largely unknown. In the 
present study, we show that the heat-shock transcription factor HSF-1 can 
mediate enhanced ascaroside pheromone biosynthesis in response to heat stress by 
activating the peroxisomal fatty acid β-oxidation genes in C. elegans. To 
explore the potential molecular mechanisms, we examined the four major genes 
involved in the ascaroside biosynthesis pathway and then quantified the changes 
in both the expression of these genes and ascaroside production under 
heat-stress conditions. The transcriptional activation of ascaroside pheromone 
biosynthesis genes by HSF-1 was quite notable, which is not only supported by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, but also accompanied by the enhanced 
production of chemically detectable major ascarosides (e.g. daumones 1 and 3). 
Consequently, the dauer formation rate was significantly increased by the 
ascaroside pheromone extracts from N2 wild-type but not from hsf-1(sy441) mutant 
animals grown under heat-stress conditions. Hence heat-stress-enhanced 
ascaroside production appears to be mediated at least in part by HSF-1, which 
seems to be important in adaptation strategies for coping with heat stress in 
this nematode.

© 2016 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20150938
PMID: 26759377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
