---
pmid: '2967497'
title: 3-Hydroxyanthranilate oxygenase activity is increased in the brains of Huntington
  disease victims.
authors:
- Schwarcz R
- Okuno E
- White RJ
- Bird ED
- Whetsell WO Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC280365
doi: 10.1073/pnas.85.11.4079
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# 3-Hydroxyanthranilate oxygenase activity is increased in the brains of Huntington disease victims.
**Authors:** Schwarcz R, Okuno E, White RJ, Bird ED, Whetsell WO Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.85.11.4079](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.85.11.4079)
**PMC:** [PMC280365](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC280365/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Jun;85(11):4079-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.85.11.4079.

3-Hydroxyanthranilate oxygenase activity is increased in the brains of 
Huntington disease victims.

Schwarcz R(1), Okuno E, White RJ, Bird ED, Whetsell WO Jr.

Author information:
(1)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore 21228.

An excess of the tryptophan metabolite quinolinic acid in the brain has been 
hypothetically related to the pathogenesis of Huntington disease. Quinolinate's 
immediate biosynthetic enzyme, 3-hydroxyanthranilate oxygenase (EC 1.13.11.6), 
has now been detected in human brain tissue. The activity of 
3-hydroxyanthranilate oxygenase is increased in Huntington disease brains as 
compared to control brains. The increment is particularly pronounced in the 
striatum, which is known to exhibit the most prominent nerve-cell loss in 
Huntington disease. Thus, the Huntington disease brain has a disproportionately 
high capability to produce the endogenous "excitotoxin" quinolinic acid. This 
finding may be of relevance for clinical, neuropathologic, and biochemical 
features associated with Huntington disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.11.4079
PMCID: PMC280365
PMID: 2967497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
