---
pmid: '26787882'
title: PGL germ granule assembly protein is a base-specific, single-stranded RNase.
authors:
- Aoki ST
- Kershner AM
- Bingman CA
- Wickens M
- Kimble J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4747772
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1524400113
---

# PGL germ granule assembly protein is a base-specific, single-stranded RNase.
**Authors:** Aoki ST, Kershner AM, Bingman CA, Wickens M, Kimble J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1524400113](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1524400113)
**PMC:** [PMC4747772](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4747772/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 2;113(5):1279-84. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1524400113. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

PGL germ granule assembly protein is a base-specific, single-stranded RNase.

Aoki ST(1), Kershner AM(2), Bingman CA(1), Wickens M(1), Kimble J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706;
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 
53706; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53706 jekimble@wisc.edu.

Cellular RNA-protein (RNP) granules are ubiquitous and have fundamental roles in 
biology and RNA metabolism, but the molecular basis of their structure, 
assembly, and function is poorly understood. Using nematode "P-granules" as a 
paradigm, we focus on the PGL granule scaffold protein to gain molecular 
insights into RNP granule structure and assembly. We first identify a PGL 
dimerization domain (DD) and determine its crystal structure. PGL-1 DD has a 
novel 13 α-helix fold that creates a positively charged channel as a homodimer. 
We investigate its capacity to bind RNA and discover unexpectedly that PGL-1 DD 
is a guanosine-specific, single-stranded endonuclease. Discovery of the PGL 
homodimer, together with previous results, suggests a model in which the PGL DD 
dimer forms a fundamental building block for P-granule assembly. Discovery of 
the PGL RNase activity expands the role of RNP granule assembly proteins to 
include enzymatic activity in addition to their job as structural scaffolds.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1524400113
PMCID: PMC4747772
PMID: 26787882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Cellular RNA-protein (RNP) granules are ubiquitous and have fundamental roles in biology and RNA metabolism, but the molecular basis of their structure, assembly, and function is poorly understood. Using nematode “P-granules” as a paradigm, we focus on the PGL granule scaffold protein to gain molecular insights into RNP granule structure and assembly. We first identify a PGL dimerization domain (DD) and determine its crystal structure. PGL-1 DD has a novel 13 α-helix fold that creates a positively charged channel as a homodimer. We investigate its capacity to bind RNA and discover unexpectedly that PGL-1 DD is a guanosine-specific, single-stranded endonuclease. Discovery of the PGL homodimer, together with previous results, suggests a model in which the PGL DD dimer forms a fundamental building block for P-granule assembly. Discovery of the PGL RNase activity expands the role of RNP granule assembly proteins to include enzymatic activity in addition to their job as structural scaffolds.

Discussion

This work reveals two key features of PGL proteins: the PGL dimerization domain and PGL-1 guanosine-specific RNA endonuclease activity. Discovery of the PGL dimerization domain allows us to expand on the Hanazawa model for P-granule assembly ( 17 ) to include PGL DD as a fundamental building block of the P-granule scaffold. Hanazawa et al. found a PGL deletion that eliminates granule assembly ( Fig. 1 A ) ( 17 ), and we now know that their deletion removes part of PGL DD. Putting PGL dimerization (present work) together with PGL multimerization ( 17 ), we now suggest that the P-granule framework is constructed from multimers of PGL dimers. This strategy is similar in nature to that of Oskar, the fly germ granule scaffold protein that also dimerizes to facilitate assembly ( 28 ).

Discovery of the PGL RNase activity changes our view of RNP granule scaffold proteins. Previously, only the RGG repeats linked the PGL scaffold with RNA ( 17 ). The PGL DD RNA endonuclease activity was unexpected. Its structure assumes a novel fold and lacks any cluster of amino acids recognizable as a classic RNase active site, which opens a host of questions about its enzyme mechanism, base specificity, P-granule function, regulation, and conservation. PGL’s enzymatic activity is modest compared with classic guanosine-specific RNases, like RNase T1. PGL could have additional sequence specificity not yet identified, or specificity for a modified guanosine, like the 5′ cap. Alternatively, inefficiency may be ideal for a granule-forming enzyme to permit RNase activity only when present at high concentrations within P-granules.

Enzymatic activities in other germ granule scaffold proteins, zebrafish Bucky Ball and Drosophila Oskar, have not been identified, but it is plausible that they, like PGL, may contain novel enzymatic domains or recruit enzymes to serve analogous roles. Intriguingly, Maelstrom, a Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) biogenesis factor and germ-granule component, was recently identified as a novel guanosine RNase ( 29 ). The RNA targets of the Maelstrom nuclease are unknown and its enzymatic activity is dispensable in vivo for piRNA biogenesis. Although Maelstrom and PGL are structurally unrelated, their parallels are striking: both reside in germ granules, both possess guanosine RNA endonuclease activity, and that enzymatic activity is dispensable in vivo. An attractive idea is that convergent evolution established RNase activity in distinct proteins within germ granules and that their activities serve a common purpose in reproduction.

What might the PGL RNase do in P-granules? Selected mRNAs localize to P-granules and that localization correlates with their translational inhibition ( 16 ). PGL DD RNase may cleave the 5′ cap or 3′ regulatory regions of mRNAs retained in P-granules, and hence block translation. Potential targets include genes associated with neuronal and muscle cell development, which are inhibited in P-granules to prevent aberrant germ cell differentiation ( 14 ). The RNases responsible for piRNA biogenesis are largely unknown and those that are known have no obvious homologs ( 30 ). For example, Zucchini, a piRNA biogenesis RNase, has no known nematode equivalent. PGL may be the functional counterpart of Zucchini or play some other role in piRNA metabolism. Regardless, the insights from this work provide a starting point to further explore the molecular assembly and RNA regulatory mechanisms of this model RNP granule.

Materials and Methods

Additional details can be found in the SI Materials and Methods .
