---
pmid: '23543736'
title: Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) acts as a novel potentiator of cyclin-dependent
  kinases to enhance cell proliferation independently of its hydrolase activity.
authors:
- Kabuta T
- Mitsui T
- Takahashi M
- Fujiwara Y
- Kabuta C
- Konya C
- Tsuchiya Y
- Hatanaka Y
- Uchida K
- Hohjoh H
- Wada K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3642309
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.435701
---

# Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) acts as a novel potentiator of cyclin-dependent kinases to enhance cell proliferation independently of its hydrolase activity.
**Authors:** Kabuta T, Mitsui T, Takahashi M, Fujiwara Y, Kabuta C, Konya C, Tsuchiya Y, Hatanaka Y, Uchida K, Hohjoh H, Wada K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.435701](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.435701)
**PMC:** [PMC3642309](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3642309/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 3;288(18):12615-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.435701. Epub 
2013 Mar 29.

Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) acts as a novel potentiator of 
cyclin-dependent kinases to enhance cell proliferation independently of its 
hydrolase activity.

Kabuta T(1), Mitsui T, Takahashi M, Fujiwara Y, Kabuta C, Konya C, Tsuchiya Y, 
Hatanaka Y, Uchida K, Hohjoh H, Wada K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of 
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, 
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. kabuta@ncnp.go.jp

Dysregulation of cell proliferation and the cell cycle are associated with 
various diseases, such as cancer. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) play central 
roles in cell proliferation and the cell cycle. Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase 
L1 (UCH-L1) is expressed in a restricted range of tissues, including the brain 
and numerous types of cancer. However, the molecular functions of UCH-L1 remain 
elusive. In this study, we found that UCH-L1 physically interacts with CDK1, 
CDK4, and CDK5, enhancing their kinase activity. Using several mutants of 
UCH-L1, we showed that this enhancement is dependent upon interaction levels 
between UCH-L1 and CDKs but is independent of the known ubiquitin-related 
functions of UCH-L1. Gain- and loss-of-function studies revealed that UCH-L1 
enhances proliferation of multiple cell types, including human cancer cells. 
Inhibition of the interaction between UCH-L1 and cell cycle-associated CDK 
resulted in the abolishment of UCH-L1-induced enhancement of cell proliferation. 
RNA interference of UCH-L1 reduced the growth of human xenograft tumors in mice. 
We concluded that UCH-L1 is a novel regulator of the kinase activities of CDKs. 
We believe that our findings from this study will significantly contribute to 
our understanding of cell cycle-associated diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.435701
PMCID: PMC3642309
PMID: 23543736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
