---
pmid: '11297421'
title: Apolipoprotein A-I directly interacts with amyloid precursor protein and inhibits
  A beta aggregation and toxicity.
authors:
- Koldamova RP
- Lefterov IM
- Lefterova MI
- Lazo JS
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi002186k
---

# Apolipoprotein A-I directly interacts with amyloid precursor protein and inhibits A beta aggregation and toxicity.
**Authors:** Koldamova RP, Lefterov IM, Lefterova MI, Lazo JS
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi002186k](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi002186k)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2001 Mar 27;40(12):3553-60. doi: 10.1021/bi002186k.

Apolipoprotein A-I directly interacts with amyloid precursor protein and 
inhibits A beta aggregation and toxicity.

Koldamova RP(1), Lefterov IM, Lefterova MI, Lazo JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is the source of the neurotoxic amyloid beta 
(Abeta) peptide associated with Alzheimer's disease. Apolipoprotein A-I 
(apoA-I), a constituent of high-density lipoprotein complexes, was identified by 
a yeast two-hybrid system as a strong and specific binding partner of 
full-length APP (APPfl). This association between apoA-I and APPfl was localized 
to the extracellular domain of APP (APPextra). Furthermore, the interaction 
between apoA-I and APPfl was confirmed by coprecipitation using recombinant 
epitope-tagged APPextra and purified apoA-I. Several functional domains have 
been identified in APPextra, and we focused on a possible interaction between 
apoA-1 and the pathologically important Abeta peptide, because APPextra contains 
the nontransmembrane domain of Abeta. The binding between apoA-I and Abeta was 
saturable (K(d) = 6 nM), specific, and reversible. APPextra also competed with 
apoA-I for binding to Abeta. Direct evidence for this interaction was obtained 
by the formation of an SDS-resistant Abeta-apoA-I complex in polyacrylamide 
gels. Competitive experiments with apolipoprotein E (isoforms E2 and E4) showed 
that apoA-I had a higher binding affinity for Abeta. We also found that apoA-I 
inhibited the beta-sheet formation of Abeta with a mean inhibitory concentration 
close to that of alpha2-macroglobulin. Finally, we demonstrated that apoA-I 
attenuated Abeta-induced cytotoxicity. These results suggest apoA-I binds to at 
least one extracellular domain of APP and has a functional role in controlling 
Abeta aggregation and toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/bi002186k
PMID: 11297421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
