---
pmid: '7615798'
title: Aortic arch malformations and ventricular septal defect in mice deficient in
  endothelin-1.
authors:
- Kurihara Y
- Kurihara H
- Oda H
- Maemura K
- Nagai R
- Ishikawa T
- Yazaki Y
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC185200
doi: 10.1172/JCI118033
---

# Aortic arch malformations and ventricular septal defect in mice deficient in endothelin-1.
**Authors:** Kurihara Y, Kurihara H, Oda H, Maemura K, Nagai R, Ishikawa T, Yazaki Y
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118033](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118033)
**PMC:** [PMC185200](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC185200/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1995 Jul;96(1):293-300. doi: 10.1172/JCI118033.

Aortic arch malformations and ventricular septal defect in mice deficient in 
endothelin-1.

Kurihara Y(1), Kurihara H, Oda H, Maemura K, Nagai R, Ishikawa T, Yazaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 1995 Jul;96(1):1-3. doi: 10.1172/JCI118008.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a 21-amino acid peptide with various biological 
activities including vasoconstriction and cell proliferation. To clarify the 
physiological and pathophysiological role of ET-1, we disrupted the mouse Edn1 
locus encoding ET-1 by gene targeting and demonstrated that ET-1 is essential to 
the normal development of pharyngeal arch-derived tissues and organs. In this 
study, we focused on the phenotypic manifestations of Edn1-/- homozygous mice in 
the cardiovascular system. Edn1-/- homozygotes display cardiovascular 
malformations including interrupted aortic arch (2.3%), tubular hypoplasia of 
the aortic arch (4.6%), aberrant right subclavian artery (12.9%), and 
ventricular septal defect with abnormalities of the outflow tract (48.4%). The 
frequency and extent of these abnormalities are increased by treatment with 
neutralizing monoclonal antibodies or a selective ETA receptor antagonist BQ123. 
At an earlier embryonic stage, formation of pharyngeal arch arteries and 
endocardial cushion is disturbed in Edn1-/- homozygotes. In situ hybridization 
confirmed ET-1 expression in the endothelium of the arch arteries and cardiac 
outflow tract and the endocardial cushion as well as in the epithelium of the 
pharyngeal arches. Thus, ET-1 is involved in the normal development of the heart 
and great vessels, and circulating ET-1 and/or other ET isoforms may cause a 
functional redundancy, at least partly, through the ETA receptor.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118033
PMCID: PMC185200
PMID: 7615798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
