---
pmid: '11878931'
title: Vaccinia virus CrmE encodes a soluble and cell surface tumor necrosis factor
  receptor that contributes to virus virulence.
authors:
- Reading PC
- Khanna A
- Smith GL
journal: Virology
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/viro.2001.1236
---

# Vaccinia virus CrmE encodes a soluble and cell surface tumor necrosis factor receptor that contributes to virus virulence.
**Authors:** Reading PC, Khanna A, Smith GL
**Journal:** Virology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/viro.2001.1236](https://doi.org/10.1006/viro.2001.1236)

## Abstract

1. Virology. 2002 Jan 20;292(2):285-98. doi: 10.1006/viro.2001.1236.

Vaccinia virus CrmE encodes a soluble and cell surface tumor necrosis factor 
receptor that contributes to virus virulence.

Reading PC(1), Khanna A, Smith GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Division of Investigative Science, Faculty 
of Medicine, Imperial College, St. Mary's Campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, 
United Kingdom.

Poxviruses encode soluble cytokine receptors to interfere with host immune 
functions. Cells infected with vaccinia virus (VV) strains USSR, Lister, and 
Evans express soluble and cell surface tumor necrosis factor receptors (vTNFRs). 
We have characterized vTNFR activity in VV USSR and identified an open reading 
frame that encodes both soluble and cell surface activity, hereafter referred to 
as VV cytokine response modifier E (VV CrmE). Expression and characterization 
from recombinant VV and baculovirus showed VV CrmE to be an 18-kDa protein that 
bound human, mouse, and rat TNF-alpha, but not human LT alpha. VV CrmE inhibited 
the cytotoxic and apoptotic activities of human, but not mouse or rat, TNF in 
vitro. Nonetheless, in a murine intranasal model, USSR recombinants lacking CrmE 
were attenuated, demonstrating a role in vivo. Furthermore, expression of VV or 
cowpox virus vTNFRs from VV strain WR (which itself does not express a vTNFR) 
was shown to enhance virulence in the murine model.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.1236
PMID: 11878931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
