---
pmid: '6450748'
title: Evidence for involvement of penicillin-binding protein 3 in murein synthesis
  during septation but not during cell elongation.
authors:
- Botta GA
- Park JT
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1981'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC217277
doi: 10.1128/jb.145.1.333-340.1981
---

# Evidence for involvement of penicillin-binding protein 3 in murein synthesis during septation but not during cell elongation.
**Authors:** Botta GA, Park JT
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.145.1.333-340.1981](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.145.1.333-340.1981)
**PMC:** [PMC217277](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC217277/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1981 Jan;145(1):333-40. doi: 10.1128/jb.145.1.333-340.1981.

Evidence for involvement of penicillin-binding protein 3 in murein synthesis 
during septation but not during cell elongation.

Botta GA, Park JT.

Furazlocillin (1 microgram/ml) and piperacillin (5 microgram/ml) bound 
specifically to penicillin-binding protein 3 (PBP-3) and not to the other major 
PBPs in intact Escherichia coli cells. The effect of this specific binding to 
PBP-3 on murein synthesis of elongating and synchronously septating cells was 
investigated in two thermosensitive division mutants, E. coli BUG6 and E. coli 
JE10730, the latter possessing a thermolabile PBP-3. Synchronous cell division 
was induced by shifting the cultures from the nonpermissive temperature (42 
degrees C) to 30 degrees C. Both [14C]diaminopimelic acid incorporation into 
murein of intact cells and [14C]N-acetylglucosamine incorporation into murein of 
cells permeabilized with ether was inhibited by an average of 42% in septating 
cells. In filaments growing at the nonpermissive temperature, we detected no 
inhibition and, frequently, a 10 to 15% stimulation of murein synthesis. The two 
drugs, at concentrations used in the above experiments, bound exclusively to 
PBP-3 both in elongating and septating intact cells and in ether-treated cells. 
These results support the hypothesis that PBP-3 activity is exclusively required 
for septal murein synthesis.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.145.1.333-340.1981
PMCID: PMC217277
PMID: 6450748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
