---
pmid: '7957078'
title: Molecular chaperones cooperate with PIM1 protease in the degradation of misfolded
  proteins in mitochondria.
authors:
- Wagner I
- Arlt H
- van Dyck L
- Langer T
- Neupert W
journal: EMBO J
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC395461
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06843.x
---

# Molecular chaperones cooperate with PIM1 protease in the degradation of misfolded proteins in mitochondria.
**Authors:** Wagner I, Arlt H, van Dyck L, Langer T, Neupert W
**Journal:** EMBO J (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06843.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06843.x)
**PMC:** [PMC395461](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC395461/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1994 Nov 1;13(21):5135-45. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06843.x.

Molecular chaperones cooperate with PIM1 protease in the degradation of 
misfolded proteins in mitochondria.

Wagner I(1), Arlt H, van Dyck L, Langer T, Neupert W.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Universität München, Germany.

ATP dependent proteolytic degradation of misfolded proteins in the mitochondrial 
matrix is mediated by the PIM1 protease and depends on the molecular chaperone 
proteins mt-hsp70 and Mdj1p. Chaperone function is essential to maintain 
misfolded proteins in a soluble state, a prerequisite for their degradation by 
PIM1 protease. In the absence of functional mt-hsp70 or Mdj1p misfolded proteins 
either remain associated with mt-hsp70 or form aggregates and thereby are no 
longer substrates for PIM1 protease. Mdj1p is shown to regulate the ATP 
dependent association of an unfolded polypeptide chain with mt-hsp70 affecting 
binding to as well as release from mt-hsp70. These findings establish a central 
role of molecular chaperone proteins in the degradation of misfolded proteins by 
PIM1 protease and thereby demonstrate a functional interrelation between 
components of the folding machinery and the proteolytic system within 
mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06843.x
PMCID: PMC395461
PMID: 7957078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
