---
pmid: '17449476'
title: Eis (enhanced intracellular survival) protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
  disturbs the cross regulation of T-cells.
authors:
- Lella RK
- Sharma C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C600280200
---

# Eis (enhanced intracellular survival) protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis disturbs the cross regulation of T-cells.
**Authors:** Lella RK, Sharma C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C600280200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C600280200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 29;282(26):18671-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C600280200. Epub
2007  Apr 19.

Eis (enhanced intracellular survival) protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
disturbs the cross regulation of T-cells.

Lella RK(1), Sharma C.

Author information:
(1)Drug Target Discovery and Development Division, Central Drug Research 
Institute, Chattar Manzil Palace, Lucknow 226001, U.P. India.

The pathogenesis of tuberculosis is complex and its manifestations diverse, 
reflecting a lifetime of dynamic interactions between mycobacterial virulence 
factors and the human immune system. The pathogenic mycobacteria have developed 
strategies to circumvent the major killing mechanisms employed by macrophages 
and take advantage of the enclosed environment within its host cell to avoid 
humoral and cell-mediated immune responses. Secretory proteins play a major role 
in host-pathogen interactions. The eis (Rv2416c) gene has been identified as a 
secretory protein, and it has been shown that it enhances intracellular survival 
of Mycobacterium semgmatis in the macrophage cell line. The main aim of this 
study was to gain insight into the biological role of Eis in the host. 
Stimulation of T-cells with Eis recombinant protein of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis inhibits Con A-mediated T-cell proliferation in vitro. Treatment of 
T-cells with Eis inhibits ERK1/2, JAK pathway, and subsequent production of 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-4. On the contrary, there is 
increased production of interferon-gamma and interleukin-10, which indicates 
that immunity in response to Eis treatment is skewed away from a protective 
T(H)1 response and Eis disturbs the cross regulation of T-cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C600280200
PMID: 17449476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
