---
pmid: '660556'
title: Regional and subcellular distribution and some factors in the regulation of
  reduced pterins in rat brain.
authors:
- Bullard WP
- Guthrie PB
- Russo PV
- Mandell AJ
journal: J Pharmacol Exp Ther
year: '1978'
full_text_available: false
---

# Regional and subcellular distribution and some factors in the regulation of reduced pterins in rat brain.
**Authors:** Bullard WP, Guthrie PB, Russo PV, Mandell AJ
**Journal:** J Pharmacol Exp Ther (1978)

## Abstract

1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1978 Jul;206(1):4-20.

Regional and subcellular distribution and some factors in the regulation of 
reduced pterins in rat brain.

Bullard WP, Guthrie PB, Russo PV, Mandell AJ.

We have studied the regional and subcellular distribution, functional role, and 
pharmacology of quinoid dihydropterin reductase (QDPR) and endogenous reduced 
pterins (PH4) subserving tyrosin hydroxylase (TOH) and tryptophan hydroxylase in 
the rat brain. There is a significant correlation between the regional 
distribution of PH4 and TOH but not between PH4 and tryptophan hydroxylase or 
between either TOH or tryptophan hydroxylase and QDPR. This suggests that a 
major portion of PH4 is associated with the biosynthetic activity of brain 
catecholaminergic systems. The regional and subcellular distribution of QDPR was 
inconsistent with a regulatory function for QDPR in monoamine synthesis. In 
vitro measures of PH4, TOH, and synaptosomal dopamine (DA) and serotonin 
synthesis in the striate cortex of untreated animals and animals subjected to 
neurotoxin or electrolytic lesions of the dorsal raphe or substantia nigra 
exhibit significant covariation of PH4 with synaptosomal DA but not serotonin 
synthesis and a significant partial correlation of PH4 with DA synthesis. The 
subcellular distribution of PH4 in the striatum demonstrates an association of 
PH4 with the biosynthetic function of dopaminergic nerve terminals. Reserpine 
and d-amphetamine in vivo elicited an increase and decrease, respectively, in 
striatal PH4 paralleling induced changes in synaptosomal DA synthesis. Other 
drugs altering central catecholaminergic function did not alter striatal PH4 
levels significantly. The data suggest that 1) a major portion of total PH4 (as 
much as 90% in the striatum) is related to the function of catecholaminergic 
rather than serotonergic systems, 2) PH4 levels is a determinant of the velocity 
of DA synthesis and 3) PH4 levels are altered by some psychoactive drugs in 
association with changes in synaptosomal catecholamine biosynthetic rates.

PMID: 660556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
