---
pmid: '19442657'
title: Evidence for a direct involvement of hMSH5 in promoting ionizing radiation
  induced apoptosis.
authors:
- Tompkins JD
- Wu X
- Chu YL
- Her C
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3171649
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.004
---

# Evidence for a direct involvement of hMSH5 in promoting ionizing radiation induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Tompkins JD, Wu X, Chu YL, Her C
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.004)
**PMC:** [PMC3171649](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3171649/)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Aug 15;315(14):2420-32. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.004. 
Epub 2009 May 12.

Evidence for a direct involvement of hMSH5 in promoting ionizing radiation 
induced apoptosis.

Tompkins JD(1), Wu X, Chu YL, Her C.

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences and Center for Reproductive Biology, PO Box 
644660, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164-4660, USA.

Although increasing evidence has suggested that the hMSH5 protein plays an 
important role in meiotic and mitotic DNA recombinational repair, its precise 
functions in recombination and DNA damage response are presently elusive. Here 
we show that the interaction between hMSH5 and c-Abl confers ionizing radiation 
(IR)-induced apoptotic response by promoting c-Abl activation and p73 
accumulation, and these effects are greatly enhanced in cells expressing 
hMSH5(P29S) (i.e. the hMSH5 variant possessing a proline to serine change within 
the N-terminal (Px)(5) dipeptide repeat). Our current study provides the first 
evidence that the (Px)(5) dipeptide repeat plays an important role in modulating 
the interaction between hMSH5 and c-Abl and alteration of this dipeptide repeat 
in hMSH5(P29S) leads to increased IR sensitivity owing to enhanced 
caspase-3-mediated apoptosis. In addition, RNAi-mediated hMSH5 silencing leads 
to the reduction of apoptosis in IR-treated cells. In short, this study 
implicates a role for hMSH5 in DNA damage response involving c-Abl and p73, and 
suggests that mutations impairing this process could significantly affect normal 
cellular responses to anti-cancer treatments.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.05.004
PMCID: PMC3171649
PMID: 19442657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
