---
pmid: '17356132'
title: Human IL4I1 is a secreted L-phenylalanine oxidase expressed by mature dendritic
  cells that inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.
authors:
- Boulland ML
- Marquet J
- Molinier-Frenkel V
- Möller P
- Guiter C
- Lasoudris F
- Copie-Bergman C
- Baia M
- Gaulard P
- Leroy K
- Castellano F
journal: Blood
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210
---

# Human IL4I1 is a secreted L-phenylalanine oxidase expressed by mature dendritic cells that inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.
**Authors:** Boulland ML, Marquet J, Molinier-Frenkel V, Möller P, Guiter C, Lasoudris F, Copie-Bergman C, Baia M, Gaulard P, Leroy K, Castellano F
**Journal:** Blood (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2007 Jul 1;110(1):220-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210. Epub 2007
Mar  13.

Human IL4I1 is a secreted L-phenylalanine oxidase expressed by mature dendritic 
cells that inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.

Boulland ML(1), Marquet J, Molinier-Frenkel V, Möller P, Guiter C, Lasoudris F, 
Copie-Bergman C, Baia M, Gaulard P, Leroy K, Castellano F.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale, Unité 841, 
Institut Mondor de Recherche Médicale, Département 
Immunologie-Oncologie-Dermatologie, Equipe 09, Créteil, France.

Interleukin-4-induced gene 1 (IL4I1) was first described as a B-cell 
IL4-inducible gene and is highly expressed in primary mediastinal B-cell 
lymphomas. We established stable HEK293 clones expressing human and mouse IL4I1 
to examine their biochemical properties and function. Both proteins were 
secreted into the culture medium, and we observed the secretion of endogenous 
human IL4I1 (hIL4I1) protein in a mediastinal lymphoma B-cell line, MedB-1. We 
showed that IL4I1 has l-amino acid oxidase activity, optimal at physiological pH 
and primarily directed toward phenylalanine. Immunohistochemical analysis of 
secondary lymphoid organs showed staining of germinal center macrophages and 
inflammatory myeloid cells. In vitro, functional enzyme was highest in mature 
dendritic cells (DCs), suggesting a role in antigen-presenting cell/T-lymphocyte 
cross-talk. Indeed, hIL4I1 inhibited the proliferation of CD3-stimulated T 
lymphocytes with a similar effect on CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. In contrast, 
memory T cells were more strongly affected by hIL4I1 and its catabolite H(2)O(2) 
than naive T cells. hIL4I1 inhibitory effect was dependent on enzymatic activity 
and H(2)O(2) production and associated with a transient down-regulation of 
TCRzeta expression. Altogether these data suggest IL4I1 as a new 
immunomodulatory enzyme produced by DCs.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-036210
PMID: 17356132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
