---
pmid: '27199445'
title: JMJD8 Regulates Angiogenic Sprouting and Cellular Metabolism by Interacting
  With Pyruvate Kinase M2 in Endothelial Cells.
authors:
- Boeckel JN
- Derlet A
- Glaser SF
- Luczak A
- Lucas T
- Heumüller AW
- Krüger M
- Zehendner CM
- Kaluza D
- Doddaballapur A
- Ohtani K
- Treguer K
- Dimmeler S
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307695
---

# JMJD8 Regulates Angiogenic Sprouting and Cellular Metabolism by Interacting With Pyruvate Kinase M2 in Endothelial Cells.
**Authors:** Boeckel JN, Derlet A, Glaser SF, Luczak A, Lucas T, Heumüller AW, Krüger M, Zehendner CM, Kaluza D, Doddaballapur A, Ohtani K, Treguer K, Dimmeler S
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307695](https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307695)

## Abstract

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Jul;36(7):1425-33. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307695. Epub 2016 May 19.

JMJD8 Regulates Angiogenic Sprouting and Cellular Metabolism by Interacting With 
Pyruvate Kinase M2 in Endothelial Cells.

Boeckel JN(1), Derlet A(1), Glaser SF(1), Luczak A(1), Lucas T(1), Heumüller 
AW(1), Krüger M(1), Zehendner CM(1), Kaluza D(1), Doddaballapur A(1), Ohtani 
K(1), Treguer K(1), Dimmeler S(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, University Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany (J.-N.B., A.D., S.F.G., A.L., T.L., A.W.H., C.M.Z., D.K., 
A.D., K.O., K.T., S.D.); Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad 
Nauheim, Germany (M.K.); Department of Cardiology, Internal Medicine III, 
Goethe-University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany (C.M.Z.); and German Center of 
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany (J.-N.B., A.D., 
S.F.G., T.L., C.M.Z., A.D., S.D.).
(2)From the Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, University Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany (J.-N.B., A.D., S.F.G., A.L., T.L., A.W.H., C.M.Z., D.K., 
A.D., K.O., K.T., S.D.); Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad 
Nauheim, Germany (M.K.); Department of Cardiology, Internal Medicine III, 
Goethe-University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany (C.M.Z.); and German Center of 
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany (J.-N.B., A.D., 
S.F.G., T.L., C.M.Z., A.D., S.D.). dimmeler@em.uni-frankfurt.de.

OBJECTIVE: Jumonji C (JmjC) domain-containing proteins modify histone and 
nonhistone proteins thereby controlling cellular functions. However, the role of 
JmjC proteins in angiogenesis is largely unknown. Here, we characterize the 
expression of JmjC domain-containing proteins after inducing endothelial 
differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells and study the function of JmjC 
domain-only proteins in endothelial cell (EC) functions.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We identified a large number of JmjC domain-containing 
proteins regulated by endothelial differentiation of murine embryonic stem 
cells. Among the family of JmjC domain-only proteins, Jmjd8 was significantly 
upregulated on endothelial differentiation. Knockdown of Jmjd8 in ECs 
significantly decreased in vitro network formation and sprouting in the spheroid 
assay. JMJD8 is exclusively detectable in the cytoplasm, excluding a function as 
a histone-modifying enzyme. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed 
JMJD8-interacting proteins with known functions in cellular metabolism like 
pyruvate kinase M2. Accordingly, knockdown of pyruvate kinase M2 in human 
umbilical vein ECs decreased endothelial sprouting in the spheroid assay. 
Knockdown of JMJD8 caused a reduction of EC metabolism as measured by Seahorse 
Bioscience extracellular flux analysis. Conversely, overexpression of JMJD8 
enhanced cellular oxygen consumption rate of ECs, reflecting an increased 
mitochondrial respiration.
CONCLUSIONS: Jmjd8 is upregulated during endothelial differentiation and 
regulates endothelial sprouting and metabolism by interacting with pyruvate 
kinase M2.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.116.307695
PMID: 27199445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
