---
pmid: '1718978'
title: Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome). An intermediate clinical
  phenotype caused by substitution of valine for glycine at position 137 of arylsulfatase
  B.
authors:
- Wicker G
- Prill V
- Brooks D
- Gibson G
- Hopwood J
- von Figura K
- Peters C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome). An intermediate clinical phenotype caused by substitution of valine for glycine at position 137 of arylsulfatase B.
**Authors:** Wicker G, Prill V, Brooks D, Gibson G, Hopwood J, von Figura K, Peters C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Nov 15;266(32):21386-91.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome). An intermediate clinical 
phenotype caused by substitution of valine for glycine at position 137 of 
arylsulfatase B.

Wicker G(1), Prill V, Brooks D, Gibson G, Hopwood J, von Figura K, Peters C.

Author information:
(1)Universität Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

The Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type VI) is a lysosomal 
storage disease with autosomal recessive inheritance caused by deficiency of the 
enzyme arylsulfatase B. Severe, intermediate, and mild forms of the disease have 
been described. The molecular correlate of the clinical heterogeneity is not 
known at present. To identify the molecular defect in a patient with the 
intermediate form of the disease, arylsulfatase B mRNA from his fibroblasts was 
reverse-transcribed, amplified by the polymerase chain reaction, and subcloned. 
Three point mutations were detected by DNA sequence analysis, two of which, a 
silent A to G transition at nucleotide 1191 and a G to A transition at 
nucleotide 1126 resulting in a methionine for valine 376 substitution, were 
polymorphisms. A G to T transversion at nucleotide 410 causing a valine for 
glycine 137 substitution (G137V) was identified as the mutation underlying the 
Maroteaux-Lamy phenotype of the patient, who was homozygous for the allele. The 
kinetic parameters of the mutant arylsulfatase B enzyme toward a radiolabeled 
trisaccharide substrate were normal excluding an alteration of the active site. 
The G137V mutation did not affect the synthesis but severely reduced the 
stability of the arylsulfatase B precursor. While the wild type precursor is 
converted by limited proteolysis in late endosomes or lysosomes to a mature 
form, the majority of the mutant precursor was degraded presumably in a 
compartment proximal to the trans Golgi network and only a small amount escaped 
to the lysosomes accounting for the low residual enzyme activity in fibroblasts 
of a patient with the juvenile form of the disease.

PMID: 1718978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
