---
pmid: '17551013'
title: Imaging protein interactions with bioluminescence resonance energy transfer
  (BRET) in plant and mammalian cells and tissues.
authors:
- Xu X
- Soutto M
- Xie Q
- Servick S
- Subramanian C
- von Arnim AG
- Johnson CH
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1891211
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0701987104
---

# Imaging protein interactions with bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) in plant and mammalian cells and tissues.
**Authors:** Xu X, Soutto M, Xie Q, Servick S, Subramanian C, von Arnim AG, Johnson CH
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0701987104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701987104)
**PMC:** [PMC1891211](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1891211/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 12;104(24):10264-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0701987104. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

Imaging protein interactions with bioluminescence resonance energy transfer 
(BRET) in plant and mammalian cells and tissues.

Xu X(1), Soutto M, Xie Q, Servick S, Subramanian C, von Arnim AG, Johnson CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Box 1634-B, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37235, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 12;104(24):9917-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0703734104.

FRET is a well established method for cellular and subcellular imaging of 
protein interactions. However, FRET obligatorily necessitates fluorescence 
excitation with its concomitant problems of photobleaching, autofluorescence, 
phototoxicity, and undesirable stimulation of photobiological processes. A 
sister technique, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET), avoids these 
problems because it uses enzyme-catalyzed luminescence; however, BRET signals 
usually have been too dim to image effectively in the past. Using a new 
generation electron bombardment-charge-coupled device camera coupled to an image 
splitter, we demonstrate that BRET can be used to image protein interactions in 
plant and animal cells and in tissues; even subcellular imaging is possible. We 
have applied this technology to image two different protein interactions: (i) 
dimerization of the developmental regulator, COP1, in plant seedlings; and (ii) 
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) in the mammalian nucleus. This 
advance heralds a host of applications for imaging without fluorescent 
excitation and its consequent limitations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0701987104
PMCID: PMC1891211
PMID: 17551013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

FRET is a well established method for cellular and subcellular imaging of protein interactions. However, FRET obligatorily necessitates fluorescence excitation with its concomitant problems of photobleaching, autofluorescence, phototoxicity, and undesirable stimulation of photobiological processes. A sister technique, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET), avoids these problems because it uses enzyme-catalyzed luminescence; however, BRET signals usually have been too dim to image effectively in the past. Using a new generation electron bombardment-charge-coupled device camera coupled to an image splitter, we demonstrate that BRET can be used to image protein interactions in plant and animal cells and in tissues; even subcellular imaging is possible. We have applied this technology to image two different protein interactions: ( i ) dimerization of the developmental regulator, COP1, in plant seedlings; and ( ii ) CCAAT/enhancer binding protein α (C/EBPα) in the mammalian nucleus. This advance heralds a host of applications for imaging without fluorescent excitation and its consequent limitations.

Discussion

Fluorescence techniques have become the predominant methodology for imaging cells, subcellular organelles, and small pieces of tissue. This technology has blossomed, leading to fluorescence tools such as FRET, fluorescence photobleaching, fluorescence lifetime imaging, confocal microscopy, etc. ( 3 ). On the other hand, because of its exquisite sensitivity and independence from excitation, luminescence technology often is preferable for high-throughput screening ( 7 ). An additional advantage of BRET is that it is superior for deep penetration of animal tissues ( 6 ). Luminescence is also favored over fluorescence for assays of promoter activity, especially for those involving temporal changes of promoter activity, because native luciferases tend to have a shorter half-life than native fluorescent proteins do and therefore are better reporters of time-dependent changes ( 14 ) [there are destabilized fluorescent proteins that have shorter half-lives, but they still are not as useful for time-course experiments in which cells are irradiated frequently, leading to phototoxicity ( 15 )].

Therefore, BRET outshines FRET in applications where fluorescence excitation is undesirable. The major limitation that has caused luminescence imaging to lag behind fluorescence imaging has been the fact that luminescence signals usually are much dimmer than fluorescence signals are. However, our application of a modified EB-CCD camera coupled with a microimager demonstrates that BRET now can be imaged at tissue, cellular, and even subcellular levels. At the subcellular level, we show that nuclear and cytoplasmic BRET signals can be visualized ( Figs. 2 and 4 ). With this technology, it should be possible to visualize mitochondrial and chloroplastidic BRET signals as well. We have applied this technology to image protein interaction of ( i ) COP1 in plant seedlings, and ( ii ) C/EBPα in the mammalian nucleus. We also show that tissues that absorb light differentially can be used for quantitative measurements of BRET by a correction using RLUC·EYFP emission profiles. Together with the demonstration that BRET imaging is possible in tissues of intact animals ( 6 ), our results enable a host of applications for imaging without fluorescent excitation, thereby avoiding the problems of photobleaching, autofluorescence, phototoxicity, and undesirable stimulation of photobiological processes.

BRET Methods.

Methods for measuring protein interactions in populations of cells with BRET have been described for bacteria ( 4 , 16 ), plants ( 10 , 17 ), and mammalian cells ( 6 , 18 – 20 ). In this study, substrates for RLUC were native coelenterazine (NanoLight, Pinetop, AZ), ViviRen/EnduRen (Promega, Madison, WI), or Deep Blue C (BioSignal; PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA). For spectral measurements of BRET emission, a QuantaMaster QM-7/SE (Photon Technology International, Birmingham, NJ) spectrophotometer was used; for luminescence spectral measurements, the excitation beam was blocked, and the slit width was set to 16 nm.
