---
pmid: '15716491'
title: Identification of zebrafish insertional mutants with defects in visual system
  development and function.
authors:
- Gross JM
- Perkins BD
- Amsterdam A
- Egaña A
- Darland T
- Matsui JI
- Sciascia S
- Hopkins N
- Dowling JE
journal: Genetics
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1444939
doi: 10.1534/genetics.104.039727
---

# Identification of zebrafish insertional mutants with defects in visual system development and function.
**Authors:** Gross JM, Perkins BD, Amsterdam A, Egaña A, Darland T, Matsui JI, Sciascia S, Hopkins N, Dowling JE
**Journal:** Genetics (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.104.039727](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.104.039727)
**PMC:** [PMC1444939](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1444939/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2005 May;170(1):245-61. doi: 10.1534/genetics.104.039727. Epub 2005 
Feb 16.

Identification of zebrafish insertional mutants with defects in visual system 
development and function.

Gross JM(1), Perkins BD, Amsterdam A, Egaña A, Darland T, Matsui JI, Sciascia S, 
Hopkins N, Dowling JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 02138, USA. jmgross@fas.harvard.edu

Genetic analysis in zebrafish has been instrumental in identifying genes 
necessary for visual system development and function. Recently, a large-scale 
retroviral insertional mutagenesis screen, in which 315 different genes were 
mutated, that resulted in obvious phenotypic defects by 5 days postfertilization 
was completed. That the disrupted gene has been identified in each of these 
mutants provides unique resource through which the formation, function, or 
physiology of individual organ systems can be studied. To that end, a screen for 
visual system mutants was performed on 250 of the mutants in this collection, 
examining each of them histologically for morphological defects in the eye and 
behaviorally for overall visual system function. Forty loci whose disruption 
resulted in defects in eye development and/or visual function were identified. 
The mutants have been divided into the following phenotypic classes that show 
defects in: (1) morphogenesis, (2) growth and central retinal development, (3) 
the peripheral marginal zone, (4) retinal lamination, (5) the photoreceptor cell 
layer, (6) the retinal pigment epithelium, (7) the lens, (8) retinal 
containment, and (9) behavior. The affected genes in these mutants highlight a 
diverse set of proteins necessary for the development, maintenance, and function 
of the vertebrate visual system.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.104.039727
PMCID: PMC1444939
PMID: 15716491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
