---
pmid: '22624718'
title: Tetraspanin CD37 directly mediates transduction of survival and apoptotic signals.
authors:
- Lapalombella R
- Yeh YY
- Wang L
- Ramanunni A
- Rafiq S
- Jha S
- Staubli J
- Lucas DM
- Mani R
- Herman SEM
- Johnson AJ
- Lozanski A
- Andritsos L
- Jones J
- Flynn JM
- Lannutti B
- Thompson P
- Algate P
- Stromatt S
- Jarjoura D
- Mo X
- Wang D
- Chen CS
- Lozanski G
- Heerema NA
- Tridandapani S
- Freitas MA
- Muthusamy N
- Byrd JC
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3360882
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.040
---

# Tetraspanin CD37 directly mediates transduction of survival and apoptotic signals.
**Authors:** Lapalombella R, Yeh YY, Wang L, Ramanunni A, Rafiq S, Jha S, Staubli J, Lucas DM, Mani R, Herman SEM, Johnson AJ, Lozanski A, Andritsos L, Jones J, Flynn JM, Lannutti B, Thompson P, Algate P, Stromatt S, Jarjoura D, Mo X, Wang D, Chen CS, Lozanski G, Heerema NA, Tridandapani S, Freitas MA, Muthusamy N, Byrd JC
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.040)
**PMC:** [PMC3360882](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3360882/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):694-708. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.040.

Tetraspanin CD37 directly mediates transduction of survival and apoptotic 
signals.

Lapalombella R(1), Yeh YY(1), Wang L(2), Ramanunni A(1), Rafiq S(3), Jha S(1), 
Staubli J(3), Lucas DM(4), Mani R(5), Herman SEM(3), Johnson AJ(4), Lozanski 
A(1), Andritsos L(1), Jones J(1), Flynn JM(1), Lannutti B(6), Thompson P(7), 
Algate P(8), Stromatt S(8), Jarjoura D(9), Mo X(9), Wang D(10), Chen CS(4), 
Lozanski G(11), Heerema NA(11), Tridandapani S(12), Freitas MA(13), Muthusamy 
N(14), Byrd JC(15).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; The Integrated Biomedical Research Graduate 
Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Division of Medicinal Chemistry and 
Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(5)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(6)Gilead Pharmaceuticals Inc, Seattle, WA 98102, USA.
(7)OrbiMed Advisors, LLC, New York, NY 10017, USA.
(8)Emergent BioSolutions, Seattle, WA 98121-3460, USA.
(9)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(10)Division of Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(12)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(13)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(14)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Department of Molecular 
Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: raj.muthusamy@osumc.edu.
(15)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Department of Veterinary Biosciences, The 
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Division of Medicinal Chemistry 
and Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA. Electronic address: john.byrd@osumc.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 May 15;21(5):597-598. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.04.034.

Tetraspanins are commonly believed to act only as "molecular facilitators," with 
no direct role in signal transduction. We herein demonstrate that upon ligation, 
CD37, a tetraspanin molecule expressed on mature normal and transformed B cells, 
becomes tyrosine phosphorylated, associates with proximal signaling molecules, 
and initiates a cascade of events leading to apoptosis. Moreover, we have 
identified two tyrosine residues with opposing regulatory functions: one lies in 
the N-terminal domain of CD37 in a predicted "ITIM-like" motif and mediates 
SHP1-dependent death, whereas the second lies in a predicted "ITAM motif" in the 
C-terminal domain of CD37 and counteracts death signals by mediating 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent survival.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.03.040
PMCID: PMC3360882
PMID: 22624718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
