---
pmid: '8617941'
title: Allele-specific differences in the interaction of MHC class I molecules with
  transporters associated with antigen processing.
authors:
- Neisig A
- Wubbolts R
- Zang X
- Melief C
- Neefjes J
journal: J Immunol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Allele-specific differences in the interaction of MHC class I molecules with transporters associated with antigen processing.
**Authors:** Neisig A, Wubbolts R, Zang X, Melief C, Neefjes J
**Journal:** J Immunol (1996)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1996 May 1;156(9):3196-206.

Allele-specific differences in the interaction of MHC class I molecules with 
transporters associated with antigen processing.

Neisig A(1), Wubbolts R, Zang X, Melief C, Neefjes J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 
Amsterdam.

MHC class I molecules bind peptides that are translocated from the cytosol into 
the endoplasmic reticulum by the peptide transporter associated with antigen 
processing (TAP). Class I heterodimers have been shown to associate with TAP and 
are released when loaded with peptide. Here, we show the existence of two pools 
of class I heterodimers, one associated with TAP and one that is free. Whereas 
the free pool is recognized by the class I-specific Ab W6/32, the TAP-associated 
pool is not. Analysis of several class I alleles shows binding to TAP with 
different efficiencies, even at the earliest time points of MHC class I 
assembly. Most HLA-A and -C alleles tested interacted efficiently with TAP, 
whereas a considerable number of HLA-B alleles associated very inefficiently or 
not at all with TAP. This was also observed in cells with nonfunctional TAP. 
Sequence comparison of the different class I alleles allowed the definition of 
amino acids in the peptide binding groove that might be involved in TAP 
association. Binding of peptides to two different pools of class I heterodimers 
may ensure efficient peptide association in an environment where peptides have a 
short life span.

PMID: 8617941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
