---
pmid: '29950717'
title: Cryo-EM structure of an essential Plasmodium vivax invasion complex.
authors:
- Gruszczyk J
- Huang RK
- Chan LJ
- Menant S
- Hong C
- Murphy JM
- Mok YF
- Griffin MDW
- Pearson RD
- Wong W
- Cowman AF
- Yu Z
- Tham WH
journal: Nature
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0249-1
---

# Cryo-EM structure of an essential Plasmodium vivax invasion complex.
**Authors:** Gruszczyk J, Huang RK, Chan LJ, Menant S, Hong C, Murphy JM, Mok YF, Griffin MDW, Pearson RD, Wong W, Cowman AF, Yu Z, Tham WH
**Journal:** Nature (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-018-0249-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0249-1)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2018 Jul;559(7712):135-139. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0249-1. Epub 2018 
Jun 27.

Cryo-EM structure of an essential Plasmodium vivax invasion complex.

Gruszczyk J(1), Huang RK(2), Chan LJ(1)(3), Menant S(1), Hong C(2), Murphy 
JM(1)(3), Mok YF(4), Griffin MDW(4), Pearson RD(5)(6), Wong W(1), Cowman 
AF(1)(3), Yu Z(7), Tham WH(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)CryoEM Shared Resource, Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(7)CryoEM Shared Resource, Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA. yuz@janelia.hhmi.org.
(8)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. tham@wehi.edu.au.
(9)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. tham@wehi.edu.au.

Plasmodium vivax is the most widely distributed malaria parasite that infects 
humans1. P. vivax invades reticulocytes exclusively, and successful entry 
depends on specific interactions between the P. vivax reticulocyte-binding 
protein 2b (PvRBP2b) and transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1)2. TfR1-deficient 
erythroid cells are refractory to invasion by P. vivax, and anti-PvRBP2b 
monoclonal antibodies inhibit reticulocyte binding and block P. vivax invasion 
in field isolates2. Here we report a high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy 
structure of a ternary complex of PvRBP2b bound to human TfR1 and transferrin, 
at 3.7 Å resolution. Mutational analyses show that PvRBP2b residues involved in 
complex formation are conserved; this suggests that antigens could be designed 
that act across P. vivax strains. Functional analyses of TfR1 highlight how P. 
vivax hijacks TfR1, an essential housekeeping protein, by binding to sites that 
govern host specificity, without affecting its cellular function of transporting 
iron. Crystal and solution structures of PvRBP2b in complex with antibody 
fragments characterize the inhibitory epitopes. Our results establish a 
structural framework for understanding how P. vivax reticulocyte-binding protein 
engages its receptor and the molecular mechanism of inhibitory monoclonal 
antibodies, providing important information for the design of novel vaccine 
candidates.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0249-1
PMID: 29950717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
