---
pmid: '8760259'
title: Abnormal postpartum renal development and cystogenesis in the bcl-2 (-/-) mouse.
authors:
- Sorenson CM
- Padanilam BJ
- Hammerman MR
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.1996.271.1.F184
---

# Abnormal postpartum renal development and cystogenesis in the bcl-2 (-/-) mouse.
**Authors:** Sorenson CM, Padanilam BJ, Hammerman MR
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.1996.271.1.F184](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.1996.271.1.F184)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1996 Jul;271(1 Pt 2):F184-93. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.1996.271.1.F184.

Abnormal postpartum renal development and cystogenesis in the bcl-2 (-/-) mouse.

Sorenson CM(1), Padanilam BJ, Hammerman MR.

Author information:
(1)George M. O'Brien Kidney and Urological Diseases Center, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 
63110, USA.

Mice deficient for B cell leukemia/lymphoma gene 2 [bcl-2(-/-) mice] manifest 
congenital renal hypoplasia and develop multicystic kidney disease and renal 
failure postnatally. To characterize postpartum renal development, to identify 
the cellular origin of the cysts, and to provide insight into the role that 
bcl-2 deficiency plays in the cystogenic process, we examined the morphology of 
kidneys from bcl-2 (-/-) mice and wild-type littermates [bcl-2 (+/+)] from birth 
(P0) to postpartum day 28 (P28), determined whether abnormalities of cellular 
proliferation and apoptosis accompany cyst development, and characterized 
expression of the bcl-2-related protein, bax. Between P0 and P7, kidneys from 
bcl-2 (-/-) and bcl-2 (+/+) mice undergo a comparable increase in weight and 
have similar histological appearances. However, during the next 2 wk of life, 
weight gain in kidneys from bcl-2 (-/-) mice is reduced compared with that in 
kidneys from bcl-2 (+/+) animals, and cysts develop in tubules with staining 
characteristics of proximal tubule, distal tubule/medullary thick ascending limb 
of Henle's loop, and collecting duct. Unaffected glomeruli and proximal tubules 
in kidneys of bcl-2 (-/-) mice undergo compensatory growth. Cystogenesis is 
accompanied by enhanced incorporation of 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine in cells within 
cortex and medulla and apoptosis of cells within cysts and in the renal 
interstitium. Bax protein is expressed in the distal tubule in kidneys of bcl-2 
(+/+) and bcl-2 (-/-) mice and in some, but not all cysts. We conclude that 
abnormal regulation of DNA synthesis and apoptosis accompany cystogenesis in 
bcl-2 (-/-) mice during postpartum kidney development. Continued expression of 
bax could enhance apoptotic cell death.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.1996.271.1.F184
PMID: 8760259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
