---
pmid: '17526720'
title: The shifting baseline of northern fur seal ecology in the northeast Pacific
  Ocean.
authors:
- Newsome SD
- Etnier MA
- Gifford-Gonzalez D
- Phillips DL
- van Tuinen M
- Hadly EA
- Costa DP
- Kennett DJ
- Guilderson TP
- Koch PL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1887562
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0610986104
---

# The shifting baseline of northern fur seal ecology in the northeast Pacific Ocean.
**Authors:** Newsome SD, Etnier MA, Gifford-Gonzalez D, Phillips DL, van Tuinen M, Hadly EA, Costa DP, Kennett DJ, Guilderson TP, Koch PL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0610986104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0610986104)
**PMC:** [PMC1887562](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1887562/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 5;104(23):9709-14. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0610986104. Epub 2007 May 25.

The shifting baseline of northern fur seal ecology in the northeast Pacific 
Ocean.

Newsome SD(1), Etnier MA, Gifford-Gonzalez D, Phillips DL, van Tuinen M, Hadly 
EA, Costa DP, Kennett DJ, Guilderson TP, Koch PL.

Author information:
(1)Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 5251 Broad Branch 
Road NW, Washington, DC 20015, USA. snewsome@ciw.edu

Historical data provide a baseline against which to judge the significance of 
recent ecological shifts and guide conservation strategies, especially for 
species decimated by pre-20th century harvesting. Northern fur seals (NFS; 
Callorhinus ursinus) are a common pinniped species in archaeological sites from 
southern California to the Aleutian Islands, yet today they breed almost 
exclusively on offshore islands at high latitudes. Harvest profiles from 
archaeological sites contain many unweaned pups, confirming the presence of 
temperate-latitude breeding colonies in California, the Pacific Northwest, and 
the eastern Aleutian Islands. Isotopic results suggest that prehistoric NFS fed 
offshore across their entire range, that California populations were distinct 
from populations to the north, and that populations breeding at temperate 
latitudes in the past used a different reproductive strategy than modern 
populations. The extinction of temperate-latitude breeding populations was 
asynchronous geographically. In southern California, the Pacific Northwest, and 
the eastern Aleutians, NFS remained abundant in the archaeological record up to 
the historical period approximately 200 years B.P.; thus their regional collapse 
is plausibly attributed to historical hunting or some other anthropogenic 
ecosystem disturbance. In contrast, NFS populations in central and northern 
California collapsed at approximately 800 years B.P., long before European 
contact. The relative roles of human hunting versus climatic factors in 
explaining this ecological shift are unclear, as more paleoclimate information 
is needed from the coastal zone.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0610986104
PMCID: PMC1887562
PMID: 17526720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
