---
pmid: '18258917'
title: Repression of the transcription factor Th-POK by Runx complexes in cytotoxic
  T cell development.
authors:
- Setoguchi R
- Tachibana M
- Naoe Y
- Muroi S
- Akiyama K
- Tezuka C
- Okuda T
- Taniuchi I
journal: Science
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1151844
---

# Repression of the transcription factor Th-POK by Runx complexes in cytotoxic T cell development.
**Authors:** Setoguchi R, Tachibana M, Naoe Y, Muroi S, Akiyama K, Tezuka C, Okuda T, Taniuchi I
**Journal:** Science (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1151844](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1151844)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2008 Feb 8;319(5864):822-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1151844.

Repression of the transcription factor Th-POK by Runx complexes in cytotoxic T 
cell development.

Setoguchi R(1), Tachibana M, Naoe Y, Muroi S, Akiyama K, Tezuka C, Okuda T, 
Taniuchi I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Transcriptional Regulation, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy 
and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

Mouse CD4+CD8+ double-positive (DP) thymocytes differentiate into CD4+ 
helper-lineage cells upon expression of the transcription factor Th-POK but 
commit to the CD8+ cytotoxic lineage in its absence. We report the redirected 
differentiation of class I-restricted thymocytes into CD4+CD8- helper-like T 
cells upon loss of Runx transcription factor complexes. A Runx-binding sequence 
within the Th-POK locus acts as a transcriptional silencer that is essential for 
Th-POK repression and for development of CD8+ T cells. Thus, Th-POK expression 
and genetic programming for T helper cell development are actively inhibited by 
Runx-dependent silencer activity, allowing for cytotoxic T cell differentiation. 
Identification of the transcription factors network in CD4 and CD8 lineage 
choice provides insight into how distinct T cell subsets are developed for 
regulating the adaptive immune system.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1151844
PMID: 18258917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
