---
pmid: '27197155'
title: Oncogenic Mutation of AIMP2/p38 Inhibits Its Tumor-Suppressive Interaction
  with Smurf2.
authors:
- Kim DG
- Lee JY
- Lee JH
- Cho HY
- Kang BS
- Jang SY
- Kim MH
- Guo M
- Han JM
- Kim SJ
- Kim S
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3255
---

# Oncogenic Mutation of AIMP2/p38 Inhibits Its Tumor-Suppressive Interaction with Smurf2.
**Authors:** Kim DG, Lee JY, Lee JH, Cho HY, Kang BS, Jang SY, Kim MH, Guo M, Han JM, Kim SJ, Kim S
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3255](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3255)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2016 Jun 1;76(11):3422-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3255.
Epub  2016 Apr 6.

Oncogenic Mutation of AIMP2/p38 Inhibits Its Tumor-Suppressive Interaction with 
Smurf2.

Kim DG(1), Lee JY(1), Lee JH(1), Cho HY(2), Kang BS(2), Jang SY(3), Kim MH(3), 
Guo M(4), Han JM(5), Kim SJ(6), Kim S(7).

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Bioconvergence Research Center, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, 
Daegu, Korea.
(3)Infection and Immunity Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Scripps Research Institute, Florida Campus, 
Jupiter, Florida.
(5)College of Pharmacy, Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)CHA Research Institutes & CHA Cancer Institute, CHA University, Seongnam, 
Korea.
(7)Medicinal Bioconvergence Research Center, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea. Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Korea. sungkim@snu.ac.kr.

AIMP2/p38 is a multifunctional tumor suppressor that normally resides in the 
cytosol as a scaffold protein of the multi-tRNA synthetase complex (MSC). One of 
the tumor-suppressive functions of AIMP2 is to facilitate ubiquitin-mediated 
degradation of FUSE-binding protein (FBP, FUBP1), a transcriptional activator of 
c-Myc. However, the mechanism by which AIMP2 functions within this pathway and 
its significance in tumorigenesis are uncertain. Here, we report that Smurf2 is 
responsible for AIMP2-mediated ubiquitination of FBP, and a mutation in AIMP2 
that inhibited its nuclear interaction with Smurf2 enhanced cellular 
transformation and tumorigenesis in vivo Treatment of HeLa cells with TGFβ 
resulted in the phosphorylation of AIMP2 on S156, a residue that is exposed on 
the embedded GST domain of AIMP2. We further found that phospho-AIMP2 
dissociated from the MSC and translocated to the nucleus, where it bound to 
Smurf2, enhancing ubiquitination of FBP. AIMP2 also inhibited nuclear export of 
Smurf2 to sustain TGFβ signaling. Collectively, these findings present a novel 
tumor-suppressive interaction between AIMP2 and Smurf2 and suggest that the 
disruption of this interaction can lead to oncogenic transformation. Cancer Res; 
76(11); 3422-36. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3255
PMID: 27197155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
