---
pmid: '2848249'
title: Purified secB protein of Escherichia coli retards folding and promotes membrane
  translocation of the maltose-binding protein in vitro.
authors:
- Weiss JB
- Ray PH
- Bassford PJ Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC282643
doi: 10.1073/pnas.85.23.8978
---

# Purified secB protein of Escherichia coli retards folding and promotes membrane translocation of the maltose-binding protein in vitro.
**Authors:** Weiss JB, Ray PH, Bassford PJ Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.85.23.8978](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.85.23.8978)
**PMC:** [PMC282643](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC282643/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Dec;85(23):8978-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.85.23.8978.

Purified secB protein of Escherichia coli retards folding and promotes membrane 
translocation of the maltose-binding protein in vitro.

Weiss JB(1), Ray PH, Bassford PJ Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill 27514.

The efficient export of a subset of Escherichia coli envelope proteins is 
dependent upon the product of the secB gene. Previous studies indicated that 
SecB promotes the export of the periplasmic maltose-binding protein (MBP) by 
preventing premature folding of the precursor MBP in the cytoplasm into an 
export-incompetent form. In this study, SecB has been purified to homogeneity 
and shown to be a soluble, cytoplasmic, multimeric protein composed of identical 
17-kDa subunits. SecB was required for efficient in vitro translocation of MBP 
into inverted membrane vesicles. The addition of purified SecB to an in vitro 
system prepared from SecB- cells significantly enhanced MBP translocation. The 
purified protein also quantitatively retarded folding of precursor MBP into a 
stable, protease-resistant conformation in the absence of membranes. Finally, 
the inclusion of excess purified SecB in a SecB+ in vitro system significantly 
prolonged the time in which precursor MBP remained competent for 
posttranslational import into membrane vesicles.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.85.23.8978
PMCID: PMC282643
PMID: 2848249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
