---
pmid: '23112161'
title: Ideal, catch, and slip bonds in cadherin adhesion.
authors:
- Rakshit S
- Zhang Y
- Manibog K
- Shafraz O
- Sivasankar S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3503169
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1208349109
---

# Ideal, catch, and slip bonds in cadherin adhesion.
**Authors:** Rakshit S, Zhang Y, Manibog K, Shafraz O, Sivasankar S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1208349109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1208349109)
**PMC:** [PMC3503169](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3503169/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 13;109(46):18815-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1208349109. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Ideal, catch, and slip bonds in cadherin adhesion.

Rakshit S(1), Zhang Y, Manibog K, Shafraz O, Sivasankar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, 
USA.

Classical cadherin cell-cell adhesion proteins play key morphogenetic roles 
during development and are essential for maintaining tissue integrity in 
multicellular organisms. Classical cadherins bind in two distinct conformations, 
X-dimer and strand-swap dimer; during cellular rearrangements, these adhesive 
states are exposed to mechanical stress. However, the molecular mechanisms by 
which cadherins resist tensile force and the pathway by which they convert 
between different conformations are unclear. Here, we use single molecule force 
measurements with an atomic force microscope (AFM) to show that E-cadherin, a 
prototypical classical cadherin, forms three types of adhesive bonds: catch 
bonds, which become longer lived in the presence of tensile force; slip bonds, 
which become shorter lived when pulled; and ideal bonds that are insensitive to 
mechanical stress. We show that X-dimers form catch bonds, whereas strand-swap 
dimers form slip bonds. Our data suggests that ideal bonds are formed as 
X-dimers convert to strand-swap binding. Catch, slip, and ideal bonds allow 
cadherins to withstand tensile force and tune the mechanical properties of 
adhesive junctions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1208349109
PMCID: PMC3503169
PMID: 23112161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Classical cadherin cell-cell adhesion proteins play key morphogenetic roles during development and are essential for maintaining tissue integrity in multicellular organisms. Classical cadherins bind in two distinct conformations, X-dimer and strand-swap dimer; during cellular rearrangements, these adhesive states are exposed to mechanical stress. However, the molecular mechanisms by which cadherins resist tensile force and the pathway by which they convert between different conformations are unclear. Here, we use single molecule force measurements with an atomic force microscope (AFM) to show that E-cadherin, a prototypical classical cadherin, forms three types of adhesive bonds: catch bonds, which become longer lived in the presence of tensile force; slip bonds, which become shorter lived when pulled; and ideal bonds that are insensitive to mechanical stress. We show that X-dimers form catch bonds, whereas strand-swap dimers form slip bonds. Our data suggests that ideal bonds are formed as X-dimers convert to strand-swap binding. Catch, slip, and ideal bonds allow cadherins to withstand tensile force and tune the mechanical properties of adhesive junctions.

Discussion

In summary, we used single-molecule force measurements to show that depending on their binding conformation, cadherins form catch bonds that adhere tightly in the presence of force, slip bonds that have a longer lifetime in the absence of force, and ideal bonds that are insensitive to force. Whereas X-dimers form catch bonds, strand-swap dimers form slip bonds. We hypothesize that ideal bonds are formed as X-dimers convert to strand-swap binding.

Cadherin catch bonds presumably allow cells to grip tightly and lock in place when pulled. We anticipate that cadherin catch bonds are widespread because nonclassical cadherins, which account for 81% of cadherins in the vertebrate genome, lack the sequence determinants for strand swapping and likely form X-dimers ( 11 ). In fact, recent crystallographic studies show that the nonclassical T-cadherin adheres in an X-dimer conformation that is virtually indistinguishable from the W2A X-dimer ( 11 ). Because catch bonds strengthen in the presence of force, our experiments reconcile the apparently contradictory finding that the lifetime of trans dimers measured in solution is low ( 15 ), whereas their lifetimes measured using mechanical probes is large ( 13 , 14 ).

Our model for catch bond formation is that the application of a tensile force reorients cadherins in the X-dimer so that they form transient bonds with an alternate binding site and lock more tightly. Consequently, the biphasic catch-slip behavior of X-dimers can be fit with a sliding-rebinding model ( 32 , 33 ) ( Fig. 1 E and F ). We were unsuccessful in fitting the data to other models for catch-slip bond formation, including two-pathway models, where force drives the system away from its native dissociation pathway into an alternative pathway involving a higher energy barrier ( 21 , 36 – 38 ), and an allosteric model that suggest that force alters X-dimer conformation and induces changes in the cadherin binding site ( 31 ).

We propose that ideal bonds are formed by an intermediate state when X-dimers transition to a strand-swap conformation ( Fig. 2 E ). This intermediate state adopts a structure where its extension along the pulling coordinate is identical for both the bound state and the transition state; consequently, its bond lifetime is independent of pulling force ( 27 ). In contrast, X-dimers and strand-swap dimers pulled along the same direction form catch-slip and slip-only bonds, respectively. The rate of force application does not affect ideal bond behavior. Furthermore, ideal bonds are measured even when WT cadherins interact for the short time of 1 ms, suggesting that the transition from X-dimer to the intermediate state occurs rapidly. However, the structure of this state and the molecular contacts responsible for ideal bond formation still need to be resolved.

It is important to note that the bond survival probability of WT, W2A, and K14E cadherins decay as the sum of two exponentials. Such a double exponential decay could either be an intrinsic part of the kinetics of a single bond ( 31 , 38 ) or correspond to the existence of two distinct bound states ( 13 , 14 , 28 ). If a double exponential survival probability arises from a single bound state, the coefficient of the second exponential would increase monotonically with force ( 31 , 38 ). However, in our data, the probability of the long-lifetime component does not systematically vary with force, suggesting that the WT, W2A, and K14E cadherins interact in two distinct bound states ( SI Appendix , Figs. S13–S15 ). The lifetime vs. force curve for the long-lived state is identical to the force-dependent lifetimes of nonspecific interactions ( SI Appendix , Fig. S9 and Table S9 ). These data demonstrate that the long-lived, low-probability state arises because of nonspecific adhesion.

It should be noted that the bond lifetimes measured in our experiments are not a result of failure of the noncovalent streptavidin–biotin interactions that are used to immobilize the cadherins on the AFM tip and surface. Previous studies have shown that streptavidin–biotin linkages form slip bonds, the lifetime of this bond, measured at a range of clamping forces up to 150 pN, is more than two orders of magnitude greater than the lifetimes reported here ( 39 ).

Our results suggest a physical mechanism that cadherins use to resist tensile forces as cells rearrange during tissue formation and wound healing. As cells migrate, cadherins bind rapidly to form X-dimers; the X-dimer catch bonds allow migrating cells to grip strongly under load. Over time, the X-dimers proceed to form more robust strand-swap dimers that have a high affinity in the absence of force; this conversion is facilitated by an intermediate conformation that is insensitive to tensile force ( Fig. 2 E ). Ideal, catch, and slip bonds allow cadherins to resist mechanical stress and tune the mechanics of intercellular junctions.
