---
pmid: '15542850'
title: Partial cleavage of RasGAP by caspases is required for cell survival in mild
  stress conditions.
authors:
- Yang JY
- Michod D
- Walicki J
- Murphy BM
- Kasibhatla S
- Martin SJ
- Widmann C
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC529026
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.23.10425-10436.2004
---

# Partial cleavage of RasGAP by caspases is required for cell survival in mild stress conditions.
**Authors:** Yang JY, Michod D, Walicki J, Murphy BM, Kasibhatla S, Martin SJ, Widmann C
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.23.10425-10436.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.23.10425-10436.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC529026](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC529026/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10425-36. doi: 
10.1128/MCB.24.23.10425-10436.2004.

Partial cleavage of RasGAP by caspases is required for cell survival in mild 
stress conditions.

Yang JY(1), Michod D, Walicki J, Murphy BM, Kasibhatla S, Martin SJ, Widmann C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Lausanne University, 1005 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Tight control of apoptosis is required for proper development and maintenance of 
homeostasis in multicellular organisms. Cells can protect themselves from 
potentially lethal stimuli by expressing antiapoptotic factors, such as 
inhibitors of apoptosis, FLICE (caspase 8)-inhibitory proteins, and members of 
the Bcl2 family. Here, we describe a mechanism that allows cells to survive once 
executioner caspases have been activated. This mechanism relies on the partial 
cleavage of RasGAP by caspase 3 into an amino-terminal fragment called fragment 
N. Generation of this fragment leads to the activation of the antiapoptotic Akt 
kinase, preventing further amplification of caspase activity. Partial cleavage 
of RasGAP is required for cell survival under stress conditions because cells 
expressing an uncleavable RasGAP mutant cannot activate Akt, cannot prevent 
amplification of caspase 3 activity, and eventually undergo apoptosis. 
Executioner caspases therefore control the extent of their own activation by a 
feedback regulatory mechanism initiated by the partial cleavage of RasGAP that 
is crucial for cell survival under adverse conditions.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.23.10425-10436.2004
PMCID: PMC529026
PMID: 15542850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tight control of apoptosis is required for proper development and maintenance of homeostasis in multicellular organisms. Cells can protect themselves from potentially lethal stimuli by expressing antiapoptotic factors, such as inhibitors of apoptosis, FLICE (caspase 8)-inhibitory proteins, and members of the Bcl2 family. Here, we describe a mechanism that allows cells to survive once executioner caspases have been activated. This mechanism relies on the partial cleavage of RasGAP by caspase 3 into an amino-terminal fragment called fragment N. Generation of this fragment leads to the activation of the antiapoptotic Akt kinase, preventing further amplification of caspase activity. Partial cleavage of RasGAP is required for cell survival under stress conditions because cells expressing an uncleavable RasGAP mutant cannot activate Akt, cannot prevent amplification of caspase 3 activity, and eventually undergo apoptosis. Executioner caspases therefore control the extent of their own activation by a feedback regulatory mechanism initiated by the partial cleavage of RasGAP that is crucial for cell survival under adverse conditions.

DISCUSSION

Accumulating evidence shows that under some circumstances upstream and executioner caspases are activated without causing cell death ( 1 , 6 , 8 - 10 , 15 , 25 ). In these situations, caspases must be only minimally stimulated so as to cleave only a subset of caspase substrates. In particular, caspase substrates, such as ICAD, that are actively involved in the destruction phase of apoptosis when targeted by caspases must be left uncleaved. Our data provide a molecular basis for cell survival in the presence of activated caspases. We have demonstrated that mild stresses generate very low levels of caspase activation that induce the first cleavage of RasGAP into fragment N but that are insufficient to cause significant cleavage of ICAD and to induce apoptosis. We have shown that fragment N prevents an amplification cascade that leads to massive caspase 3 activation. Therefore mild stresses do not cause apoptosis because fragment N is generated and because fragment N maintains the activation of caspase 3 to minimal levels. Consequently, it is the caspases themselves that prevent their massive activation by cleaving RasGAP into fragment N.

Cells expressing a RasGAP mutant bearing a single point mutation abolishing its cleavage by caspases are killed by mild stresses that would otherwise not affect the viability of wild-type cells. This indicates that even if other antiapoptotic fragments are generated by caspases, they cannot compensate for the lack of RasGAP cleavage. Remarkably, therefore, the negative feedback control of caspases following their mild activation cannot operate if only one protein among the 280 described caspase substrates is not cleaved ( 16 ).

Fragment N is not a direct caspase inhibitor but rather protects cells by activating Akt, a well-known antiapoptotic kinase ( 55 ). An amino-terminal moiety of RasGAP, corresponding to fragment N plus the plekstrin homology domain of fragment C, can in fact interact directly with Akt ( 57 ). It is therefore likely that the binding of fragment N to Akt modulates the activity of the kinase. However, the exact mechanisms underlying the regulation of Akt by fragment N remain to be characterized.

Akt promotes cell survival by inactivating proapoptotic molecules, such as Bad, or by stimulating the mTOR or the NF-κB pathways ( 4 , 48 ). However, fragment N, while protecting cells in an Akt-dependent manner, does not do so by stimulating NF-κB activity ( 55 ). This could indicate that NF-κB activation may not always participate in cell protection. Indeed, there are situations in which activation of NF-κB is detrimental to the cell. For example, NF-κB is required for p53-mediated apoptosis ( 33 ) and cytokine-induced apoptosis in β cells of the pancreas ( 3 , 17 ). Therefore, activating Akt in a way that precludes NF-κB stimulation may be crucial for fragment N to be a general inhibitor of apoptosis.

It is unknown which effector proteins activated or induced by fragment N in an Akt-dependent manner mediate its protective function. Several inhibitors of caspases, such as cellular FLIPs and members of the IAP family, are potential candidates. FLIPs specifically prevent the activation of caspase 8 in response to Fas ligand or tumor necrosis factor but appear not to be involved in the regulation of other caspases ( 27 ). Consequently, it would not be anticipated that FLIPs protect cells once executioner caspases are activated. The IAP family of proteins can directly inhibit upstream and downstream caspases, including caspase 3 ( 11 , 28 ). As these proteins seem to be the only endogenous inhibitors that can block apoptosis once caspases have been activated, they may be responsible for the protective effect induced by the formation of fragment N. However, the expression of many IAPs depends on NF-κB activity ( 11 , 46 ), and expression of at least one IAP family member, cIAP-2, does not rely on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity ( 45 ). In contrast, fragment N-induced protection depends on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase but not on NF-κB ( 55 ), which raises the question of whether protection by fragment N may be mediated by proteins other than the IAPs.

RasGAP knockout mice die in utero as a result of abnormal development of the circulatory system ( 18 ). The RasGAP −/− embryos also display extensive neuronal death ( 18 ). Our data provide a plausible explanation for this phenotype: RasGAP −/− cells are more sensitive to apoptosis because they do not have the possibility of producing fragment N and consequently cannot activate the survival Akt pathway. RasGAP −/− cells are, however, not the ideal system to specifically assess the role of RasGAP cleavage because the full-length RasGAP may also regulate cell survival independently of its caspase cleavage fragments. In this context, it should be noted that RasGAP −/− cells are slightly less susceptible to mild stress-induced apoptosis than cells expressing an uncleavable form of RasGAP (Fig. 5 ). Because Ras activation may stimulate survival pathways ( 55 ), it is possible that the higher basal Ras activity in RasGAP −/− cells than in cells expressing full-length RasGAP (Fig. 4C ) ( 43 ) gives them a slight survival advantage over cells expressing an uncleavable form of full-length RasGAP. However, the observation that overexpression of fragment N, but not full-length RasGAP, renders cells more resistant to apoptosis ( 54 ) further indicates that RasGAP induces a protective pathway only when it is cleaved at position 455.

Our results indicate that caspase 3 controls the level of its own activation by targeting RasGAP. In the absence of this safeguard mechanism, low caspase 3 activities are amplified inexorably until apoptosis is induced. There is therefore no constitutive cellular signal to protect cells such as MEFs from untimely caspase 3 activation. Rather, it is the caspases themselves that turn on a survival pathway. Presumably, this mechanism has arisen to protect cells against caspase activation occurring inopportunely or for other purposes than apoptosis.
