---
pmid: '22966085'
title: Mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease (MASP)-1 is crucial for lectin
  pathway activation in human serum, whereas neither MASP-1 nor MASP-3 is required
  for alternative pathway function.
authors:
- Degn SE
- Jensen L
- Hansen AG
- Duman D
- Tekin M
- Jensenius JC
- Thiel S
journal: J Immunol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201736
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease (MASP)-1 is crucial for lectin pathway activation in human serum, whereas neither MASP-1 nor MASP-3 is required for alternative pathway function.
**Authors:** Degn SE, Jensen L, Hansen AG, Duman D, Tekin M, Jensenius JC, Thiel S
**Journal:** J Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.1201736](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1201736)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 15;189(8):3957-69. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201736. Epub
2012  Sep 10.

Mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease (MASP)-1 is crucial for lectin 
pathway activation in human serum, whereas neither MASP-1 nor MASP-3 is required 
for alternative pathway function.

Degn SE(1), Jensen L, Hansen AG, Duman D, Tekin M, Jensenius JC, Thiel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. 
sdegn@microbiology.au.dk

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2477. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1390002.
    J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2477-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1390003.
    J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5447-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400777.
    J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5448-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400766.

The lectin pathway of complement is an important component of innate immunity. 
Its activation has been thought to occur via recognition of pathogens by 
mannan-binding lectin (MBL) or ficolins in complex with MBL-associated serine 
protease (MASP)-2, followed by MASP-2 autoactivation and cleavage of C4 and C2 
generating the C3 convertase. MASP-1 and MASP-3 are related proteases found in 
similar complexes. MASP-1 has been shown to aid MASP-2 convertase generation by 
auxiliary C2 cleavage. In mice, MASP-1 and MASP-3 have been reported to be 
central also to alternative pathway function through activation of profactor D 
and factor B. In this study, we present functional studies based on a patient 
harboring a nonsense mutation in the common part of the MASP1 gene and hence 
deficient in both MASP-1 and MASP-3. Surprisingly, we find that the alternative 
pathway in this patient functions normally, and is unaffected by reconstitution 
with MASP-1 and MASP-3. Conversely, we find that the patient has a nonfunctional 
lectin pathway, which can be restored by MASP-1, implying that this component is 
crucial for complement activation. We show that, although MASP-2 is able to 
autoactivate under artificial conditions, MASP-1 dramatically increases lectin 
pathway activity at physiological conditions through direct activation of 
MASP-2. We further demonstrate that MASP-1 and MASP-2 can associate in the same 
MBL complex, and that such cocomplexes are found in serum, providing a scenario 
for transactivation of MASP-2. Hence, in functional terms, it appears that 
MASP-1 and MASP-2 act in a manner analogous to that of C1r and C1s of the 
classical pathway.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201736
PMID: 22966085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
