---
pmid: '11320098'
title: Characterization of a stellate cell activation-associated protein (STAP) with
  peroxidase activity found in rat hepatic stellate cells.
authors:
- Kawada N
- Kristensen DB
- Asahina K
- Nakatani K
- Minamiyama Y
- Seki S
- Yoshizato K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102630200
---

# Characterization of a stellate cell activation-associated protein (STAP) with peroxidase activity found in rat hepatic stellate cells.
**Authors:** Kawada N, Kristensen DB, Asahina K, Nakatani K, Minamiyama Y, Seki S, Yoshizato K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M102630200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M102630200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):25318-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102630200. Epub
2001  Apr 24.

Characterization of a stellate cell activation-associated protein (STAP) with 
peroxidase activity found in rat hepatic stellate cells.

Kawada N(1), Kristensen DB, Asahina K, Nakatani K, Minamiyama Y, Seki S, 
Yoshizato K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka City University 
Medical School, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 2001 Dec 14;276(50):47744-5.

A proteome approach for the molecular analysis of the activation of rat stellate 
cell, a liver-specific pericyte, led to the discovery of a novel protein named 
STAP (stellate cell activation-associated protein). We cloned STAP cDNA. STAP is 
a cytoplasmic protein with molecular weight of 21,496 and shows about 40% amino 
acid sequence homology with myoglobin. STAP was dramatically induced in in vivo 
activated stellate cells isolated from fibrotic liver and in stellate cells 
undergoing in vitro activation during primary culture. This induction was seen 
together with that of other activation-associated molecules, such as smooth 
muscle alpha-actin, PDGF receptor-beta, and neural cell adhesion molecule. The 
expression of STAP protein and mRNA was augmented time dependently in 
thioacetamide-induced fibrotic liver. Immunoelectron microscopy and proteome 
analysis detected STAP in stellate cells but not in other hepatic constituent 
cells. Biochemical characterization of recombinant rat STAP revealed that STAP 
is a heme protein exhibiting peroxidase activity toward hydrogen peroxide and 
linoleic acid hydroperoxide. These results indicate that STAP is a novel 
endogenous peroxidase catabolizing hydrogen peroxide and lipid hydroperoxides, 
both of which have been reported to trigger stellate cell activation and 
consequently promote progression of liver fibrosis. STAP could thus play a role 
as an antifibrotic scavenger of peroxides in the liver.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102630200
PMID: 11320098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
