---
pmid: '11418595'
title: E2F transcriptional activation requires TRRAP and GCN5 cofactors.
authors:
- Lang SE
- McMahon SB
- Cole MD
- Hearing P
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102067200
---

# E2F transcriptional activation requires TRRAP and GCN5 cofactors.
**Authors:** Lang SE, McMahon SB, Cole MD, Hearing P
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M102067200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M102067200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32627-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M102067200. Epub 
2001 Jun 19.

E2F transcriptional activation requires TRRAP and GCN5 cofactors.

Lang SE(1), McMahon SB, Cole MD, Hearing P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State 
University of New York, Stony Brook, New York 11794-5222, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors regulates the temporal transcription of 
genes involved in cell cycle progression and DNA synthesis. E2F transactivation 
is antagonized by retinoblastoma protein (pRb), which recruits 
chromatin-remodeling proteins such as histone deacetylases and SWI.SNF complexes 
to the promoter to repress transcription. We hypothesized that E2F proteins must 
reverse the pRb-imposed chromatin structure to stimulate transcription. If this 
is true, E2F proteins should recruit proteins capable of histone acetylation. 
Here we map the E2F-4 transactivation domain and show that E2F-1 and E2F-4 
transactivation domains bind the acetyltransferase GCN5 and cofactor TRRAP in 
vivo. TRRAP and GCN5 co-expression stimulated E2F-mediated transactivation, and 
c-Myc repressed E2F transactivation dependent on an intact TRRAP/GCN5 binding 
motif. The transactivation domain of E2F-4 recruited proteins with significant 
histone acetyltransferase activity in vivo, and this activity required 
catalytically active GCN5. E2F-4 proteins with subtle mutations in the 
transactivation domain exhibited a positive correlation among transcriptional 
activation and GCN5 and TRRAP binding capacity and associated acetyltransferase 
activity. We conclude that E2F stimulates transcription by recruiting 
acetyltransferase activity and the essential cofactors GCN5 and TRRAP. These 
results provide a mechanism for E2F transcription factors to overcome 
pRb-mediated dominant repression of transcription.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M102067200
PMID: 11418595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
