---
pmid: '31735670'
title: An ECM-to-Nucleus Signaling Pathway Activates Lysosomes for C. elegans Larval
  Development.
authors:
- Miao R
- Li M
- Zhang Q
- Yang C
- Wang X
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.10.020
---

# An ECM-to-Nucleus Signaling Pathway Activates Lysosomes for C. elegans Larval Development.
**Authors:** Miao R, Li M, Zhang Q, Yang C, Wang X
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2019.10.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2019.10.020)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2020 Jan 6;52(1):21-37.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.10.020. Epub 
2019 Nov 14.

An ECM-to-Nucleus Signaling Pathway Activates Lysosomes for C. elegans Larval 
Development.

Miao R(1), Li M(2), Zhang Q(3), Yang C(2), Wang X(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China; 
National Institute of Biological Sciences, No. 7 Science Park Road, Zhongguancun 
Life Science Park, Beijing 102206, China; National Laboratory of 
Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of 
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan and Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, 
Kunming 650091, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China; College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China; College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address: wangxiaochen@ibp.ac.cn.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2020 Jan 6;52(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.12.008.

Lysosomes degrade macromolecular cargos, recycle catabolites, and serve as 
signaling platforms to maintain cell homeostasis, but their role at the tissue 
level is unclear. Here, we investigate lysosome regulation and function during 
C. elegans molting, a specialized extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling process 
essential for larval development. We found that lysosomes are specifically 
activated in the epidermis at molt when the apical ECM (cuticle) is being 
replaced. Impaired lysosome function affects endocytic cargo degradation, 
suppresses elevated protein synthesis at molt, and causes molting defects. 
Disturbance of ECM-epidermis attachments triggers lysosomal activation and 
induces expression of the vacuolar H+-ATPase (V-ATPase), which is mediated by 
the GATA transcription factor ELT-3 and the STAT family protein STA-2. Our study 
reveals an ECM-to-nucleus signaling pathway that activates lysosomes to 
facilitate ECM remodeling essential for larval development.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2019.10.020
PMID: 31735670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
