---
pmid: '12902323'
title: 'Roles of His291-alpha and His146-beta'' in the reductive acylation reaction
  catalyzed by human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase: refined phosphorylation
  loop structure in the active site.'
authors:
- Wynn RM
- Machius M
- Chuang JL
- Li J
- Tomchick DR
- Chuang DT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306204200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Roles of His291-alpha and His146-beta' in the reductive acylation reaction catalyzed by human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase: refined phosphorylation loop structure in the active site.
**Authors:** Wynn RM, Machius M, Chuang JL, Li J, Tomchick DR, Chuang DT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M306204200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M306204200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 31;278(44):43402-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306204200. Epub 
2003 Aug 5.

Roles of His291-alpha and His146-beta' in the reductive acylation reaction 
catalyzed by human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase: refined 
phosphorylation loop structure in the active site.

Wynn RM(1), Machius M, Chuang JL, Li J, Tomchick DR, Chuang DT.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Internal Medicine, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9038, USA.

We report here that alterations of either His291-alpha or His146-beta' in the 
active site of human branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase (E1b) impede 
both the decarboxylation and the reductive acylation reactions catalyzed by E1b 
as well as the binding of cofactor thiamin diphosphate (ThDP). In a refined 
human E1b active-site structure, His291-alpha, which aligns with His407 in 
Escherichia coli pyruvate dehydrogenase and His263 in yeast transketolase, is on 
a largely ordered phosphorylation loop. The imidazole ring of His291-alpha in 
E1b coordinates to the terminal phosphate oxygen atoms of bound ThDP. The N3 
atom of wild-type His146-beta', which can be protonated, binds a water molecule 
and points toward the aminopyrimidine ring of ThDP. Remarkably, the H291A-alpha 
mutation results in a complete order-to-disorder transition of the loop region, 
which precludes the binding of the substrate lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b. The 
H146A-beta' mutation, on the other hand, does not alter the loop structure, but 
nullifies the reductive acylation activity of E1b. Our results suggest that: 1) 
His291-alpha plays a structural rather than a catalytic role in the binding of 
cofactor ThDP and the lipoyl-bearing domain to E1b, and 2) His146-beta' is an 
essential catalytic residue, probably functioning as a proton donor in the 
reductive acylation of lipoamide on the lipoyl-bearing domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306204200
PMID: 12902323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
