---
pmid: '26334369'
title: Structural Insights into KCTD Protein Assembly and Cullin3 Recognition.
authors:
- Ji AX
- Chu A
- Nielsen TK
- Benlekbir S
- Rubinstein JL
- Privé GG
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.08.019
---

# Structural Insights into KCTD Protein Assembly and Cullin3 Recognition.
**Authors:** Ji AX, Chu A, Nielsen TK, Benlekbir S, Rubinstein JL, Privé GG
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2015.08.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2015.08.019)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2016 Jan 16;428(1):92-107. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.08.019. Epub
2015  Aug 31.

Structural Insights into KCTD Protein Assembly and Cullin3 Recognition.

Ji AX(1), Chu A(1), Nielsen TK(2), Benlekbir S(3), Rubinstein JL(4), Privé 
GG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, 
Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada.
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Campbell Family Institute for Cancer 
Research, University Health Network, 101 College Street, Toronto, ON, M5G 1L7, 
Canada.
(3)The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, 686 Bay Street, Toronto, 
ON, M5G 0A4, Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, 
Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada; The Hospital for Sick Children Research Institute, 
686 Bay Street, Toronto, ON, M5G 0A4, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, 
University of Toronto, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle, 
Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Canada; Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Campbell Family 
Institute for Cancer Research, University Health Network, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, ON, M5G 1L7, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of 
Toronto, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9, Canada. Electronic 
address: prive@uhnres.utoronto.ca.

Cullin3 (Cul3)-based ubiquitin E3 ligase complexes catalyze the transfer of 
ubiquitin from an E2 enzyme to target substrate proteins. In these assemblies, 
the C-terminal region of Cul3 binds Rbx1/E2-ubiquitin, while the N-terminal 
region interacts with various BTB (bric-à-brac, tramtrack, broad complex) domain 
proteins that serve as substrate adaptors. Previous crystal structures of the 
homodimeric BTB proteins KLHL3, KLHL11 and SPOP in complex with the N-terminal 
domain of Cul3 revealed the features required for Cul3 recognition in these 
proteins. A second class of BTB-domain-containing proteins, the KCTD proteins, 
is also Cul3 substrate adaptors, but these do not share many of the previously 
identified determinants for Cul3 binding. We report the pentameric crystal 
structures of the KCTD1 and KCTD9 BTB domains and identify plasticity in the 
KCTD1 rings. We find that the KCTD proteins 5, 6, 9 and 17 bind to Cul3 with 
high affinity, while the KCTD proteins 1 and 16 do not have detectable binding. 
Finally, we confirm the 5:5 assembly of KCTD9/Cul3 complexes by cryo-electron 
microscopy and provide a molecular rationale for BTB-mediated Cul3 binding 
specificity in the KCTD family.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2015.08.019
PMID: 26334369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
