---
pmid: '11801603'
title: SMAC negatively regulates the anti-apoptotic activity of melanoma inhibitor
  of apoptosis (ML-IAP).
authors:
- Vucic D
- Deshayes K
- Ackerly H
- Pisabarro MT
- Kadkhodayan S
- Fairbrother WJ
- Dixit VM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112045200
---

# SMAC negatively regulates the anti-apoptotic activity of melanoma inhibitor of apoptosis (ML-IAP).
**Authors:** Vucic D, Deshayes K, Ackerly H, Pisabarro MT, Kadkhodayan S, Fairbrother WJ, Dixit VM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112045200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112045200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 5;277(14):12275-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112045200. Epub
2002  Jan 18.

SMAC negatively regulates the anti-apoptotic activity of melanoma inhibitor of 
apoptosis (ML-IAP).

Vucic D(1), Deshayes K, Ackerly H, Pisabarro MT, Kadkhodayan S, Fairbrother WJ, 
Dixit VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080, USA.

Inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs) physically interact with a variety of 
pro-apoptotic proteins and inhibit apoptosis induced by diverse stimuli. 
X-linked IAP (X-IAP) is a prototype IAP family member that inhibits several 
caspases, the effector proteases of apoptosis. The inhibitory activity of X-IAP 
is regulated by SMAC, a protein that is processed to its active form upon 
receipt of a death stimulus. Cleaved SMAC binds X-IAP and antagonizes its 
anti-apoptotic activity. Here we show that melanoma IAP (ML-IAP), a potent 
anti-cell death protein and caspase inhibitor, physically interacts with SMAC 
through its BIR (baculovirus IAP repeat) domain. In addition to binding 
full-length SMAC, ML-IAP BIR associates with SMAC peptides that are derived from 
the amino terminus of active, processed SMAC. This high affinity interaction is 
very specific and can be completely abolished by single amino acid mutations 
either in the amino terminus of active SMAC or in the BIR domain of ML-IAP. In 
cells expressing ML-IAP and X-IAP, SMAC coexpression or addition of SMAC 
peptides abrogates the ability of the IAPs to inhibit cell death. These results 
demonstrate the feasibility of using SMAC peptides as a way to sensitize 
IAP-expressing cells to pro-apoptotic stimuli such as chemotherapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112045200
PMID: 11801603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
