---
pmid: '25749521'
title: TNKS1BP1 functions in DNA double-strand break repair though facilitating DNA-PKcs
  autophosphorylation dependent on PARP-1.
authors:
- Zou LH
- Shang ZF
- Tan W
- Liu XD
- Xu QZ
- Song M
- Wang Y
- Guan H
- Zhang SM
- Yu L
- Zhong CG
- Zhou PK
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4466666
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3137
---

# TNKS1BP1 functions in DNA double-strand break repair though facilitating DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation dependent on PARP-1.
**Authors:** Zou LH, Shang ZF, Tan W, Liu XD, Xu QZ, Song M, Wang Y, Guan H, Zhang SM, Yu L, Zhong CG, Zhou PK
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2015)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.3137](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.3137)
**PMC:** [PMC4466666](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4466666/)

## Abstract

1. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):7011-22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3137.

TNKS1BP1 functions in DNA double-strand break repair though facilitating 
DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation dependent on PARP-1.

Zou LH(1)(2), Shang ZF(2)(3), Tan W(1)(2), Liu XD(2), Xu QZ(2), Song M(2)(3), 
Wang Y(2), Guan H(2), Zhang SM(2), Yu L(4), Zhong CG(1), Zhou PK(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Heath, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan Province 
410078, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Radiation Toxicology and Oncology, Beijing Key Laboratory for 
Radiobiology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, P. R. 
China.
(3)School of Radiation Medicine and Protection, Medical College of Soochow 
University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Radiation Medicine of Jiangsu 
Higher Education Institutions, Suzhou 215123, P. R. China.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

TNKS1BP1 was originally identified as an interaction protein of tankyrase 1, 
which belongs to the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) superfamily. PARP 
members play important roles for example in DNA repair, telomere stability and 
mitosis regulation. Although the TNKS1BP1 protein was considered to be a 
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation acceptor of tankyrase 1, its function is still unknown. 
Here we firstly identified that TNKS1BP1 was up-regulated by ionizing radiation 
(IR) and the depletion of TNKS1BP1 significantly sensitized cancer cells to IR. 
Neutral comet assay, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and γH2AX foci analysis 
indicated that TNKS1BP1 is required for the efficient repair of DNA 
double-strand breaks (DSB). The TNKS1BP1 protein was demonstrated to interact 
with DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs) and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 
(PARP-1), by co-immunoprecipitation analysis. Moreover, TNKS1BP1 was shown to 
promote the association of PARP-1 and DNA-PKcs. Overexpression of TNKS1BP1 
induced the autophosphorylation of DNA-PKcs/Ser2056 in a PARP-1 dependent 
manner, which contributed to an increased capability of DNA DSB repair. 
Inhibition of PARP-1 blocked the TNKS1BP1-mediated DNA-PKcs autophosphorylation 
and attenuated the PARylation of DNA-PKcs. TNKS1BP1 is a newly described 
component of the DNA DSB repair machinery, which provides much more mechanistic 
evidence for the rationale of developing effective anticancer measures by 
targeting PARP-1 and DNA-PKcs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3137
PMCID: PMC4466666
PMID: 25749521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST No 
potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
