---
pmid: '17146057'
title: Solution structure and dynamics of the complex between cytochrome c and cytochrome
  c peroxidase determined by paramagnetic NMR.
authors:
- Volkov AN
- Worrall JA
- Holtzmann E
- Ubbink M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1748157
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0603551103
---

# Solution structure and dynamics of the complex between cytochrome c and cytochrome c peroxidase determined by paramagnetic NMR.
**Authors:** Volkov AN, Worrall JA, Holtzmann E, Ubbink M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0603551103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0603551103)
**PMC:** [PMC1748157](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1748157/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 12;103(50):18945-50. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0603551103. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Solution structure and dynamics of the complex between cytochrome c and 
cytochrome c peroxidase determined by paramagnetic NMR.

Volkov AN(1), Worrall JA, Holtzmann E, Ubbink M.

Author information:
(1)Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Gorlaeus Laboratories, P.O. 
Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

The physiological complex of yeast cytochrome c peroxidase and iso-1-cytochrome 
c is a paradigm for biological electron transfer. Using paramagnetic NMR 
spectroscopy, we have determined the conformation of the protein complex in 
solution, which is shown to be very similar to that observed in the crystal 
structure [Pelletier H, Kraut J (1992) Science 258:1748-1755]. Our results 
support the view that this transient electron transfer complex is dynamic. The 
solution structure represents the dominant protein-protein orientation, which, 
according to our estimates, is occupied for >70% of the lifetime of the complex, 
with the rest of the time spent in the dynamic encounter state. Based on the 
observed paramagnetic effects, we have delineated the conformational space 
sampled by the protein molecules during the dynamic part of the interaction, 
providing experimental support for the theoretical predictions of the classical 
Brownian dynamics study [Northrup SH, Boles JO, Reynolds JCL (1988) Science 
241:67-70]. Our findings corroborate the dynamic behavior of this complex and 
offer an insight into the mechanism of the protein complex formation in 
solution.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0603551103
PMCID: PMC1748157
PMID: 17146057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
