---
pmid: '21762413'
title: Characterization of the EFC/F-BAR domain protein, FCHO2.
authors:
- Uezu A
- Umeda K
- Tsujita K
- Suetsugu S
- Takenawa T
- Nakanishi H
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x
---

# Characterization of the EFC/F-BAR domain protein, FCHO2.
**Authors:** Uezu A, Umeda K, Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Takenawa T, Nakanishi H
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2011 Aug;16(8):868-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x.
Epub  2011 Jul 18.

Characterization of the EFC/F-BAR domain protein, FCHO2.

Uezu A(1), Umeda K, Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Takenawa T, Nakanishi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

We have previously shown that SGIP1α is an endocytic protein specifically 
expressed in neural tissues. SGIP1α has a lipid-binding domain called the MP 
domain, which shows no significant homology to any other domains. In this study, 
we characterized FCHO2, a protein with a high level of homology to SGIP1α. FCHO2 
lacks the MP domain but has another lipid-binding domain, the EFC/F-BAR domain. 
FCHO2 was ubiquitously expressed. The FCHO2 EFC domain bound to 
phosphatidylserine and phosphoinositides and deformed the plasma membrane and 
liposomes into narrow tubes. FCHO2 localized to clathrin-coated pits at the 
plasma membrane and bound to Eps15, an important adaptor protein in 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. FCHO2 knockdown reduced transferrin endocytosis. 
These results suggest that FCHO2 regulates clathrin-mediated endocytosis through 
its interactions with membranes and Eps15. These properties of FCHO2 are similar 
to those of SGIP1α. FCHO2 is likely to be a ubiquitous homologue of SGIP1α. We 
furthermore found that FCHO2 was subjected to monoubiquitination, and gel 
filtration analysis showed that FCHO2 formed an oligomer. These new properties 
might also contribute to the role of FCHO2 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society 
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x
PMID: 21762413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
