---
pmid: '37844242'
title: Molecular basis for C-degron recognition by CRL2(APPBP2) ubiquitin ligase.
authors:
- Zhao S
- Olmayev-Yaakobov D
- Ru W
- Li S
- Chen X
- Zhang J
- Yao X
- Koren I
- Zhang K
- Xu C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2023'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC10614623
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2308870120
---

# Molecular basis for C-degron recognition by CRL2(APPBP2) ubiquitin ligase.
**Authors:** Zhao S, Olmayev-Yaakobov D, Ru W, Li S, Chen X, Zhang J, Yao X, Koren I, Zhang K, Xu C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2308870120](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2308870120)
**PMC:** [PMC10614623](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10614623/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Oct 24;120(43):e2308870120. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2308870120. Epub 2023 Oct 16.

Molecular basis for C-degron recognition by CRL2(APPBP2) ubiquitin ligase.

Zhao S(#)(1), Olmayev-Yaakobov D(#)(2), Ru W(1), Li S(1), Chen X(1), Zhang J(1), 
Yao X(1), Koren I(2), Zhang K(1), Xu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Cellular Dynamics, Division of Life 
Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 
230027, Peoples Republic of China.
(2)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.
(#)Contributed equally

E3 ubiquitin ligases determine the specificity of eukaryotic protein degradation 
by selective binding to destabilizing protein motifs, termed degrons, in 
substrates for ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. The exposed C-terminal residues 
of proteins can act as C-degrons that are recognized by distinct substrate 
receptors (SRs) as part of dedicated cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase (CRL) 
complexes. APPBP2, an SR of Cullin 2-RING ligase (CRL2), has been shown to 
recognize R-x-x-G/C-degron; however, the molecular mechanism of recognition 
remains elusive. By solving several cryogenic electron microscopy structures of 
active CRL2APPBP2 bound with different R-x-x-G/C-degrons, we unveiled the 
molecular mechanisms underlying the assembly of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer and 
tetramer, as well as C-degron recognition. The structural study, complemented by 
binding experiments and cell-based assays, demonstrates that APPBP2 specifically 
recognizes the R-x-x-G/C-degron via a bipartite mechanism; arginine and glycine, 
which play critical roles in C-degron recognition, accommodate distinct pockets 
that are spaced by two residues. In addition, the binding pocket is deep enough 
to enable the interaction of APPBP2 with the motif placed at or up to three 
residues upstream of the C-end. Overall, our study not only provides structural 
insight into CRL2APPBP2-mediated protein turnover but also serves as the basis 
for future structure-based chemical probe design.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2308870120
PMCID: PMC10614623
PMID: 37844242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

## Full Text

The main proteolytic system of eukaryotic cells, the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS), mediates the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of substrate proteins and plays a critical role in protein quality control mechanisms by eliminating unwanted, aberrant or regulatory short-lived proteins(1, 2). In the process of ubiquitin conjugation to substrates (ubiquitination), the E3 ubiquitin ligase bridges the E2~ubiquitin conjugate and the substrate and catalyzes the transfer of ubiquitin from E2 to the substrate(3). Thus, the E3 ligase is thought to determine the specificity of the UPS, and in most cases, it directly recognizes specific motifs called degrons in its substrates(4, 5). An important property of degrons is transferability, such that fusion of a degron can confer instability on an otherwise long-lived protein. Degrons comprise mostly short linear motifs of several amino acids in length. The first identified degrons were degrons located at proteins N termini (N-degrons) (6), leading to the uncovering of the N-degron pathways (formerly “N-end rule pathways”) (7, 8), but only in the last few years has it emerged that a diverse set of C-degron pathways target analogous degron motifs located at the extreme C terminus of proteins(9, 10).

Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) constitute the largest family of E3 ligases, with eight cullin proteins encoded in the human genome (CUL1, CUL2, CUL3, CUL4A, CUL4B, CUL5, CUL7, and CUL9) (11) comprising over 300 distinct complexes (12, 13). In general, a cullin protein associates with an adaptor protein and a RING-type protein (RBX1 or RBX2) via its N-terminal and C-terminal regions, respectively, and further tethers an interchangeable substrate receptor (SR) through the adaptor protein (12, 14). In this way, a specific CRL is denoted by the cullin member with the name of substrate recognition receptor in superscript. For example, CRL2FEM1B is composed of five subunits: CUL2 as the cullin scaffold, RBX1 as the catalytic subunit that recruits an E2 enzyme, Elongin B–Elongin C (EB-EC) heterodimer serving as the adaptor, and FEM1B as the SR (15, 16).

It has been recently reported that specific SRs of CUL2 target distinct C-degrons (9, 10) and the underlying molecular mechanisms were revealed. KLHDC2 binds to C-degrons ending with diglycine (17, 18); FEM1B and FEM1A/1C recognize C-degrons ending with arginine (Arg/C-degrons), with upstream sequences playing a role in selectivity (19–21). Very recently, it was reported that Cereblon, the SR of CRL4, targets the C-terminal cyclic imide degron(22), Gln/C-degron is recognized by TRIM7 (23, 24), Ala tails function as C-degron to recruit CRL2KLHDC10 or Pirh2 (25, 26), and CRL4DCAF12 targets di-Glu C-degron (27). In the above C-degron pathway branches, sequence-specific C-terminal residues are engaged by an SR of the multisubunit E3 ligase or a functional domain of a single E3 ligase.

APPBP2 functions as a CRL2-specific SR that has been reported to bind C-degrons sharing a C-terminal Arg-x-x-Gly motif (hereafter “R-x-x-G/C-degrons”), with exact two spacer amino acids between the critical residues important for interaction with substrate, Arg and Gly (9, 10). In most cases, the motif was located close to the extreme C terminus, separated by one or two residues from the C-end (R-x-x-G-x or R-x-x-G-x-x, respectively). However, the molecular mechanism by which APPBP2 targets specific C-degrons to mediate protein turnover remains elusive.

Here, we solved several cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of the assembled CRL2APPBP2 with distinct R-x-x-G/C-degron peptides, including the C-degrons of XP_211896 (R-x-x- G-P), a variant of XP_211896 [hereafter, “XP_211896(+AA)”] (R-x-x-G-P-A-A), and MRPL28 (R-x-x-G-Q). We found that in all complex structures, APPBP2 recognizes the R-x-x-G/C-degron peptides via a bipartite mechanism; the Gly and Arg within the C-degron are recognized by a small cleft and a negatively charged concave, respectively, located in a deep pocket of APPBP2; the main chain groups of the R-x-x-G motif are hydrogen bonded to APPBP2, accounting for the exact two spacing residues between the Arg and Gly. In addition, CRL2APPBP2 structures unveil the assembly mode of APPBP2 with CUL2 and EB/EC into ubiquitin ligase oligomeric complexes. In vitro binding assays confirmed the importance of Gly, Arg, and additional degron residues to APPBP2 binding as well as APPBP2 binding pocket residues that mediate interaction with the C-degron. These findings were supported by an in vivo protein stability assay, demonstrating that the interaction between CRL2APPBP2 and R-x-x-G/C-degron efficiently controls the turnover of substrates via the UPS pathway in cells. Overall, our structural approach, complemented by biochemical, biophysical, and cell biology experiments, provides structural insights into the selectivity of the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase machinery toward the R-x-x-G/C-degron and serves as the basis for the future design of small molecule ligands for targeted protein degradation.

ResultsAPPBP2 Recognizes C-degrons Sharing the R-x-x-G Motif.To investigate the R-x-x-G/C-degron binding properties of APPBP2, we expressed full-length human APPBP2 in bacteria but failed to obtain a soluble protein, presumably due to its low thermal stability. Given that APPBP2 associates with the heterodimer adaptor EB-EC in the context of an active CRL2 complex, which might promote its thermal stability, we coexpressed and purified the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex, which behaves mainly as a dimer in solution and is indeed much more stable than APPBP2 alone (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A and B). Then, we examined the C-degron binding affinity of APPBP2-EB-EC by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) binding assay. The Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier (SUMO)-fusion peptides were chosen for in vitro binding experiments because of their higher solubility compared to synthesized short peptides (19). The SUMO-fusion 16-mer peptides were tested for their ability to bind to APPBP2, including those of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35, which we previously demonstrated to be targeted by APPBP2 in an R-x-x-G/C-degron-dependent manner (9). All SUMO-fusion proteins bearing the R-x-x-G/C-degron bind to APPBP2-EB-EC with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.7 μM, whereas the negative control, SUMO alone, does not bind (Fig. 1 B and C and SI Appendix, Table S1). Taken together, these results indicate that APPBP2 binds directly to R-x-x-G/C-degrons.Fig. 1.Cryo-EM structure of dimeric CRL2APPBP2. (A) Domain architecture of individual subunits in the dimeric CRL2APPBP2 complex denoting each subunit in a distinct color. The domains or regions that are not visible in the cryo-EM structure are colored gray. VB- VHL box. (B) Sequence alignment for the C-degrons of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35. (C) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex binding to different SUMO fusion C-degrons. SUMO alone served as the negative control. (D) The map (Top) and cartoon (Bottom) of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, with the subunits colored in the same manner as shown in (A). (E) Overall structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron; protomer A is indicated by dashes.Structure of CRL2APPBP2 Bound to R-x-x-G/C-degron.To gain molecular insights into the assembly of the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase complex and the molecular mechanism underlying C-degron recognition by APPBP2, we reconstituted fully assembled CRL2APPBP2 consisting of NEDD8-modified CUL2Δ-RBX1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1C, see the Methods section) (28), APPBP2, and EB-EC dimer (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). CUL2Δ represents a variant of human CUL2 with the intrinsically disordered region (residues 117 to 134) deleted to avoid unwanted proteolysis. It has been reported that CUL2Δ can be neddylated as effectively as its wild-type (WT) counterpart (28). Therefore, we named the reconstituted complex containing neddylated CUL2Δ, “CRL2APPBP2 complex” hereafter. The CRL2APPBP2 complex, composed of five subunits, was purified with high purity (SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). The static light scattering (SLS) experiment indicated that the molecular weight of CRL2APPBP2 was 387 kDa, which is twice the expected size, suggesting a dimeric state of CRL2APPBP2 in solution (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E).Next, we chose the C-degron of hypothetical protein XP_211896 as a model R-x-x-G/C-degron for structural study. An excess amount of the XP_211896 C-degron peptide was incubated with CRL2APPBP2 to obtain the CRL2APPBP2-C-degron complex. The cryo-EM dataset for the complex particles was collected from a single specimen. In agreement with the SLS experiment (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E), the particles were classified into a dimer state and unexpectedly also into a tetramer state, which were solved at 3.27 Å and 3.26 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S2).Dimeric and Tetrameric Assembly of CRL2APPBP2.In the structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer (dimerAB), two CRL2APPBP2 protomers (A and B) form a central symmetrical dimer (Fig. 1 D and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). APPBP2, EB, EC, and the N-terminal region of CUL2 (CUL2NT) are visible in each protomer (Fig. 1 A, D, and E). Although we used NEDD8-modified CRL2 to reconstitute CRL2APPBP2, we did not observe the map for the C-terminal region of CUL2, RBX1, or NEDD8, which is consistent with previous studies showing that NEDD8 modification releases the C-terminal WHB domain of CUL2 and increases the dynamic properties of the C-terminal region of CUL2 and its associated RBX1 (29, 30).In each protomer, APPBP2 binds to CUL2 and EC via hydrophobic interactions (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 B and C). A C2H2 zinc finger is found at the APPBP2 dimer interface with Zn2+ coordinated by Cys54 and His89 from both APPBP2 protomers (APPBP2A and APPBP2B) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 D and E). By generating the APPBP2 double mutant C54A/H89A, we found that mutant APPBP2 assembled with EB-EC (APPBP2-EB-EC) or the whole mutant CRL2 complex (CRL2APPBP2) behaves as a monomer (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 E and F and S4 A and B), suggesting that the APPBP2-EB-EC and CRL2APPBP2 dimers are governed by the zinc-mediated dimerization of APPBP2.In addition, APPBP2 from one protomer (APPBP2A) also interacts with CUL2 and EB from the other protomer (CUL2B and ECB, respectively) to stabilize the dimer (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 F and G). The two CRL2APPBP2 dimers (dimerAB and dimerCD) further dimerize to form the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, which is assembled as a dimer of dimers (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).Recognition of R-x-x-G-x/C-degron by APPBP2.Given the homogenous CRL2APPBP2 dimer in solution and the identical APPBP2 architecture and C-degron recognition mode in all structures, we chose the CRL2APPBP2 dimer for structural analysis. APPBP2 is composed of highly conserved structural domains: an N-terminal VHL box spanning α1 to α3, which is responsible for CUL2-EB-EC binding, and a protein–protein interaction domain composed of eleven TPR repeats (TPR1-11) spanning α6 to α27 and two short helices (α28 to α29) (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The XP_211896 C-degron peptide binds to APPBP2 at a 1:1 ratio (Fig. 2A), with the last seven residues (−7LTRNKGP−1) of the peptide visible and inserted into a deep pocket of APPBP2 formed by TPR repeats 6 to 11 (TPR6-11) (Fig. 2 A and B and SI Appendix, Fig. S7A). Notably, peptide residues are numbered from the C terminus, with the residue at the C-end as “−1”, the penultimate residue as “−2”, etc. The C-degron peptide ending with R-x-x-G-P interacts extensively with the pocket residues of APPBP2 (Fig. 2 C–G). Leu−7 and Thr−6 form hydrophobic interactions with Tyr483, Tyr345 and Tyr515, with the main chain carbonyl group of Thr−6 hydrogen bonded to the Ser479 side chain (Fig. 2C); Arg−5 forms favorable electrostatic interactions with Asp387, Asp388, and Ser441, with its main chain carbonyl group hydrogen bonded to the side chain of Tyr345 (Fig. 2D); the main chain carbonyl group of Asn−4 forms hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr345 and Arg437 (Fig. 2E); Lys−3 forms hydrophobic interactions with Val342, Tyr345, and Leu472 and hydrogen bonds with the side chains of His476 and Tyr468 via its main chain carbonyl and side chain ε-amino groups, respectively (Fig. 2E); Gly−2 forms two main chain hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr338 and Tyr341 of APPBP2 and van der Waals interactions with Leu384 and Arg437 (Fig. 2F); and Pro−1 of the peptide forms two hydrogen bonds with side chains of Arg380 and Asn434 of APPBP2 via its main chain carboxyl group, and hydrophobic interactions are formed with APPBP2 Leu472 and His476 (Fig. 2G). The main chain hydrogen bond network formed between Arg−5, Asn−4, and Lys−3 of the C-degron and APPBP2 residues confers rigidity to the −5RNKG−2 motif, accounting for the exact two spacing residues between the critical Arg and Gly. Taken together, these intermolecular interactions indicate that APPBP2 recognizes the R-x-x-G/C-degron in a sequence-specific manner (Fig. 2H).Fig. 2.R-x-x-G-P/C-degron recognition by APPBP2. (A) Overall structure of the TPR6-11 of APPBP2 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with APPBPP2 and the peptide shown in cyan and yellow cartoons, respectively. (B) Electrostatic surface of APPBP2 TPR6-11 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron with the peptide residues labeled. (C–G) Close-up view of APPBP2 recognition of (C) Pro−1, (D) Gly−2, (E) Lys−3 and Asn−4, (F) Arg−5, and (G) Thr−6 and Leu−7. The C-degron and APPBP2 residues are shown as yellow and cyan sticks, respectively. The hydrogen bonds are indicated with black dashes. (H) Interaction diagram between APPBP2 and the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with the peptide and APPBP2 residues labeled in yellow and cyan, respectively. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions are indicated with black dashes and black arrows, respectively.Given that only one oxygen of the main chain carbonyl group of Pro−1 is hydrogen bonded to the APPBP2 residues, we speculated that APPBP2 could tolerate extra residues at the C terminus of the R-x-x-G/C-degron. Consistently, the addition of di-Ala at the C terminus of R-x-x-G-P (+AA) did not markedly impair the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.6 vs. 2.4 μM), whereas the addition of five alanine residues (+AAAAA) at the C terminus deceased the binding to APPBP2 >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3A). The binding data suggest that APPBP2 tolerates at least 1 to 3 residues at the C terminus of R-x-x-G; however, the binding affinity drops as the number of added residues increases. This is consistent with the fact that most APPBP2 peptide substrates recovered from our peptidome screen were R-x-x-G-x or R-x-x-G-x-x, with very few of the substrates containing more than two residues after glycine (9). Truncation of the C-terminal proline (-P) only slightly decreased the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.4 vs. 3.5 μM) (Fig. 3A), suggesting that R-x-x-G can be located at the extreme C-end. However, truncation of the last 2 residues (-GP) diminished the binding affinity by >5.0-fold (KDs: 2.4 vs. 13 μM), whereas truncation of the last 3 residues (-KGP) abolished the binding completely (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Table S1). Consistent with the structural analysis, the intact C-terminal R-x-x-G motif is required for high APPBP2-binding affinity, and shortening or repositioning of the motif drastically affects the interaction with APPBP2.Fig. 3.Binding affinities for WT APPBP2-EB-EC and its variants to different C-degrons. (A) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron variants with different lengths. (B–F) ITC curves for (B) the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with the different R-x-x-G-P/C-degron point mutants, (C) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, (D) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the ASCC3 C-degron, (E) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the C-degron of peptide 35, and (F) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the MRPL28 C-degron.Next, we introduced point mutations into the C-degron peptide to evaluate the roles of individual residues in binding to APPBP2. Intriguingly, P-1A weakened APPBP2 binding by ~3.3-fold (KDs: 7.9 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), indicating that a hydrophobic residue is favored at the terminal position. G-2A and G-2V decreased APPBP2 binding affinities by ~2.0- (KDs: 4.8 vs. 2.4 μM) and ~5.0-fold (KDs: 13 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), respectively, demonstrating that only the smallest residues, such as Gly or Ala, are favored at the penultimate position, while the larger side chain of Val is not tolerated. Arg within the R-x-x-G motif is most critical to APPBP2 binding, as revealed by the R-5A mutation that weakened binding affinity by 18-fold (KDs: 44 vs. 2.4 μM). Double mutation of both Arg and Gly, R-5A/G-2V, abolished binding completely (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Table S1), providing evidence for the bipartite mode of interaction. Overall, the binding data suggested the critical roles of Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G motif in binding to APPBP2 and the preference of APPBP2 toward the C-degrons ending with R-x-x-G/A-x0-3.Mutagenesis Approach Defines Key APPBP2 Residues Involved in R-x-x-G/C-degron Binding.We further mutated the pocket residues of APPBP2 and examined the C-degron binding affinities of APPBP2 mutants by ITC experiments. Both Glu387 and Glu388 of APPBP2 make electrostatic interactions with Arg within the R-x-x-G motif, and the E387R/E388R double mutant abolished the binding, suggesting the essential role of electrostatic interactions in binding to the C-degron (Fig. 3C). Consistent with the finding that Tyr345 and Arg437 of APPBP2 form hydrogen bonds with the main chain of the degron peptide, R437M decreased the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM), and Y345A/R437A displayed no binding toward the R-x-x-G/C-degron, underscoring the importance of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds in C-degron binding (Fig. 3C). Given that Arg380 and Lys430 make electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Pro−1, R380E/K430E also reduced the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C). In accordance with the finding that the main chain carbonyl groups of the peptide are hydrogen bonded to the side chains of His476 and Ser479, H476E/S479E also weakened the C-degron binding affinity by ~10-fold (KDs: > 25 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C and SI Appendix, Table S1). All of the above APPBP2 mutants maintained EB-EC binding affinity, as each of them was copurified with EB-EC (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 C–G), suggesting that the mutations only impaired the C-degron binding affinity and did not affect the protein fold. Collectively, the binding data further validated the APPBP2-degron binding interface.Recognition of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron by APPBP2.To understand the molecular mechanism by which APPBP2 tolerates the addition of extra residues in its extreme C termini, we solved the cryo-EM structure of CRL2APPBP2 bound to a variant of the XP_211896 C-degron that contains two additional C-terminal Ala resides, RNKGPAA [“XP_211896(+AA)”], a representative of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron. Similar to CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, the particles of XP_211896(+AA)-bound CRL2APPBP2 also exhibited dimeric and tetrameric states, which were solved at 3.30 Å and 3.54 Å resolution, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S8 and Table S2).The CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer and tetramer are assembled in the same manner as those observed for CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). In the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer, the last nine residues of the peptide (-9LTRNKGPAA-1) are visible and display good map quality (SI Appendix, Fig. S7B). Overall, APPBP2 interacts with the R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron in the same manner as observed for the R-x-x-G-x/C-degron (Fig. 4A). The two extra residues at the C terminus, −2AA−1, are well accommodated into the pocket, accounting for APPBP2 tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of the R-x-x-G motif. The main chain carbonyl group of Pro−3 is hydrogen bonded to the guanidinium group of Arg380, which also makes favorable electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Ala−1 (Fig. 4A). Although inserted deep into the pocket, Ala−2 and Ala−1 of the peptide make fewer contacts with APPBP2 residues, consistent with the finding that APPBP2 binds to R-x-x-G-x and R-x-x-G-x-x-x C-degrons with similar binding affinities (Fig. 3A).Fig. 4.APPBP2 employs a conserved mode of R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition. (A) Close-up view of the recognition of the R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron by APPBP2, with the C-degron residues highlighted. The APPBP2 residues involved in C-degron recognition are shown as cyan sticks. (B) Close-up view of the recognition of the MRPL28 R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2. The residues are colored in the same way as shown in (A). (C) The degron-bound structures are superimposed on APPBP2. The electrostatic surface of APPBP2 is shown with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron (yellow), R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron (cyan), and R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron (green). The arginine and glycine residues within the R-x-x-G motif are highlighted and shown in stick representation. (D) Proposed bipartite binding mode for the C-terminal R-x-x-G motif by APPBP2.Recognition of R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2.To understand the substrate selectivity of APPBP2, especially its preference for the residues post glycine in the R-x-x-G motif, we solved the structure of CRL2APPPB2 with the MRPL28 C-degron ending with RASGQ. Similar to other C-degron-bound structures of CRL2 APPBP2, the particles of CRL2APPBP2 with R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron also assemble into dimers and tetramers, which were solved at 3.22 Å and 3.44 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 and Table S2). The overall architectures of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer and tetramer are similar to those observed in other C-degron-bound CRL2APPBP2 structures (SI Appendix, Fig. S11).The last seven residues of the C-degron (−7QKRASGQ−1) are visible and inserted into the previously identified degron-binding pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S7C). In the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 complex, the MRPL28 C-degron interacts with APPBP2 in the same manner as the C-degron of XP_211896 (Fig. 4B), with Gln−1 forming a favorable electrostatic interaction with APPBP2 Glu469. By superimposing all degron-bound structures on APPBP2, we found that the R-x-x-G motif within the three C-degrons adopts the same conformation (Fig. 4C), suggesting that APPBP2 recognizes R-x-x-G/C-degrons in a conserved manner. To study whether APPBP2 utilizes the same surface to bind in a similar manner to all R-x-x-G/C-degrons, we further examined the binding of APPBP2-EB-EC and its degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, to two previously reported R-x-x-G/C-degrons, ASCC3 (-RPRGLR) and peptide 35 (-RNKGK) (9). Binding data showed that unlike WT APPBP2, which binds to the two C-degrons with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.5 μM, neither of the two degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, bound to ASCC3 or peptide 35 (Fig. 3 D and E). Overall, the structural analysis, complemented by mutagenesis and in vitro binding experiments, suggested that APPBP2 uses the same surface to recognize distinct substrates sharing R-x-x-G/C-degrons.Validation of APPBP2-Mediated Substrate Recognition and Degradation in Cell-Based Assays.To validate the functional role of the C-degron-binding residues in APPBP2, we constructed a series of APPBP2 mutants in a lentiviral expression vector and tested their activity in a cell-based system called Global protein stability (GPS) (31). GPS is a fluorescent-based reporter system that monitors changes in protein stability in live cells. This system is based on a bicistronic lentiviral expression vector that encodes DsRed, serving as an internal expression reference for the lentiviral cassette, and a GFP fusion that is translated from an internal ribosome entry site. In this method, the GFP/DsRed ratio serves to read out the effect of the fusion partner on the stability of GFP (9, 31).For cell-based assays, we first generated HEK293T APPBP2 knockout (KO) cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Then, we transduced the KO cells with lentiviral constructs encoding WT or mutant APPBP2 complementary DNA (cDNA) followed by recovery and a second transduction with GPS peptides (Fig. 5A). As APPBP2 representative substrates, we engineered a few GPS reporters encoding 23mer C-degron peptides of various R-x-x-G motifs with one, two or three C-terminal residues post Gly: GPS-peptide 35, GPS-MRLP28, GPS-XP_211896 (all share the R-x-x-G-x motif), GPS-ASCC3 (R-x-x-G-x-x) (9), and XP_211896(+AA) (R-x-x-G-x-x-x).Fig. 5.GPS assay to validate critical R-x-x-G/C-degron binding residues in APPBP2. (A) Overview of the GPS experiment to investigate the effect of WT and mutant APPBP2 proteins on the stability of GFP-fused C-degrons. (B) Stability analysis of the indicated GFP-fused C-degrons on various genetic backgrounds. The GFP/DsRed ratio was used to indicate the stability of the GFP-fused C-degron and was analyzed by flow cytometry. In each case, GFP-fused degron instability is rescued in cells expressing the WT but not the mutant APPBP2 proteins. Control KO cells (cells transfected with sgRNA targeting AAVSI) expressing GPS substrate served as the reference for substrate instability. (C) The abundance of exogenously expressed APPBP2 protein, WT or the indicated mutants, as assessed by immunoblot using anti-HA antibody. Vinculin antibody was used as a loading control. (D) A proposed model for R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition by the CRL2APPBP2 dimer.In agreement with the solved structures and ITC experiments, the C-degron binding pocket mutants Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R failed to rescue the degradation of all substrates tested (Fig. 5B), although their expression levels were comparable to that of WT APPBP2, as judged by immunoblotting (Fig. 5C). Altogether, the GPS cell-based assay demonstrates the importance of the APPBP2 C-degron binding pocket in R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition in vivo. Overall, a proposed model for the APPBP2-mediated R-x-x-G/C- degron pathway is well supported by the structural biology data and in vivo GPS assay (Fig. 5D).Finally, we investigated the importance of the oligomeric CRL2APPBP2 state for C-degron binding and substrate turnover. Expression of the C54A/H89A APPBP2 mutant (SI Appendix, Fig. S12A), which does not assemble into oligomeric complexes, was still functional in vivo in degrading the substrates (SI Appendix, Fig. S12B), and in vitro, it binds to C-degrons with similar affinity (Fig. 3 D and F and SI Appendix, Table S1) and was able to catalyze substrate polyubiquitination as WT APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S12 C and D). Altogether, these data suggest that the oligomeric state of APPBP2 is not required for the polyubiquitination and subsequent turnover of the R-x-x-G/C-degron-bearing substrate.Comparison between Different C-degron Recognition Modes.Several C-degron complexes have been solved, including those of KLHDC2 with Gly/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13A) (17), TRIM7 with Gln/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13B) (23), FEM1B/C with Arg/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19), and DCAF12 with diGlu/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13E) (27), which allows us to compare them with that of APPBP2 with R-x-x-G/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). There are several differences between APPBP2-C-degron and the other E3 ligase/SR-C-degron complexes. First, all degron-binding proteins adopt distinct architectures utilizing Kelch repeats (KLHDC2), the PRY-SPRY domain (TRIM7), Ankyrin repeats (FEM1 proteins), the WD40 domain (DCAF12), or TPR repeats (APPBP2) (SI Appendix, Fig. S13). Second, the R-x-x-G/C-degron is inserted into the deep pocket of APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F), which is equivalent to a dead-end road, whereas in the other C-degron structures, the degron peptides lie in grooves (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 A–E). Third, in contrast with the other C-degrons, the R-x-x-G motif is not strictly located at the extreme C terminus of the C-degron, and APPBP2 displays plasticity in tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of R-x-x-G given enough space in the pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Fourth, Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G/C-degron are recognized by APPBP2 via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions, respectively (Fig. 2H and SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Although FEM1C and FEM1B also utilize the bipartite mechanism to recognize the Arg/C-degron, they possess different substrate binding properties and sequence selectivity (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19).

APPBP2 Recognizes C-degrons Sharing the R-x-x-G Motif.To investigate the R-x-x-G/C-degron binding properties of APPBP2, we expressed full-length human APPBP2 in bacteria but failed to obtain a soluble protein, presumably due to its low thermal stability. Given that APPBP2 associates with the heterodimer adaptor EB-EC in the context of an active CRL2 complex, which might promote its thermal stability, we coexpressed and purified the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex, which behaves mainly as a dimer in solution and is indeed much more stable than APPBP2 alone (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A and B). Then, we examined the C-degron binding affinity of APPBP2-EB-EC by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) binding assay. The Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier (SUMO)-fusion peptides were chosen for in vitro binding experiments because of their higher solubility compared to synthesized short peptides (19). The SUMO-fusion 16-mer peptides were tested for their ability to bind to APPBP2, including those of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35, which we previously demonstrated to be targeted by APPBP2 in an R-x-x-G/C-degron-dependent manner (9). All SUMO-fusion proteins bearing the R-x-x-G/C-degron bind to APPBP2-EB-EC with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.7 μM, whereas the negative control, SUMO alone, does not bind (Fig. 1 B and C and SI Appendix, Table S1). Taken together, these results indicate that APPBP2 binds directly to R-x-x-G/C-degrons.Fig. 1.Cryo-EM structure of dimeric CRL2APPBP2. (A) Domain architecture of individual subunits in the dimeric CRL2APPBP2 complex denoting each subunit in a distinct color. The domains or regions that are not visible in the cryo-EM structure are colored gray. VB- VHL box. (B) Sequence alignment for the C-degrons of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35. (C) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex binding to different SUMO fusion C-degrons. SUMO alone served as the negative control. (D) The map (Top) and cartoon (Bottom) of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, with the subunits colored in the same manner as shown in (A). (E) Overall structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron; protomer A is indicated by dashes.

APPBP2 Recognizes C-degrons Sharing the R-x-x-G Motif.

To investigate the R-x-x-G/C-degron binding properties of APPBP2, we expressed full-length human APPBP2 in bacteria but failed to obtain a soluble protein, presumably due to its low thermal stability. Given that APPBP2 associates with the heterodimer adaptor EB-EC in the context of an active CRL2 complex, which might promote its thermal stability, we coexpressed and purified the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex, which behaves mainly as a dimer in solution and is indeed much more stable than APPBP2 alone (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A and B). Then, we examined the C-degron binding affinity of APPBP2-EB-EC by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) binding assay. The Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier (SUMO)-fusion peptides were chosen for in vitro binding experiments because of their higher solubility compared to synthesized short peptides (19). The SUMO-fusion 16-mer peptides were tested for their ability to bind to APPBP2, including those of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35, which we previously demonstrated to be targeted by APPBP2 in an R-x-x-G/C-degron-dependent manner (9). All SUMO-fusion proteins bearing the R-x-x-G/C-degron bind to APPBP2-EB-EC with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.7 μM, whereas the negative control, SUMO alone, does not bind (Fig. 1 B and C and SI Appendix, Table S1). Taken together, these results indicate that APPBP2 binds directly to R-x-x-G/C-degrons.

Cryo-EM structure of dimeric CRL2APPBP2. (A) Domain architecture of individual subunits in the dimeric CRL2APPBP2 complex denoting each subunit in a distinct color. The domains or regions that are not visible in the cryo-EM structure are colored gray. VB- VHL box. (B) Sequence alignment for the C-degrons of XP_211896, MRPL28, ASCC3, and peptide 35. (C) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC ternary complex binding to different SUMO fusion C-degrons. SUMO alone served as the negative control. (D) The map (Top) and cartoon (Bottom) of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, with the subunits colored in the same manner as shown in (A). (E) Overall structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron; protomer A is indicated by dashes.

Structure of CRL2APPBP2 Bound to R-x-x-G/C-degron.To gain molecular insights into the assembly of the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase complex and the molecular mechanism underlying C-degron recognition by APPBP2, we reconstituted fully assembled CRL2APPBP2 consisting of NEDD8-modified CUL2Δ-RBX1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1C, see the Methods section) (28), APPBP2, and EB-EC dimer (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). CUL2Δ represents a variant of human CUL2 with the intrinsically disordered region (residues 117 to 134) deleted to avoid unwanted proteolysis. It has been reported that CUL2Δ can be neddylated as effectively as its wild-type (WT) counterpart (28). Therefore, we named the reconstituted complex containing neddylated CUL2Δ, “CRL2APPBP2 complex” hereafter. The CRL2APPBP2 complex, composed of five subunits, was purified with high purity (SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). The static light scattering (SLS) experiment indicated that the molecular weight of CRL2APPBP2 was 387 kDa, which is twice the expected size, suggesting a dimeric state of CRL2APPBP2 in solution (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E).Next, we chose the C-degron of hypothetical protein XP_211896 as a model R-x-x-G/C-degron for structural study. An excess amount of the XP_211896 C-degron peptide was incubated with CRL2APPBP2 to obtain the CRL2APPBP2-C-degron complex. The cryo-EM dataset for the complex particles was collected from a single specimen. In agreement with the SLS experiment (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E), the particles were classified into a dimer state and unexpectedly also into a tetramer state, which were solved at 3.27 Å and 3.26 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S2).

Structure of CRL2APPBP2 Bound to R-x-x-G/C-degron.

To gain molecular insights into the assembly of the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase complex and the molecular mechanism underlying C-degron recognition by APPBP2, we reconstituted fully assembled CRL2APPBP2 consisting of NEDD8-modified CUL2Δ-RBX1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S1C, see the Methods section) (28), APPBP2, and EB-EC dimer (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). CUL2Δ represents a variant of human CUL2 with the intrinsically disordered region (residues 117 to 134) deleted to avoid unwanted proteolysis. It has been reported that CUL2Δ can be neddylated as effectively as its wild-type (WT) counterpart (28). Therefore, we named the reconstituted complex containing neddylated CUL2Δ, “CRL2APPBP2 complex” hereafter. The CRL2APPBP2 complex, composed of five subunits, was purified with high purity (SI Appendix, Fig. S1D). The static light scattering (SLS) experiment indicated that the molecular weight of CRL2APPBP2 was 387 kDa, which is twice the expected size, suggesting a dimeric state of CRL2APPBP2 in solution (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E).

Next, we chose the C-degron of hypothetical protein XP_211896 as a model R-x-x-G/C-degron for structural study. An excess amount of the XP_211896 C-degron peptide was incubated with CRL2APPBP2 to obtain the CRL2APPBP2-C-degron complex. The cryo-EM dataset for the complex particles was collected from a single specimen. In agreement with the SLS experiment (SI Appendix, Fig. S1E), the particles were classified into a dimer state and unexpectedly also into a tetramer state, which were solved at 3.27 Å and 3.26 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S2).

Dimeric and Tetrameric Assembly of CRL2APPBP2.In the structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer (dimerAB), two CRL2APPBP2 protomers (A and B) form a central symmetrical dimer (Fig. 1 D and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). APPBP2, EB, EC, and the N-terminal region of CUL2 (CUL2NT) are visible in each protomer (Fig. 1 A, D, and E). Although we used NEDD8-modified CRL2 to reconstitute CRL2APPBP2, we did not observe the map for the C-terminal region of CUL2, RBX1, or NEDD8, which is consistent with previous studies showing that NEDD8 modification releases the C-terminal WHB domain of CUL2 and increases the dynamic properties of the C-terminal region of CUL2 and its associated RBX1 (29, 30).In each protomer, APPBP2 binds to CUL2 and EC via hydrophobic interactions (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 B and C). A C2H2 zinc finger is found at the APPBP2 dimer interface with Zn2+ coordinated by Cys54 and His89 from both APPBP2 protomers (APPBP2A and APPBP2B) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 D and E). By generating the APPBP2 double mutant C54A/H89A, we found that mutant APPBP2 assembled with EB-EC (APPBP2-EB-EC) or the whole mutant CRL2 complex (CRL2APPBP2) behaves as a monomer (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 E and F and S4 A and B), suggesting that the APPBP2-EB-EC and CRL2APPBP2 dimers are governed by the zinc-mediated dimerization of APPBP2.In addition, APPBP2 from one protomer (APPBP2A) also interacts with CUL2 and EB from the other protomer (CUL2B and ECB, respectively) to stabilize the dimer (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 F and G). The two CRL2APPBP2 dimers (dimerAB and dimerCD) further dimerize to form the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, which is assembled as a dimer of dimers (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).

Dimeric and Tetrameric Assembly of CRL2APPBP2.

In the structure of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer (dimerAB), two CRL2APPBP2 protomers (A and B) form a central symmetrical dimer (Fig. 1 D and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). APPBP2, EB, EC, and the N-terminal region of CUL2 (CUL2NT) are visible in each protomer (Fig. 1 A, D, and E). Although we used NEDD8-modified CRL2 to reconstitute CRL2APPBP2, we did not observe the map for the C-terminal region of CUL2, RBX1, or NEDD8, which is consistent with previous studies showing that NEDD8 modification releases the C-terminal WHB domain of CUL2 and increases the dynamic properties of the C-terminal region of CUL2 and its associated RBX1 (29, 30).

In each protomer, APPBP2 binds to CUL2 and EC via hydrophobic interactions (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 B and C). A C2H2 zinc finger is found at the APPBP2 dimer interface with Zn2+ coordinated by Cys54 and His89 from both APPBP2 protomers (APPBP2A and APPBP2B) (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 D and E). By generating the APPBP2 double mutant C54A/H89A, we found that mutant APPBP2 assembled with EB-EC (APPBP2-EB-EC) or the whole mutant CRL2 complex (CRL2APPBP2) behaves as a monomer (SI Appendix, Figs. S1 E and F and S4 A and B), suggesting that the APPBP2-EB-EC and CRL2APPBP2 dimers are governed by the zinc-mediated dimerization of APPBP2.

In addition, APPBP2 from one protomer (APPBP2A) also interacts with CUL2 and EB from the other protomer (CUL2B and ECB, respectively) to stabilize the dimer (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 F and G). The two CRL2APPBP2 dimers (dimerAB and dimerCD) further dimerize to form the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, which is assembled as a dimer of dimers (SI Appendix, Fig. S5).

Recognition of R-x-x-G-x/C-degron by APPBP2.Given the homogenous CRL2APPBP2 dimer in solution and the identical APPBP2 architecture and C-degron recognition mode in all structures, we chose the CRL2APPBP2 dimer for structural analysis. APPBP2 is composed of highly conserved structural domains: an N-terminal VHL box spanning α1 to α3, which is responsible for CUL2-EB-EC binding, and a protein–protein interaction domain composed of eleven TPR repeats (TPR1-11) spanning α6 to α27 and two short helices (α28 to α29) (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The XP_211896 C-degron peptide binds to APPBP2 at a 1:1 ratio (Fig. 2A), with the last seven residues (−7LTRNKGP−1) of the peptide visible and inserted into a deep pocket of APPBP2 formed by TPR repeats 6 to 11 (TPR6-11) (Fig. 2 A and B and SI Appendix, Fig. S7A). Notably, peptide residues are numbered from the C terminus, with the residue at the C-end as “−1”, the penultimate residue as “−2”, etc. The C-degron peptide ending with R-x-x-G-P interacts extensively with the pocket residues of APPBP2 (Fig. 2 C–G). Leu−7 and Thr−6 form hydrophobic interactions with Tyr483, Tyr345 and Tyr515, with the main chain carbonyl group of Thr−6 hydrogen bonded to the Ser479 side chain (Fig. 2C); Arg−5 forms favorable electrostatic interactions with Asp387, Asp388, and Ser441, with its main chain carbonyl group hydrogen bonded to the side chain of Tyr345 (Fig. 2D); the main chain carbonyl group of Asn−4 forms hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr345 and Arg437 (Fig. 2E); Lys−3 forms hydrophobic interactions with Val342, Tyr345, and Leu472 and hydrogen bonds with the side chains of His476 and Tyr468 via its main chain carbonyl and side chain ε-amino groups, respectively (Fig. 2E); Gly−2 forms two main chain hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr338 and Tyr341 of APPBP2 and van der Waals interactions with Leu384 and Arg437 (Fig. 2F); and Pro−1 of the peptide forms two hydrogen bonds with side chains of Arg380 and Asn434 of APPBP2 via its main chain carboxyl group, and hydrophobic interactions are formed with APPBP2 Leu472 and His476 (Fig. 2G). The main chain hydrogen bond network formed between Arg−5, Asn−4, and Lys−3 of the C-degron and APPBP2 residues confers rigidity to the −5RNKG−2 motif, accounting for the exact two spacing residues between the critical Arg and Gly. Taken together, these intermolecular interactions indicate that APPBP2 recognizes the R-x-x-G/C-degron in a sequence-specific manner (Fig. 2H).Fig. 2.R-x-x-G-P/C-degron recognition by APPBP2. (A) Overall structure of the TPR6-11 of APPBP2 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with APPBPP2 and the peptide shown in cyan and yellow cartoons, respectively. (B) Electrostatic surface of APPBP2 TPR6-11 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron with the peptide residues labeled. (C–G) Close-up view of APPBP2 recognition of (C) Pro−1, (D) Gly−2, (E) Lys−3 and Asn−4, (F) Arg−5, and (G) Thr−6 and Leu−7. The C-degron and APPBP2 residues are shown as yellow and cyan sticks, respectively. The hydrogen bonds are indicated with black dashes. (H) Interaction diagram between APPBP2 and the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with the peptide and APPBP2 residues labeled in yellow and cyan, respectively. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions are indicated with black dashes and black arrows, respectively.Given that only one oxygen of the main chain carbonyl group of Pro−1 is hydrogen bonded to the APPBP2 residues, we speculated that APPBP2 could tolerate extra residues at the C terminus of the R-x-x-G/C-degron. Consistently, the addition of di-Ala at the C terminus of R-x-x-G-P (+AA) did not markedly impair the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.6 vs. 2.4 μM), whereas the addition of five alanine residues (+AAAAA) at the C terminus deceased the binding to APPBP2 >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3A). The binding data suggest that APPBP2 tolerates at least 1 to 3 residues at the C terminus of R-x-x-G; however, the binding affinity drops as the number of added residues increases. This is consistent with the fact that most APPBP2 peptide substrates recovered from our peptidome screen were R-x-x-G-x or R-x-x-G-x-x, with very few of the substrates containing more than two residues after glycine (9). Truncation of the C-terminal proline (-P) only slightly decreased the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.4 vs. 3.5 μM) (Fig. 3A), suggesting that R-x-x-G can be located at the extreme C-end. However, truncation of the last 2 residues (-GP) diminished the binding affinity by >5.0-fold (KDs: 2.4 vs. 13 μM), whereas truncation of the last 3 residues (-KGP) abolished the binding completely (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Table S1). Consistent with the structural analysis, the intact C-terminal R-x-x-G motif is required for high APPBP2-binding affinity, and shortening or repositioning of the motif drastically affects the interaction with APPBP2.Fig. 3.Binding affinities for WT APPBP2-EB-EC and its variants to different C-degrons. (A) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron variants with different lengths. (B–F) ITC curves for (B) the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with the different R-x-x-G-P/C-degron point mutants, (C) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, (D) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the ASCC3 C-degron, (E) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the C-degron of peptide 35, and (F) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the MRPL28 C-degron.Next, we introduced point mutations into the C-degron peptide to evaluate the roles of individual residues in binding to APPBP2. Intriguingly, P-1A weakened APPBP2 binding by ~3.3-fold (KDs: 7.9 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), indicating that a hydrophobic residue is favored at the terminal position. G-2A and G-2V decreased APPBP2 binding affinities by ~2.0- (KDs: 4.8 vs. 2.4 μM) and ~5.0-fold (KDs: 13 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), respectively, demonstrating that only the smallest residues, such as Gly or Ala, are favored at the penultimate position, while the larger side chain of Val is not tolerated. Arg within the R-x-x-G motif is most critical to APPBP2 binding, as revealed by the R-5A mutation that weakened binding affinity by 18-fold (KDs: 44 vs. 2.4 μM). Double mutation of both Arg and Gly, R-5A/G-2V, abolished binding completely (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Table S1), providing evidence for the bipartite mode of interaction. Overall, the binding data suggested the critical roles of Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G motif in binding to APPBP2 and the preference of APPBP2 toward the C-degrons ending with R-x-x-G/A-x0-3.

Recognition of R-x-x-G-x/C-degron by APPBP2.

Given the homogenous CRL2APPBP2 dimer in solution and the identical APPBP2 architecture and C-degron recognition mode in all structures, we chose the CRL2APPBP2 dimer for structural analysis. APPBP2 is composed of highly conserved structural domains: an N-terminal VHL box spanning α1 to α3, which is responsible for CUL2-EB-EC binding, and a protein–protein interaction domain composed of eleven TPR repeats (TPR1-11) spanning α6 to α27 and two short helices (α28 to α29) (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). The XP_211896 C-degron peptide binds to APPBP2 at a 1:1 ratio (Fig. 2A), with the last seven residues (−7LTRNKGP−1) of the peptide visible and inserted into a deep pocket of APPBP2 formed by TPR repeats 6 to 11 (TPR6-11) (Fig. 2 A and B and SI Appendix, Fig. S7A). Notably, peptide residues are numbered from the C terminus, with the residue at the C-end as “−1”, the penultimate residue as “−2”, etc. The C-degron peptide ending with R-x-x-G-P interacts extensively with the pocket residues of APPBP2 (Fig. 2 C–G). Leu−7 and Thr−6 form hydrophobic interactions with Tyr483, Tyr345 and Tyr515, with the main chain carbonyl group of Thr−6 hydrogen bonded to the Ser479 side chain (Fig. 2C); Arg−5 forms favorable electrostatic interactions with Asp387, Asp388, and Ser441, with its main chain carbonyl group hydrogen bonded to the side chain of Tyr345 (Fig. 2D); the main chain carbonyl group of Asn−4 forms hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr345 and Arg437 (Fig. 2E); Lys−3 forms hydrophobic interactions with Val342, Tyr345, and Leu472 and hydrogen bonds with the side chains of His476 and Tyr468 via its main chain carbonyl and side chain ε-amino groups, respectively (Fig. 2E); Gly−2 forms two main chain hydrogen bonds with the side chains of Tyr338 and Tyr341 of APPBP2 and van der Waals interactions with Leu384 and Arg437 (Fig. 2F); and Pro−1 of the peptide forms two hydrogen bonds with side chains of Arg380 and Asn434 of APPBP2 via its main chain carboxyl group, and hydrophobic interactions are formed with APPBP2 Leu472 and His476 (Fig. 2G). The main chain hydrogen bond network formed between Arg−5, Asn−4, and Lys−3 of the C-degron and APPBP2 residues confers rigidity to the −5RNKG−2 motif, accounting for the exact two spacing residues between the critical Arg and Gly. Taken together, these intermolecular interactions indicate that APPBP2 recognizes the R-x-x-G/C-degron in a sequence-specific manner (Fig. 2H).

R-x-x-G-P/C-degron recognition by APPBP2. (A) Overall structure of the TPR6-11 of APPBP2 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with APPBPP2 and the peptide shown in cyan and yellow cartoons, respectively. (B) Electrostatic surface of APPBP2 TPR6-11 bound with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron with the peptide residues labeled. (C–G) Close-up view of APPBP2 recognition of (C) Pro−1, (D) Gly−2, (E) Lys−3 and Asn−4, (F) Arg−5, and (G) Thr−6 and Leu−7. The C-degron and APPBP2 residues are shown as yellow and cyan sticks, respectively. The hydrogen bonds are indicated with black dashes. (H) Interaction diagram between APPBP2 and the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron peptide, with the peptide and APPBP2 residues labeled in yellow and cyan, respectively. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions are indicated with black dashes and black arrows, respectively.

Given that only one oxygen of the main chain carbonyl group of Pro−1 is hydrogen bonded to the APPBP2 residues, we speculated that APPBP2 could tolerate extra residues at the C terminus of the R-x-x-G/C-degron. Consistently, the addition of di-Ala at the C terminus of R-x-x-G-P (+AA) did not markedly impair the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.6 vs. 2.4 μM), whereas the addition of five alanine residues (+AAAAA) at the C terminus deceased the binding to APPBP2 >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3A). The binding data suggest that APPBP2 tolerates at least 1 to 3 residues at the C terminus of R-x-x-G; however, the binding affinity drops as the number of added residues increases. This is consistent with the fact that most APPBP2 peptide substrates recovered from our peptidome screen were R-x-x-G-x or R-x-x-G-x-x, with very few of the substrates containing more than two residues after glycine (9). Truncation of the C-terminal proline (-P) only slightly decreased the APPBP2 binding affinity (KDs: 2.4 vs. 3.5 μM) (Fig. 3A), suggesting that R-x-x-G can be located at the extreme C-end. However, truncation of the last 2 residues (-GP) diminished the binding affinity by >5.0-fold (KDs: 2.4 vs. 13 μM), whereas truncation of the last 3 residues (-KGP) abolished the binding completely (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Table S1). Consistent with the structural analysis, the intact C-terminal R-x-x-G motif is required for high APPBP2-binding affinity, and shortening or repositioning of the motif drastically affects the interaction with APPBP2.

Binding affinities for WT APPBP2-EB-EC and its variants to different C-degrons. (A) ITC curves for the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron variants with different lengths. (B–F) ITC curves for (B) the APPBP2-EB-EC complex with the different R-x-x-G-P/C-degron point mutants, (C) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the R-x-x-G-P/C-degron, (D) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the ASCC3 C-degron, (E) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the C-degron of peptide 35, and (F) different APPBP2-EB-EC variants with the MRPL28 C-degron.

Next, we introduced point mutations into the C-degron peptide to evaluate the roles of individual residues in binding to APPBP2. Intriguingly, P-1A weakened APPBP2 binding by ~3.3-fold (KDs: 7.9 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), indicating that a hydrophobic residue is favored at the terminal position. G-2A and G-2V decreased APPBP2 binding affinities by ~2.0- (KDs: 4.8 vs. 2.4 μM) and ~5.0-fold (KDs: 13 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3B), respectively, demonstrating that only the smallest residues, such as Gly or Ala, are favored at the penultimate position, while the larger side chain of Val is not tolerated. Arg within the R-x-x-G motif is most critical to APPBP2 binding, as revealed by the R-5A mutation that weakened binding affinity by 18-fold (KDs: 44 vs. 2.4 μM). Double mutation of both Arg and Gly, R-5A/G-2V, abolished binding completely (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Table S1), providing evidence for the bipartite mode of interaction. Overall, the binding data suggested the critical roles of Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G motif in binding to APPBP2 and the preference of APPBP2 toward the C-degrons ending with R-x-x-G/A-x0-3.

Mutagenesis Approach Defines Key APPBP2 Residues Involved in R-x-x-G/C-degron Binding.We further mutated the pocket residues of APPBP2 and examined the C-degron binding affinities of APPBP2 mutants by ITC experiments. Both Glu387 and Glu388 of APPBP2 make electrostatic interactions with Arg within the R-x-x-G motif, and the E387R/E388R double mutant abolished the binding, suggesting the essential role of electrostatic interactions in binding to the C-degron (Fig. 3C). Consistent with the finding that Tyr345 and Arg437 of APPBP2 form hydrogen bonds with the main chain of the degron peptide, R437M decreased the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM), and Y345A/R437A displayed no binding toward the R-x-x-G/C-degron, underscoring the importance of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds in C-degron binding (Fig. 3C). Given that Arg380 and Lys430 make electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Pro−1, R380E/K430E also reduced the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C). In accordance with the finding that the main chain carbonyl groups of the peptide are hydrogen bonded to the side chains of His476 and Ser479, H476E/S479E also weakened the C-degron binding affinity by ~10-fold (KDs: > 25 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C and SI Appendix, Table S1). All of the above APPBP2 mutants maintained EB-EC binding affinity, as each of them was copurified with EB-EC (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 C–G), suggesting that the mutations only impaired the C-degron binding affinity and did not affect the protein fold. Collectively, the binding data further validated the APPBP2-degron binding interface.

Mutagenesis Approach Defines Key APPBP2 Residues Involved in R-x-x-G/C-degron Binding.

We further mutated the pocket residues of APPBP2 and examined the C-degron binding affinities of APPBP2 mutants by ITC experiments. Both Glu387 and Glu388 of APPBP2 make electrostatic interactions with Arg within the R-x-x-G motif, and the E387R/E388R double mutant abolished the binding, suggesting the essential role of electrostatic interactions in binding to the C-degron (Fig. 3C). Consistent with the finding that Tyr345 and Arg437 of APPBP2 form hydrogen bonds with the main chain of the degron peptide, R437M decreased the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM), and Y345A/R437A displayed no binding toward the R-x-x-G/C-degron, underscoring the importance of the intermolecular hydrogen bonds in C-degron binding (Fig. 3C). Given that Arg380 and Lys430 make electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Pro−1, R380E/K430E also reduced the binding affinity by >20-fold (KDs: >50 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C). In accordance with the finding that the main chain carbonyl groups of the peptide are hydrogen bonded to the side chains of His476 and Ser479, H476E/S479E also weakened the C-degron binding affinity by ~10-fold (KDs: > 25 vs. 2.4 μM) (Fig. 3C and SI Appendix, Table S1). All of the above APPBP2 mutants maintained EB-EC binding affinity, as each of them was copurified with EB-EC (SI Appendix, Fig. S4 C–G), suggesting that the mutations only impaired the C-degron binding affinity and did not affect the protein fold. Collectively, the binding data further validated the APPBP2-degron binding interface.

Recognition of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron by APPBP2.To understand the molecular mechanism by which APPBP2 tolerates the addition of extra residues in its extreme C termini, we solved the cryo-EM structure of CRL2APPBP2 bound to a variant of the XP_211896 C-degron that contains two additional C-terminal Ala resides, RNKGPAA [“XP_211896(+AA)”], a representative of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron. Similar to CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, the particles of XP_211896(+AA)-bound CRL2APPBP2 also exhibited dimeric and tetrameric states, which were solved at 3.30 Å and 3.54 Å resolution, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S8 and Table S2).The CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer and tetramer are assembled in the same manner as those observed for CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). In the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer, the last nine residues of the peptide (-9LTRNKGPAA-1) are visible and display good map quality (SI Appendix, Fig. S7B). Overall, APPBP2 interacts with the R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron in the same manner as observed for the R-x-x-G-x/C-degron (Fig. 4A). The two extra residues at the C terminus, −2AA−1, are well accommodated into the pocket, accounting for APPBP2 tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of the R-x-x-G motif. The main chain carbonyl group of Pro−3 is hydrogen bonded to the guanidinium group of Arg380, which also makes favorable electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Ala−1 (Fig. 4A). Although inserted deep into the pocket, Ala−2 and Ala−1 of the peptide make fewer contacts with APPBP2 residues, consistent with the finding that APPBP2 binds to R-x-x-G-x and R-x-x-G-x-x-x C-degrons with similar binding affinities (Fig. 3A).Fig. 4.APPBP2 employs a conserved mode of R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition. (A) Close-up view of the recognition of the R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron by APPBP2, with the C-degron residues highlighted. The APPBP2 residues involved in C-degron recognition are shown as cyan sticks. (B) Close-up view of the recognition of the MRPL28 R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2. The residues are colored in the same way as shown in (A). (C) The degron-bound structures are superimposed on APPBP2. The electrostatic surface of APPBP2 is shown with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron (yellow), R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron (cyan), and R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron (green). The arginine and glycine residues within the R-x-x-G motif are highlighted and shown in stick representation. (D) Proposed bipartite binding mode for the C-terminal R-x-x-G motif by APPBP2.

Recognition of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron by APPBP2.

To understand the molecular mechanism by which APPBP2 tolerates the addition of extra residues in its extreme C termini, we solved the cryo-EM structure of CRL2APPBP2 bound to a variant of the XP_211896 C-degron that contains two additional C-terminal Ala resides, RNKGPAA [“XP_211896(+AA)”], a representative of R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron. Similar to CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, the particles of XP_211896(+AA)-bound CRL2APPBP2 also exhibited dimeric and tetrameric states, which were solved at 3.30 Å and 3.54 Å resolution, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S8 and Table S2).

The CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer and tetramer are assembled in the same manner as those observed for CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). In the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer, the last nine residues of the peptide (-9LTRNKGPAA-1) are visible and display good map quality (SI Appendix, Fig. S7B). Overall, APPBP2 interacts with the R-x-x-G-x-x-x/C-degron in the same manner as observed for the R-x-x-G-x/C-degron (Fig. 4A). The two extra residues at the C terminus, −2AA−1, are well accommodated into the pocket, accounting for APPBP2 tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of the R-x-x-G motif. The main chain carbonyl group of Pro−3 is hydrogen bonded to the guanidinium group of Arg380, which also makes favorable electrostatic interactions with the main chain carbonyl groups of Ala−1 (Fig. 4A). Although inserted deep into the pocket, Ala−2 and Ala−1 of the peptide make fewer contacts with APPBP2 residues, consistent with the finding that APPBP2 binds to R-x-x-G-x and R-x-x-G-x-x-x C-degrons with similar binding affinities (Fig. 3A).

APPBP2 employs a conserved mode of R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition. (A) Close-up view of the recognition of the R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron by APPBP2, with the C-degron residues highlighted. The APPBP2 residues involved in C-degron recognition are shown as cyan sticks. (B) Close-up view of the recognition of the MRPL28 R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2. The residues are colored in the same way as shown in (A). (C) The degron-bound structures are superimposed on APPBP2. The electrostatic surface of APPBP2 is shown with R-x-x-G-P/C-degron (yellow), R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron (cyan), and R-x-x-G-P-A-A/C-degron (green). The arginine and glycine residues within the R-x-x-G motif are highlighted and shown in stick representation. (D) Proposed bipartite binding mode for the C-terminal R-x-x-G motif by APPBP2.

Recognition of R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2.To understand the substrate selectivity of APPBP2, especially its preference for the residues post glycine in the R-x-x-G motif, we solved the structure of CRL2APPPB2 with the MRPL28 C-degron ending with RASGQ. Similar to other C-degron-bound structures of CRL2 APPBP2, the particles of CRL2APPBP2 with R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron also assemble into dimers and tetramers, which were solved at 3.22 Å and 3.44 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 and Table S2). The overall architectures of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer and tetramer are similar to those observed in other C-degron-bound CRL2APPBP2 structures (SI Appendix, Fig. S11).The last seven residues of the C-degron (−7QKRASGQ−1) are visible and inserted into the previously identified degron-binding pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S7C). In the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 complex, the MRPL28 C-degron interacts with APPBP2 in the same manner as the C-degron of XP_211896 (Fig. 4B), with Gln−1 forming a favorable electrostatic interaction with APPBP2 Glu469. By superimposing all degron-bound structures on APPBP2, we found that the R-x-x-G motif within the three C-degrons adopts the same conformation (Fig. 4C), suggesting that APPBP2 recognizes R-x-x-G/C-degrons in a conserved manner. To study whether APPBP2 utilizes the same surface to bind in a similar manner to all R-x-x-G/C-degrons, we further examined the binding of APPBP2-EB-EC and its degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, to two previously reported R-x-x-G/C-degrons, ASCC3 (-RPRGLR) and peptide 35 (-RNKGK) (9). Binding data showed that unlike WT APPBP2, which binds to the two C-degrons with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.5 μM, neither of the two degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, bound to ASCC3 or peptide 35 (Fig. 3 D and E). Overall, the structural analysis, complemented by mutagenesis and in vitro binding experiments, suggested that APPBP2 uses the same surface to recognize distinct substrates sharing R-x-x-G/C-degrons.

Recognition of R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron by APPBP2.

To understand the substrate selectivity of APPBP2, especially its preference for the residues post glycine in the R-x-x-G motif, we solved the structure of CRL2APPPB2 with the MRPL28 C-degron ending with RASGQ. Similar to other C-degron-bound structures of CRL2 APPBP2, the particles of CRL2APPBP2 with R-x-x-G-Q/C-degron also assemble into dimers and tetramers, which were solved at 3.22 Å and 3.44 Å resolutions, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S10 and Table S2). The overall architectures of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer and tetramer are similar to those observed in other C-degron-bound CRL2APPBP2 structures (SI Appendix, Fig. S11).

The last seven residues of the C-degron (−7QKRASGQ−1) are visible and inserted into the previously identified degron-binding pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S7C). In the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 complex, the MRPL28 C-degron interacts with APPBP2 in the same manner as the C-degron of XP_211896 (Fig. 4B), with Gln−1 forming a favorable electrostatic interaction with APPBP2 Glu469. By superimposing all degron-bound structures on APPBP2, we found that the R-x-x-G motif within the three C-degrons adopts the same conformation (Fig. 4C), suggesting that APPBP2 recognizes R-x-x-G/C-degrons in a conserved manner. To study whether APPBP2 utilizes the same surface to bind in a similar manner to all R-x-x-G/C-degrons, we further examined the binding of APPBP2-EB-EC and its degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, to two previously reported R-x-x-G/C-degrons, ASCC3 (-RPRGLR) and peptide 35 (-RNKGK) (9). Binding data showed that unlike WT APPBP2, which binds to the two C-degrons with KDs in the range of 1.7 to 3.5 μM, neither of the two degron binding mutants, Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R, bound to ASCC3 or peptide 35 (Fig. 3 D and E). Overall, the structural analysis, complemented by mutagenesis and in vitro binding experiments, suggested that APPBP2 uses the same surface to recognize distinct substrates sharing R-x-x-G/C-degrons.

Validation of APPBP2-Mediated Substrate Recognition and Degradation in Cell-Based Assays.To validate the functional role of the C-degron-binding residues in APPBP2, we constructed a series of APPBP2 mutants in a lentiviral expression vector and tested their activity in a cell-based system called Global protein stability (GPS) (31). GPS is a fluorescent-based reporter system that monitors changes in protein stability in live cells. This system is based on a bicistronic lentiviral expression vector that encodes DsRed, serving as an internal expression reference for the lentiviral cassette, and a GFP fusion that is translated from an internal ribosome entry site. In this method, the GFP/DsRed ratio serves to read out the effect of the fusion partner on the stability of GFP (9, 31).For cell-based assays, we first generated HEK293T APPBP2 knockout (KO) cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Then, we transduced the KO cells with lentiviral constructs encoding WT or mutant APPBP2 complementary DNA (cDNA) followed by recovery and a second transduction with GPS peptides (Fig. 5A). As APPBP2 representative substrates, we engineered a few GPS reporters encoding 23mer C-degron peptides of various R-x-x-G motifs with one, two or three C-terminal residues post Gly: GPS-peptide 35, GPS-MRLP28, GPS-XP_211896 (all share the R-x-x-G-x motif), GPS-ASCC3 (R-x-x-G-x-x) (9), and XP_211896(+AA) (R-x-x-G-x-x-x).Fig. 5.GPS assay to validate critical R-x-x-G/C-degron binding residues in APPBP2. (A) Overview of the GPS experiment to investigate the effect of WT and mutant APPBP2 proteins on the stability of GFP-fused C-degrons. (B) Stability analysis of the indicated GFP-fused C-degrons on various genetic backgrounds. The GFP/DsRed ratio was used to indicate the stability of the GFP-fused C-degron and was analyzed by flow cytometry. In each case, GFP-fused degron instability is rescued in cells expressing the WT but not the mutant APPBP2 proteins. Control KO cells (cells transfected with sgRNA targeting AAVSI) expressing GPS substrate served as the reference for substrate instability. (C) The abundance of exogenously expressed APPBP2 protein, WT or the indicated mutants, as assessed by immunoblot using anti-HA antibody. Vinculin antibody was used as a loading control. (D) A proposed model for R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition by the CRL2APPBP2 dimer.In agreement with the solved structures and ITC experiments, the C-degron binding pocket mutants Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R failed to rescue the degradation of all substrates tested (Fig. 5B), although their expression levels were comparable to that of WT APPBP2, as judged by immunoblotting (Fig. 5C). Altogether, the GPS cell-based assay demonstrates the importance of the APPBP2 C-degron binding pocket in R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition in vivo. Overall, a proposed model for the APPBP2-mediated R-x-x-G/C- degron pathway is well supported by the structural biology data and in vivo GPS assay (Fig. 5D).Finally, we investigated the importance of the oligomeric CRL2APPBP2 state for C-degron binding and substrate turnover. Expression of the C54A/H89A APPBP2 mutant (SI Appendix, Fig. S12A), which does not assemble into oligomeric complexes, was still functional in vivo in degrading the substrates (SI Appendix, Fig. S12B), and in vitro, it binds to C-degrons with similar affinity (Fig. 3 D and F and SI Appendix, Table S1) and was able to catalyze substrate polyubiquitination as WT APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S12 C and D). Altogether, these data suggest that the oligomeric state of APPBP2 is not required for the polyubiquitination and subsequent turnover of the R-x-x-G/C-degron-bearing substrate.

Validation of APPBP2-Mediated Substrate Recognition and Degradation in Cell-Based Assays.

To validate the functional role of the C-degron-binding residues in APPBP2, we constructed a series of APPBP2 mutants in a lentiviral expression vector and tested their activity in a cell-based system called Global protein stability (GPS) (31). GPS is a fluorescent-based reporter system that monitors changes in protein stability in live cells. This system is based on a bicistronic lentiviral expression vector that encodes DsRed, serving as an internal expression reference for the lentiviral cassette, and a GFP fusion that is translated from an internal ribosome entry site. In this method, the GFP/DsRed ratio serves to read out the effect of the fusion partner on the stability of GFP (9, 31).

For cell-based assays, we first generated HEK293T APPBP2 knockout (KO) cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Then, we transduced the KO cells with lentiviral constructs encoding WT or mutant APPBP2 complementary DNA (cDNA) followed by recovery and a second transduction with GPS peptides (Fig. 5A). As APPBP2 representative substrates, we engineered a few GPS reporters encoding 23mer C-degron peptides of various R-x-x-G motifs with one, two or three C-terminal residues post Gly: GPS-peptide 35, GPS-MRLP28, GPS-XP_211896 (all share the R-x-x-G-x motif), GPS-ASCC3 (R-x-x-G-x-x) (9), and XP_211896(+AA) (R-x-x-G-x-x-x).

GPS assay to validate critical R-x-x-G/C-degron binding residues in APPBP2. (A) Overview of the GPS experiment to investigate the effect of WT and mutant APPBP2 proteins on the stability of GFP-fused C-degrons. (B) Stability analysis of the indicated GFP-fused C-degrons on various genetic backgrounds. The GFP/DsRed ratio was used to indicate the stability of the GFP-fused C-degron and was analyzed by flow cytometry. In each case, GFP-fused degron instability is rescued in cells expressing the WT but not the mutant APPBP2 proteins. Control KO cells (cells transfected with sgRNA targeting AAVSI) expressing GPS substrate served as the reference for substrate instability. (C) The abundance of exogenously expressed APPBP2 protein, WT or the indicated mutants, as assessed by immunoblot using anti-HA antibody. Vinculin antibody was used as a loading control. (D) A proposed model for R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition by the CRL2APPBP2 dimer.

In agreement with the solved structures and ITC experiments, the C-degron binding pocket mutants Y345A/R437A and E387R/E388R failed to rescue the degradation of all substrates tested (Fig. 5B), although their expression levels were comparable to that of WT APPBP2, as judged by immunoblotting (Fig. 5C). Altogether, the GPS cell-based assay demonstrates the importance of the APPBP2 C-degron binding pocket in R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition in vivo. Overall, a proposed model for the APPBP2-mediated R-x-x-G/C- degron pathway is well supported by the structural biology data and in vivo GPS assay (Fig. 5D).

Finally, we investigated the importance of the oligomeric CRL2APPBP2 state for C-degron binding and substrate turnover. Expression of the C54A/H89A APPBP2 mutant (SI Appendix, Fig. S12A), which does not assemble into oligomeric complexes, was still functional in vivo in degrading the substrates (SI Appendix, Fig. S12B), and in vitro, it binds to C-degrons with similar affinity (Fig. 3 D and F and SI Appendix, Table S1) and was able to catalyze substrate polyubiquitination as WT APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S12 C and D). Altogether, these data suggest that the oligomeric state of APPBP2 is not required for the polyubiquitination and subsequent turnover of the R-x-x-G/C-degron-bearing substrate.

Comparison between Different C-degron Recognition Modes.Several C-degron complexes have been solved, including those of KLHDC2 with Gly/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13A) (17), TRIM7 with Gln/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13B) (23), FEM1B/C with Arg/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19), and DCAF12 with diGlu/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13E) (27), which allows us to compare them with that of APPBP2 with R-x-x-G/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). There are several differences between APPBP2-C-degron and the other E3 ligase/SR-C-degron complexes. First, all degron-binding proteins adopt distinct architectures utilizing Kelch repeats (KLHDC2), the PRY-SPRY domain (TRIM7), Ankyrin repeats (FEM1 proteins), the WD40 domain (DCAF12), or TPR repeats (APPBP2) (SI Appendix, Fig. S13). Second, the R-x-x-G/C-degron is inserted into the deep pocket of APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F), which is equivalent to a dead-end road, whereas in the other C-degron structures, the degron peptides lie in grooves (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 A–E). Third, in contrast with the other C-degrons, the R-x-x-G motif is not strictly located at the extreme C terminus of the C-degron, and APPBP2 displays plasticity in tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of R-x-x-G given enough space in the pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Fourth, Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G/C-degron are recognized by APPBP2 via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions, respectively (Fig. 2H and SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Although FEM1C and FEM1B also utilize the bipartite mechanism to recognize the Arg/C-degron, they possess different substrate binding properties and sequence selectivity (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19).

Comparison between Different C-degron Recognition Modes.

Several C-degron complexes have been solved, including those of KLHDC2 with Gly/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13A) (17), TRIM7 with Gln/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13B) (23), FEM1B/C with Arg/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19), and DCAF12 with diGlu/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13E) (27), which allows us to compare them with that of APPBP2 with R-x-x-G/C-degron (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). There are several differences between APPBP2-C-degron and the other E3 ligase/SR-C-degron complexes. First, all degron-binding proteins adopt distinct architectures utilizing Kelch repeats (KLHDC2), the PRY-SPRY domain (TRIM7), Ankyrin repeats (FEM1 proteins), the WD40 domain (DCAF12), or TPR repeats (APPBP2) (SI Appendix, Fig. S13). Second, the R-x-x-G/C-degron is inserted into the deep pocket of APPBP2 (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F), which is equivalent to a dead-end road, whereas in the other C-degron structures, the degron peptides lie in grooves (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 A–E). Third, in contrast with the other C-degrons, the R-x-x-G motif is not strictly located at the extreme C terminus of the C-degron, and APPBP2 displays plasticity in tolerating 1 to 3 extra residues downstream of R-x-x-G given enough space in the pocket (SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Fourth, Arg and Gly within the R-x-x-G/C-degron are recognized by APPBP2 via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions, respectively (Fig. 2H and SI Appendix, Fig. S13F). Although FEM1C and FEM1B also utilize the bipartite mechanism to recognize the Arg/C-degron, they possess different substrate binding properties and sequence selectivity (SI Appendix, Fig. S13 C and D) (19).

DiscussionIn mammalian cells, the UPS is the major route to remove unwanted, damaged, or regulatory proteins. E3 ligases serve as surveillance system and mediate substrate polyubiquitination and degradation by recognizing defined structures or sequence motifs of substrates (32). Specific N- and C-terminal protein sequences were reported to function as N- and C-degrons, respectively, by recruiting specific E3 ligases (4, 5). CRLs through distinct SRs were recently demonstrated to recognize an arsenal of C-degrons, and mutagenesis approaches combined with structural methods allow the elucidation of the molecular mechanism of CRL substrate selection. Here, we present several structures of assembled CRL2APPBP2 bound with example C-degrons sharing the R-x-x-G motif.Unexpectedly, CRL2APPBP2 adopts a Zn2+-mediated homodimer, and RBX1 further mediates the dimerization of the two dimers to generate tetrameric CRL2APPBP2. SR-mediated CRL dimerization was previously demonstrated for other CRL complexes as a means of recognizing multiple degrons in substrates (33) or facilitating diverse lysine acceptor site utilization (34), overall increasing substrate ubiquitination. However, an APPBP2 mutant that does not assemble into dimers was able to promote substrate ubiquitination and degradation as efficiently as WT APPBP2, suggesting that oligomerization is not required for the turnover of substrates bearing R-x-x-G/C-degrons. We cannot exclude the possibility, however, that the oligomeric state might promote the degradation of non-C-degron-bearing APPBP2 substrates. In addition, we cannot rule out that the oligomeric state represents a partially autoinhibited state, as was recently reported for the CRL2KLHDC2 and CRL4DCAF1 E3 ligases (18, 35).By solving several structures of CRL2APPBP2 bound with different C-degron peptides, we uncovered that arginine and glycine within the R-x-x-G motif, which are recognized by APPBP2 via the bipartite binding mechanism, constitute the main C-degron determinants targeted by APPBP2. Furthermore, the main chain groups of the R-x-x-G motif are rigidified by forming hydrogen bonds with APPBP2 residues in all structures, which disallows any conformational changes on the main chain, thereby accounting for the fact that two spacing residues are strictly found between Arg and Gly in all substrates. Nevertheless, the R-x-x-G motif location in the C terminus is flexible and exhibits plasticity to some extent with respect to its distance from the C-end, as revealed by our in vitro and in vivo assays, with C-degrons ending with R-x-x-G-x (XP_211896 and MRPL28), R-x-x-G-x-x (ASCC3), and R-x-x-G-x-x-x [XP_211896(+AA)]. This finding is consistent with the deep C-degron-binding pocket of APPBP2, which accommodates extra C-terminal residues to avoid steric clashes. The pocket depth is unique with respect to other SR C-degron binding grooves, which are too shallow to tolerate extra C-terminal residues.Another intriguing feature is that the ability of APPBP2 to target substrates ending with R-x-x-G partially overlaps with the specificity of KLHDC2, KLHDC3, and KLHDC10 for C-degrons ending with glycine (9). Indeed, we previously found that CRL2KLHDC2 and CRL2APPBP2 can both control the turnover of substrates ending with −5RXXGG−1, such as PTOV1 (−5RGMGG−1) (9), raising the possibility that the R-x-x-G/C-degron might cooperate with other C-degron pathways to eliminate unwanted proteins. In addition to the R-x-x-G/C-degron pocket, APPBP2 likely has an alternative substrate binding pocket, as shown for other SRs such as FEM1B (15, 19). Very recently, CRL2APPBP2 was found to regulate beige fat metabolism by mediating the degradation of PRDM16 in a ubiquitination-dependent manner (36). However, the C-terminal sequence of PRDM16 (−10SGAFHPINHL−1) does not exhibit any similarity to the R-x-x-G/C-degron. Future studies to identify substrates of APPBP2 will shed light on its substrate scope and hence its physiological significance.Data from the COSMIC database (https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/) indicate that APPBP2 overexpression and mutations are associated with different types of tumors. In addition to the mutations predicted to destabilize the fold of APPBP2, two single mutations, E388K and E469K, occur on the APPBP2-degron binding interface. While Glu388 forms electrostatic interactions with the Arg of the R-x-x-G motif, Glu469 provides polar interactions with the residue downstream of the R-x-x-G motif. Therefore, the two mutations might weaken the degron-binding affinity of APPBP2, thereby impairing the CRL2APPBP2-mediated intricate regulation of protein turnover. Thus, our study not only unveils the mechanisms underlying the assembly of oligomeric CRL2APPBP2 and R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition by APPBP2 but also sheds light on the design of small molecule inhibitors and PROTAC molecules targeting the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase with therapeutic implications.

In mammalian cells, the UPS is the major route to remove unwanted, damaged, or regulatory proteins. E3 ligases serve as surveillance system and mediate substrate polyubiquitination and degradation by recognizing defined structures or sequence motifs of substrates (32). Specific N- and C-terminal protein sequences were reported to function as N- and C-degrons, respectively, by recruiting specific E3 ligases (4, 5). CRLs through distinct SRs were recently demonstrated to recognize an arsenal of C-degrons, and mutagenesis approaches combined with structural methods allow the elucidation of the molecular mechanism of CRL substrate selection. Here, we present several structures of assembled CRL2APPBP2 bound with example C-degrons sharing the R-x-x-G motif.

Unexpectedly, CRL2APPBP2 adopts a Zn2+-mediated homodimer, and RBX1 further mediates the dimerization of the two dimers to generate tetrameric CRL2APPBP2. SR-mediated CRL dimerization was previously demonstrated for other CRL complexes as a means of recognizing multiple degrons in substrates (33) or facilitating diverse lysine acceptor site utilization (34), overall increasing substrate ubiquitination. However, an APPBP2 mutant that does not assemble into dimers was able to promote substrate ubiquitination and degradation as efficiently as WT APPBP2, suggesting that oligomerization is not required for the turnover of substrates bearing R-x-x-G/C-degrons. We cannot exclude the possibility, however, that the oligomeric state might promote the degradation of non-C-degron-bearing APPBP2 substrates. In addition, we cannot rule out that the oligomeric state represents a partially autoinhibited state, as was recently reported for the CRL2KLHDC2 and CRL4DCAF1 E3 ligases (18, 35).

By solving several structures of CRL2APPBP2 bound with different C-degron peptides, we uncovered that arginine and glycine within the R-x-x-G motif, which are recognized by APPBP2 via the bipartite binding mechanism, constitute the main C-degron determinants targeted by APPBP2. Furthermore, the main chain groups of the R-x-x-G motif are rigidified by forming hydrogen bonds with APPBP2 residues in all structures, which disallows any conformational changes on the main chain, thereby accounting for the fact that two spacing residues are strictly found between Arg and Gly in all substrates. Nevertheless, the R-x-x-G motif location in the C terminus is flexible and exhibits plasticity to some extent with respect to its distance from the C-end, as revealed by our in vitro and in vivo assays, with C-degrons ending with R-x-x-G-x (XP_211896 and MRPL28), R-x-x-G-x-x (ASCC3), and R-x-x-G-x-x-x [XP_211896(+AA)]. This finding is consistent with the deep C-degron-binding pocket of APPBP2, which accommodates extra C-terminal residues to avoid steric clashes. The pocket depth is unique with respect to other SR C-degron binding grooves, which are too shallow to tolerate extra C-terminal residues.

Another intriguing feature is that the ability of APPBP2 to target substrates ending with R-x-x-G partially overlaps with the specificity of KLHDC2, KLHDC3, and KLHDC10 for C-degrons ending with glycine (9). Indeed, we previously found that CRL2KLHDC2 and CRL2APPBP2 can both control the turnover of substrates ending with −5RXXGG−1, such as PTOV1 (−5RGMGG−1) (9), raising the possibility that the R-x-x-G/C-degron might cooperate with other C-degron pathways to eliminate unwanted proteins. In addition to the R-x-x-G/C-degron pocket, APPBP2 likely has an alternative substrate binding pocket, as shown for other SRs such as FEM1B (15, 19). Very recently, CRL2APPBP2 was found to regulate beige fat metabolism by mediating the degradation of PRDM16 in a ubiquitination-dependent manner (36). However, the C-terminal sequence of PRDM16 (−10SGAFHPINHL−1) does not exhibit any similarity to the R-x-x-G/C-degron. Future studies to identify substrates of APPBP2 will shed light on its substrate scope and hence its physiological significance.

Data from the COSMIC database (https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/) indicate that APPBP2 overexpression and mutations are associated with different types of tumors. In addition to the mutations predicted to destabilize the fold of APPBP2, two single mutations, E388K and E469K, occur on the APPBP2-degron binding interface. While Glu388 forms electrostatic interactions with the Arg of the R-x-x-G motif, Glu469 provides polar interactions with the residue downstream of the R-x-x-G motif. Therefore, the two mutations might weaken the degron-binding affinity of APPBP2, thereby impairing the CRL2APPBP2-mediated intricate regulation of protein turnover. Thus, our study not only unveils the mechanisms underlying the assembly of oligomeric CRL2APPBP2 and R-x-x-G/C-degron recognition by APPBP2 but also sheds light on the design of small molecule inhibitors and PROTAC molecules targeting the CRL2APPBP2 E3 ligase with therapeutic implications.

Materials and MethodsCloning, Protein Expression, and Purification.APPBP21–584 was amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a modified pET28a vector fused with an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag. Site-specific mutations were performed using two reverse and complementary primers containing the mutation codon and then verified by sequencing. EB1–118 and EC17–112 were amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a pRSFDuet-1 vector. The 16-mer peptides were cloned and inserted into pET28a-SUMO vectors by using overlap extension PCR to obtain the SUMO fusion peptides, in which the peptides were fused with SUMO protein via a (Gly-Gly-Gly-Ser)2 linker. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2.APPBP2 recombinant proteins were coexpressed with EB-EC. A truncated form of CUL2 (CUL2Δ: Δ117-134) was coexpressed with RBX1 in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) (a gift from Dr. Xing Liu at Purdue University). Cells were grown in LB medium at 37 °C until the optical density (OD600) reached ~0.8. Protein expression was induced with 0.2 mM β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside for 20 h at 16 °C. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 3,600 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 400 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The mutated APPBP2-EB-EC complex containing APPBP2 mutant proteins was purified as the WT complex. The primers used for generating APPBP2 mutants are listed in SI Appendix, Table S3.To obtain the APPBP2-EB-EC complex bound with the C-degron peptide, the APPBP2-EB-EC complex and SUMO infusion peptides were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then mixed and dialyzed together in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 7.5. Tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease and SUMO protease were added to remove the N-terminal His-tag and SUMO-tag. Then, the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare).CUL2Δ·RBX1 recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5.In Vitro Neddylation Assay.The CUL2Δ-RBX1 complex was neddylated as described (28) by mixing 12 µM CUL2Δ-RBX1, 2 μM UBC12, 0.2 µM APPBP1-UBA3, and 25 µM NEDD8 in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM adenosine triphosphate (ATP). NEDD8 was added at room temperature. Neddylation was quenched after 10 min by adding 10 mM DTT to suppress the activity of APPBP1-UBA3 and UBC12. After microcentrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, NEDD8–CUL2Δ-RBX1 was purified using a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT.Multiangle SLS.The molecular mass analysis for the WT CRLAPPBP2 complex, the mutated CRLAPPBP2 complex containing the APPBP2 C54A/H89A mutant, the WT APPBP2-EB-EC complex and the APPBP2(C54A/H89A)-EB-EC complex was performed on an AKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) coupled with a DAWN HELEOS 8+ instrument (Wyatt Technology). One hundred microliters of protein samples (4 mg/mL) was loaded into a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) preequilibrated by a buffer composed of 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT. The data were analyzed with ASTRA software (Wyatt).Cryo-EM Sample Preparation and Data Collection.Cryo-EM samples were generated by mixing two complexes, APPBP2-EB-EC-Peptide and NEDD8-CUL2Δ·RBX1, in a 1:1 ratio. The mixture was incubated at 4 °C for at least 30 min and subjected to size-exclusion chromatography using a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5. Then, the protein complex was concentrated to 6.0 mg/mL and added to 0.02% octyl-β-glucoside. Next, 3 to 4 μL of freshly assembled protein complex was applied onto glow-discharged 200-mesh R2/1 Quantifoil copper grids. The grids were blotted for 3.5 s in 100% humidity at 4 °C with no blotting offset and rapidly frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific).The CRL2APPBP2 grids were screened using a Talos Arctica cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 200 kV. Good grids were then imaged in a Titan Krios cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Gatan K3 Summit direct electron detector, where each image was composed of 30 individual frames with an exposure time of 2 s and a dose rate of 31.5 electrons per second per Å2. For all cryo-EM samples, micrographs were recorded with a pixel size of 0.82 Å, and the defocus range was set from −1.5 to −2.9 μm.Image Processing.Data processing was performed by using cyroSPARC(37). A patch motion correction algorithm was used for motion correction of the micrographs. Patch CTF estimation was used to estimate the CTF parameters. For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, 945,452 particles were automatically picked and extracted from the full dataset of 4,570 movie stacks. After two-dimensional (2D) classifications, 788,398 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 31.7% and 33.9% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 258,495 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 tetramer at a resolution of 3.26 Å. The particles representing dimeric CRL2APPBP2 were used for template picking to extract more particles. After 2D classification and several rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 273,296 particles were used for nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 dimer at a resolution of 3.27 Å.For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the C-degron of the XP_211896 variant (+AA), template picking was performed to extract 1,079,339 particles from the full dataset of 4,164 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 572,013 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 30.1% and 25.8% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 143,118 particles representing dimeric states were subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer at a resolution of 3.30 Å. A total of 135,850 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) tetramer at a resolution of 3.54 Å.For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the MRPL28 C-degron, template picking was performed to extract 870,393 particles from the full dataset of 3845 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 461,650 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 36.6% and 26.6% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 156,258 particles representing dimeric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer at a resolution of 3.22 Å. A total of 113,976 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 tetramer at a resolution of 3.44 Å.Model Building and Refinement.The sharpened maps generated by cryoSPARC were used for model building. The atomic models of the human CUL2 N-terminal fragment, EB, EC, and APPBP2 were predicted using AlphaFold2 (38). For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer, initial templates were generated in Coot (39) by fitting the predicted protein models into the density map and manually adjusting them to remove the residues with missing densities. Two short fragments of CUL2, two EB, two EC, and two APPBP2 molecules were visible in the cryo-EM structure. The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, the two short fragments of CUL2 (CUL2A and CUL2B), four EBA-D, four ECA-D, and four APPBP2 (APPBP2A-D) were fitted into the map, and then, the crystal structure of CUL2-RBX1 [protein data bank (PDB): 5N4 W] was used to build CUL2A-RBX1A and CUL2C-RBX1C by Coot (39). The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. The manually refined models were used as the starting point and were further refined in phenix by using real-space refinement (40). The models were analyzed by MolProbity in Phenix (40) to show the quality. The refinement statistics are summarized in Supplementary SI Appendix, Table S1. PyMOL (https://pymol.org/) and UCSF ChimeraX (41) were used for figure preparation.ITC.To obtain SUMO-fused peptides for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then loaded into a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides used in the ITC experiments are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2. To obtain APPBP2-EB-EC for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in the same buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. ITC assays were carried out on a PEAQ-ITC calorimeter at 25 °C. ITC experiments were performed by titrating 2 μL of SUMO fusion peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into cells containing 30 to 50 μM proteins, with a spacing time of 120 s and a reference power of 5 μCal/s. Control experiments were performed by titrating peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into buffer and were subtracted during analysis. Binding isotherms were plotted, analyzed, and fitted based on a one-site binding model by PEAQ-ITC software (Malvern Panalytical) and Origin Software (MicroCal Inc.).In Vitro Ubiquitination Assays.The last 16 amino acids of MRPL28 (-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ) were fused downstream of the His-FLAG-GFP tag in the PET28a vector and then expressed and purified to obtain pure substrate protein. Purified UBA1 (150 nM), UBE2R1 (1 μM), neddylated CUL2-RBX1 (1 μM), APPBP2-EB-EC (1 μM), ubiquitin (30 μM), and His-FLAG-GFP-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ (1 μM) were mixed in a reaction buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, and 1 mM DTT. The reaction was carried out in a volume of 40 μL at 37 °C for 0 to 60 min and then resolved by sodium dodecyl–sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). Ubiquitinated products were detected by immunoblotting. The ubiquitination assays were performed twice with similar results. The ITC raw data and fitting curves are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S14, with the thermodynamic parameters and N values provided in SI Appendix, Table S1.Mammalian Expression Plasmids.To express APPBP2 in mammalian cells, plasmid vectors encoding cDNAs for APPBP2 were obtained from the Ultimate ORF Clone collection (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subcloned and inserted into the lentiviral pHAGE-Flag-HA Gateway Destination vector via an LR recombination reaction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mutations of key residues in the degron binding pocket of APPBP2 were generated by PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange Lightning kit (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The primer sets used to generate APPBP2 mutants for expression in mammalian cells are listed in SI Appendix, Table S4.For individual CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene disruption experiments, the lentiCRISPR v2 vector was used (Addgene #52961). Oligonucleotides encoding the top and bottom strands of the sgRNAs were synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies), annealed and cloned, and inserted into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector as described (9). The nucleotide sequences of the sgRNAs used were as follows:sg-AAVSI: GGGGCCACTAGGGACAGGATsg-APPBP2: GATGTAGTTGTCCACGACAGCell Lines.HEK293T (ATCC CRL-3216) cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), 100 units/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Transfection and Lentivirus Production.Lentiviral stocks were generated through the transfection of HEK293T cells with the lentiviral transfer vector plus plasmids encoding Gag-Pol, Rev, Tat, and VSV-G using PolyJet in vitro DNA Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) as recommended by the manufacturer. Lentiviral supernatants were collected 48 h later, passed through a 0.45-mm filter, and applied to target cells in the presence of 8 mg/mL hexadimethrine bromide (Polybrene).Generation of CRISPR/Cas9 KO Cells.HEK293T cells were transfected with sgRNAs targeting AAVSI or APPBP2 as explained before to generate control or APPBP2 KO cells, respectively. Forty-eight hours following transfection, cells were selected with puromycin for 48 h to eliminate nontransfected cells. KO efficiency was analyzed 7 d posttransfection using functional GPS assays with known APPBP2 substrates as described previously (9).GPS Assay.The GPS assay using GFP-fused C-degron reporter cell lines was described previously (9). Briefly, peptide 35 (GIPLRMNSLFRKRNKGK*) and the last 23 amino acids of MRPL28 (ELIQQLQQQALSEPAVVQKRASGQ*), XP_211896 (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGP*), ASCC3 (RRLDGKEEDEKMSRASDRFRGLR*), and XP_211896 (+AA), a variant that includes two additional terminal Ala residues (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGPAA*), were amplified by PCR from the C23mer peptidome library (9) and cloned and inserted into the GPS vector downstream of GFP using the BstBI and XhoI sites. To test the activity of APPBP2 mutants using the GPS assay, lentiviral vectors encoding WT or mutant versions of APPBP2 were packaged and introduced into control or APPBP2 KO HEK293T cells, followed by selection with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for 3 d to generate rescue cells stably expressing the APPBP2 proteins. APPBP2 stable cells were then used in a second round of transduction with the GPS APPBP2 substrate reporters. The GPS reporters were packaged and used to transduce rescue stable cells followed by blasticidin (20 μg/mL) selection for 3 d. Flow cytometry was used to record the fluorescence signals of GFP and DsRed from cells transduced with the GPS reporters. Analysis of the GFP/DsRed ratio was performed using FlowJo.Western Blotting Analyses.Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM NaPO4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA pH 8, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% deoxycholic acid sodium salt, and 0.1% SDS) supplemented with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 25 min at 4 °C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C), and nuclear pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer, sonicated briefly, and reclarified. The protein concentration was determined by a standard Bradford assay (Bio-Rad #500-0006), a linear bovine serum albumin calibration curve, and an Epoch microplate spectrophotometer. Proteins were subsequently resolved by SDS–PAGE (Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gels, Bio-Rad) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Trans-Blot Turbo System, Bio-Rad), which was then blocked in 10% nonfat dry milk in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T). The membrane was incubated with primary antibody (mouse anti-Vinculin (Sigma–Aldrich, Cat#V9131); rabbit anti-HA, (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#3724) overnight at 4 °C, and then, following three washes with PBS-T, Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody [goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#111-035-003); goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#115-035-003)] was added for 1 h at room temperature. Following an additional three washes in PBS-T, reactive bands were visualized using SuperSignal West Femtochemiluminescence substrate (Pierce; #34095) or EZ-ECL (Biological Industries; #20-500-171) for 5 min. Reactive bands were visualized using ImageQuant TL software v8.2 on an Amersham Imager 680 (Cytiva).Flow Cytometry.HEK293T cells were detached with trypsin, washed once with PBS, and then analyzed on an LSRFortessa instrument (Becton Dickinson) or CytoFLEX (Beckman Coulter), and the resulting data were analyzed using FlowJo.

Materials and Methods

Cloning, Protein Expression, and Purification.APPBP21–584 was amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a modified pET28a vector fused with an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag. Site-specific mutations were performed using two reverse and complementary primers containing the mutation codon and then verified by sequencing. EB1–118 and EC17–112 were amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a pRSFDuet-1 vector. The 16-mer peptides were cloned and inserted into pET28a-SUMO vectors by using overlap extension PCR to obtain the SUMO fusion peptides, in which the peptides were fused with SUMO protein via a (Gly-Gly-Gly-Ser)2 linker. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2.APPBP2 recombinant proteins were coexpressed with EB-EC. A truncated form of CUL2 (CUL2Δ: Δ117-134) was coexpressed with RBX1 in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) (a gift from Dr. Xing Liu at Purdue University). Cells were grown in LB medium at 37 °C until the optical density (OD600) reached ~0.8. Protein expression was induced with 0.2 mM β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside for 20 h at 16 °C. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 3,600 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 400 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The mutated APPBP2-EB-EC complex containing APPBP2 mutant proteins was purified as the WT complex. The primers used for generating APPBP2 mutants are listed in SI Appendix, Table S3.To obtain the APPBP2-EB-EC complex bound with the C-degron peptide, the APPBP2-EB-EC complex and SUMO infusion peptides were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then mixed and dialyzed together in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 7.5. Tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease and SUMO protease were added to remove the N-terminal His-tag and SUMO-tag. Then, the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare).CUL2Δ·RBX1 recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5.

Cloning, Protein Expression, and Purification.

APPBP21–584 was amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a modified pET28a vector fused with an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag. Site-specific mutations were performed using two reverse and complementary primers containing the mutation codon and then verified by sequencing. EB1–118 and EC17–112 were amplified by PCR from a cDNA library and cloned and inserted into a pRSFDuet-1 vector. The 16-mer peptides were cloned and inserted into pET28a-SUMO vectors by using overlap extension PCR to obtain the SUMO fusion peptides, in which the peptides were fused with SUMO protein via a (Gly-Gly-Gly-Ser)2 linker. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2.

APPBP2 recombinant proteins were coexpressed with EB-EC. A truncated form of CUL2 (CUL2Δ: Δ117-134) was coexpressed with RBX1 in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) (a gift from Dr. Xing Liu at Purdue University). Cells were grown in LB medium at 37 °C until the optical density (OD600) reached ~0.8. Protein expression was induced with 0.2 mM β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside for 20 h at 16 °C. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 3,600 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 400 mM NaCl and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The mutated APPBP2-EB-EC complex containing APPBP2 mutant proteins was purified as the WT complex. The primers used for generating APPBP2 mutants are listed in SI Appendix, Table S3.

To obtain the APPBP2-EB-EC complex bound with the C-degron peptide, the APPBP2-EB-EC complex and SUMO infusion peptides were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then mixed and dialyzed together in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH 7.5. Tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease and SUMO protease were added to remove the N-terminal His-tag and SUMO-tag. Then, the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare).

CUL2Δ·RBX1 recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5.

In Vitro Neddylation Assay.The CUL2Δ-RBX1 complex was neddylated as described (28) by mixing 12 µM CUL2Δ-RBX1, 2 μM UBC12, 0.2 µM APPBP1-UBA3, and 25 µM NEDD8 in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM adenosine triphosphate (ATP). NEDD8 was added at room temperature. Neddylation was quenched after 10 min by adding 10 mM DTT to suppress the activity of APPBP1-UBA3 and UBC12. After microcentrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, NEDD8–CUL2Δ-RBX1 was purified using a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT.

In Vitro Neddylation Assay.

The CUL2Δ-RBX1 complex was neddylated as described (28) by mixing 12 µM CUL2Δ-RBX1, 2 μM UBC12, 0.2 µM APPBP1-UBA3, and 25 µM NEDD8 in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM adenosine triphosphate (ATP). NEDD8 was added at room temperature. Neddylation was quenched after 10 min by adding 10 mM DTT to suppress the activity of APPBP1-UBA3 and UBC12. After microcentrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, NEDD8–CUL2Δ-RBX1 was purified using a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT.

Multiangle SLS.The molecular mass analysis for the WT CRLAPPBP2 complex, the mutated CRLAPPBP2 complex containing the APPBP2 C54A/H89A mutant, the WT APPBP2-EB-EC complex and the APPBP2(C54A/H89A)-EB-EC complex was performed on an AKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) coupled with a DAWN HELEOS 8+ instrument (Wyatt Technology). One hundred microliters of protein samples (4 mg/mL) was loaded into a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) preequilibrated by a buffer composed of 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT. The data were analyzed with ASTRA software (Wyatt).

Multiangle SLS.

The molecular mass analysis for the WT CRLAPPBP2 complex, the mutated CRLAPPBP2 complex containing the APPBP2 C54A/H89A mutant, the WT APPBP2-EB-EC complex and the APPBP2(C54A/H89A)-EB-EC complex was performed on an AKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) coupled with a DAWN HELEOS 8+ instrument (Wyatt Technology). One hundred microliters of protein samples (4 mg/mL) was loaded into a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) preequilibrated by a buffer composed of 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT. The data were analyzed with ASTRA software (Wyatt).

Cryo-EM Sample Preparation and Data Collection.Cryo-EM samples were generated by mixing two complexes, APPBP2-EB-EC-Peptide and NEDD8-CUL2Δ·RBX1, in a 1:1 ratio. The mixture was incubated at 4 °C for at least 30 min and subjected to size-exclusion chromatography using a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5. Then, the protein complex was concentrated to 6.0 mg/mL and added to 0.02% octyl-β-glucoside. Next, 3 to 4 μL of freshly assembled protein complex was applied onto glow-discharged 200-mesh R2/1 Quantifoil copper grids. The grids were blotted for 3.5 s in 100% humidity at 4 °C with no blotting offset and rapidly frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific).The CRL2APPBP2 grids were screened using a Talos Arctica cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 200 kV. Good grids were then imaged in a Titan Krios cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Gatan K3 Summit direct electron detector, where each image was composed of 30 individual frames with an exposure time of 2 s and a dose rate of 31.5 electrons per second per Å2. For all cryo-EM samples, micrographs were recorded with a pixel size of 0.82 Å, and the defocus range was set from −1.5 to −2.9 μm.

Cryo-EM Sample Preparation and Data Collection.

Cryo-EM samples were generated by mixing two complexes, APPBP2-EB-EC-Peptide and NEDD8-CUL2Δ·RBX1, in a 1:1 ratio. The mixture was incubated at 4 °C for at least 30 min and subjected to size-exclusion chromatography using a Superose 6 Increase 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5. Then, the protein complex was concentrated to 6.0 mg/mL and added to 0.02% octyl-β-glucoside. Next, 3 to 4 μL of freshly assembled protein complex was applied onto glow-discharged 200-mesh R2/1 Quantifoil copper grids. The grids were blotted for 3.5 s in 100% humidity at 4 °C with no blotting offset and rapidly frozen in liquid ethane using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

The CRL2APPBP2 grids were screened using a Talos Arctica cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 200 kV. Good grids were then imaged in a Titan Krios cryoelectron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Gatan K3 Summit direct electron detector, where each image was composed of 30 individual frames with an exposure time of 2 s and a dose rate of 31.5 electrons per second per Å2. For all cryo-EM samples, micrographs were recorded with a pixel size of 0.82 Å, and the defocus range was set from −1.5 to −2.9 μm.

Image Processing.Data processing was performed by using cyroSPARC(37). A patch motion correction algorithm was used for motion correction of the micrographs. Patch CTF estimation was used to estimate the CTF parameters. For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, 945,452 particles were automatically picked and extracted from the full dataset of 4,570 movie stacks. After two-dimensional (2D) classifications, 788,398 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 31.7% and 33.9% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 258,495 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 tetramer at a resolution of 3.26 Å. The particles representing dimeric CRL2APPBP2 were used for template picking to extract more particles. After 2D classification and several rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 273,296 particles were used for nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 dimer at a resolution of 3.27 Å.For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the C-degron of the XP_211896 variant (+AA), template picking was performed to extract 1,079,339 particles from the full dataset of 4,164 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 572,013 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 30.1% and 25.8% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 143,118 particles representing dimeric states were subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer at a resolution of 3.30 Å. A total of 135,850 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) tetramer at a resolution of 3.54 Å.For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the MRPL28 C-degron, template picking was performed to extract 870,393 particles from the full dataset of 3845 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 461,650 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 36.6% and 26.6% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 156,258 particles representing dimeric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer at a resolution of 3.22 Å. A total of 113,976 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 tetramer at a resolution of 3.44 Å.

Image Processing.

Data processing was performed by using cyroSPARC(37). A patch motion correction algorithm was used for motion correction of the micrographs. Patch CTF estimation was used to estimate the CTF parameters. For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the XP_211896 C-degron, 945,452 particles were automatically picked and extracted from the full dataset of 4,570 movie stacks. After two-dimensional (2D) classifications, 788,398 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 31.7% and 33.9% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 258,495 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 tetramer at a resolution of 3.26 Å. The particles representing dimeric CRL2APPBP2 were used for template picking to extract more particles. After 2D classification and several rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 273,296 particles were used for nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896 dimer at a resolution of 3.27 Å.

For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the C-degron of the XP_211896 variant (+AA), template picking was performed to extract 1,079,339 particles from the full dataset of 4,164 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 572,013 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 30.1% and 25.8% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 143,118 particles representing dimeric states were subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) dimer at a resolution of 3.30 Å. A total of 135,850 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-XP_211896(+AA) tetramer at a resolution of 3.54 Å.

For the dataset of CRL2APPBP2 bound with the MRPL28 C-degron, template picking was performed to extract 870,393 particles from the full dataset of 3845 movie stacks. After 2D classifications, 461,650 particles were selected for ab initio reconstruction. A total of 36.6% and 26.6% of the total particles represent dimeric and tetrameric states, respectively. After iterative rounds of heterogeneous refinement, a total of 156,258 particles representing dimeric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 dimer at a resolution of 3.22 Å. A total of 113,976 particles representing tetrameric states were further subjected to nonuniform refinement with C2 symmetry imposed, yielding a reconstruction of the CRL2APPBP2-MRPL28 tetramer at a resolution of 3.44 Å.

Model Building and Refinement.The sharpened maps generated by cryoSPARC were used for model building. The atomic models of the human CUL2 N-terminal fragment, EB, EC, and APPBP2 were predicted using AlphaFold2 (38). For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer, initial templates were generated in Coot (39) by fitting the predicted protein models into the density map and manually adjusting them to remove the residues with missing densities. Two short fragments of CUL2, two EB, two EC, and two APPBP2 molecules were visible in the cryo-EM structure. The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, the two short fragments of CUL2 (CUL2A and CUL2B), four EBA-D, four ECA-D, and four APPBP2 (APPBP2A-D) were fitted into the map, and then, the crystal structure of CUL2-RBX1 [protein data bank (PDB): 5N4 W] was used to build CUL2A-RBX1A and CUL2C-RBX1C by Coot (39). The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. The manually refined models were used as the starting point and were further refined in phenix by using real-space refinement (40). The models were analyzed by MolProbity in Phenix (40) to show the quality. The refinement statistics are summarized in Supplementary SI Appendix, Table S1. PyMOL (https://pymol.org/) and UCSF ChimeraX (41) were used for figure preparation.

Model Building and Refinement.

The sharpened maps generated by cryoSPARC were used for model building. The atomic models of the human CUL2 N-terminal fragment, EB, EC, and APPBP2 were predicted using AlphaFold2 (38). For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 dimer, initial templates were generated in Coot (39) by fitting the predicted protein models into the density map and manually adjusting them to remove the residues with missing densities. Two short fragments of CUL2, two EB, two EC, and two APPBP2 molecules were visible in the cryo-EM structure. The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. For modeling of the CRL2APPBP2 tetramer, the two short fragments of CUL2 (CUL2A and CUL2B), four EBA-D, four ECA-D, and four APPBP2 (APPBP2A-D) were fitted into the map, and then, the crystal structure of CUL2-RBX1 [protein data bank (PDB): 5N4 W] was used to build CUL2A-RBX1A and CUL2C-RBX1C by Coot (39). The C-degron peptides were fitted into the map after all CRL2APPBP2 subunits were built. The manually refined models were used as the starting point and were further refined in phenix by using real-space refinement (40). The models were analyzed by MolProbity in Phenix (40) to show the quality. The refinement statistics are summarized in Supplementary SI Appendix, Table S1. PyMOL (https://pymol.org/) and UCSF ChimeraX (41) were used for figure preparation.

ITC.To obtain SUMO-fused peptides for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then loaded into a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides used in the ITC experiments are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2. To obtain APPBP2-EB-EC for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in the same buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. ITC assays were carried out on a PEAQ-ITC calorimeter at 25 °C. ITC experiments were performed by titrating 2 μL of SUMO fusion peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into cells containing 30 to 50 μM proteins, with a spacing time of 120 s and a reference power of 5 μCal/s. Control experiments were performed by titrating peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into buffer and were subtracted during analysis. Binding isotherms were plotted, analyzed, and fitted based on a one-site binding model by PEAQ-ITC software (Malvern Panalytical) and Origin Software (MicroCal Inc.).

To obtain SUMO-fused peptides for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare) and then loaded into a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in a buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. The sequences of the SUMO fusion peptides used in the ITC experiments are summarized in SI Appendix, Table S2. To obtain APPBP2-EB-EC for the ITC assay, recombinant proteins were purified first by Ni-NTA (GE Healthcare). TEV protease was added to remove the N-terminal tag, and the proteins were further purified by a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare) in the same buffer containing 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. ITC assays were carried out on a PEAQ-ITC calorimeter at 25 °C. ITC experiments were performed by titrating 2 μL of SUMO fusion peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into cells containing 30 to 50 μM proteins, with a spacing time of 120 s and a reference power of 5 μCal/s. Control experiments were performed by titrating peptides (0.5 to 1 mM) into buffer and were subtracted during analysis. Binding isotherms were plotted, analyzed, and fitted based on a one-site binding model by PEAQ-ITC software (Malvern Panalytical) and Origin Software (MicroCal Inc.).

In Vitro Ubiquitination Assays.The last 16 amino acids of MRPL28 (-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ) were fused downstream of the His-FLAG-GFP tag in the PET28a vector and then expressed and purified to obtain pure substrate protein. Purified UBA1 (150 nM), UBE2R1 (1 μM), neddylated CUL2-RBX1 (1 μM), APPBP2-EB-EC (1 μM), ubiquitin (30 μM), and His-FLAG-GFP-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ (1 μM) were mixed in a reaction buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, and 1 mM DTT. The reaction was carried out in a volume of 40 μL at 37 °C for 0 to 60 min and then resolved by sodium dodecyl–sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). Ubiquitinated products were detected by immunoblotting. The ubiquitination assays were performed twice with similar results. The ITC raw data and fitting curves are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S14, with the thermodynamic parameters and N values provided in SI Appendix, Table S1.

In Vitro Ubiquitination Assays.

The last 16 amino acids of MRPL28 (-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ) were fused downstream of the His-FLAG-GFP tag in the PET28a vector and then expressed and purified to obtain pure substrate protein. Purified UBA1 (150 nM), UBE2R1 (1 μM), neddylated CUL2-RBX1 (1 μM), APPBP2-EB-EC (1 μM), ubiquitin (30 μM), and His-FLAG-GFP-QALSEPAVVQKRASGQ (1 μM) were mixed in a reaction buffer containing 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ATP, and 1 mM DTT. The reaction was carried out in a volume of 40 μL at 37 °C for 0 to 60 min and then resolved by sodium dodecyl–sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). Ubiquitinated products were detected by immunoblotting. The ubiquitination assays were performed twice with similar results. The ITC raw data and fitting curves are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S14, with the thermodynamic parameters and N values provided in SI Appendix, Table S1.

Mammalian Expression Plasmids.To express APPBP2 in mammalian cells, plasmid vectors encoding cDNAs for APPBP2 were obtained from the Ultimate ORF Clone collection (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subcloned and inserted into the lentiviral pHAGE-Flag-HA Gateway Destination vector via an LR recombination reaction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mutations of key residues in the degron binding pocket of APPBP2 were generated by PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange Lightning kit (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The primer sets used to generate APPBP2 mutants for expression in mammalian cells are listed in SI Appendix, Table S4.For individual CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene disruption experiments, the lentiCRISPR v2 vector was used (Addgene #52961). Oligonucleotides encoding the top and bottom strands of the sgRNAs were synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies), annealed and cloned, and inserted into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector as described (9). The nucleotide sequences of the sgRNAs used were as follows:sg-AAVSI: GGGGCCACTAGGGACAGGATsg-APPBP2: GATGTAGTTGTCCACGACAG

Mammalian Expression Plasmids.

To express APPBP2 in mammalian cells, plasmid vectors encoding cDNAs for APPBP2 were obtained from the Ultimate ORF Clone collection (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subcloned and inserted into the lentiviral pHAGE-Flag-HA Gateway Destination vector via an LR recombination reaction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mutations of key residues in the degron binding pocket of APPBP2 were generated by PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis using the QuikChange Lightning kit (Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The primer sets used to generate APPBP2 mutants for expression in mammalian cells are listed in SI Appendix, Table S4.

For individual CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene disruption experiments, the lentiCRISPR v2 vector was used (Addgene #52961). Oligonucleotides encoding the top and bottom strands of the sgRNAs were synthesized (Integrated DNA Technologies), annealed and cloned, and inserted into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector as described (9). The nucleotide sequences of the sgRNAs used were as follows:sg-AAVSI: GGGGCCACTAGGGACAGGATsg-APPBP2: GATGTAGTTGTCCACGACAG

sg-AAVSI: GGGGCCACTAGGGACAGGAT

sg-APPBP2: GATGTAGTTGTCCACGACAG

Cell Lines.HEK293T (ATCC CRL-3216) cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), 100 units/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Cell Lines.

HEK293T (ATCC CRL-3216) cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), 100 units/ml penicillin, and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

Transfection and Lentivirus Production.Lentiviral stocks were generated through the transfection of HEK293T cells with the lentiviral transfer vector plus plasmids encoding Gag-Pol, Rev, Tat, and VSV-G using PolyJet in vitro DNA Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) as recommended by the manufacturer. Lentiviral supernatants were collected 48 h later, passed through a 0.45-mm filter, and applied to target cells in the presence of 8 mg/mL hexadimethrine bromide (Polybrene).

Transfection and Lentivirus Production.

Lentiviral stocks were generated through the transfection of HEK293T cells with the lentiviral transfer vector plus plasmids encoding Gag-Pol, Rev, Tat, and VSV-G using PolyJet in vitro DNA Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) as recommended by the manufacturer. Lentiviral supernatants were collected 48 h later, passed through a 0.45-mm filter, and applied to target cells in the presence of 8 mg/mL hexadimethrine bromide (Polybrene).

Generation of CRISPR/Cas9 KO Cells.HEK293T cells were transfected with sgRNAs targeting AAVSI or APPBP2 as explained before to generate control or APPBP2 KO cells, respectively. Forty-eight hours following transfection, cells were selected with puromycin for 48 h to eliminate nontransfected cells. KO efficiency was analyzed 7 d posttransfection using functional GPS assays with known APPBP2 substrates as described previously (9).

Generation of CRISPR/Cas9 KO Cells.

HEK293T cells were transfected with sgRNAs targeting AAVSI or APPBP2 as explained before to generate control or APPBP2 KO cells, respectively. Forty-eight hours following transfection, cells were selected with puromycin for 48 h to eliminate nontransfected cells. KO efficiency was analyzed 7 d posttransfection using functional GPS assays with known APPBP2 substrates as described previously (9).

GPS Assay.The GPS assay using GFP-fused C-degron reporter cell lines was described previously (9). Briefly, peptide 35 (GIPLRMNSLFRKRNKGK*) and the last 23 amino acids of MRPL28 (ELIQQLQQQALSEPAVVQKRASGQ*), XP_211896 (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGP*), ASCC3 (RRLDGKEEDEKMSRASDRFRGLR*), and XP_211896 (+AA), a variant that includes two additional terminal Ala residues (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGPAA*), were amplified by PCR from the C23mer peptidome library (9) and cloned and inserted into the GPS vector downstream of GFP using the BstBI and XhoI sites. To test the activity of APPBP2 mutants using the GPS assay, lentiviral vectors encoding WT or mutant versions of APPBP2 were packaged and introduced into control or APPBP2 KO HEK293T cells, followed by selection with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for 3 d to generate rescue cells stably expressing the APPBP2 proteins. APPBP2 stable cells were then used in a second round of transduction with the GPS APPBP2 substrate reporters. The GPS reporters were packaged and used to transduce rescue stable cells followed by blasticidin (20 μg/mL) selection for 3 d. Flow cytometry was used to record the fluorescence signals of GFP and DsRed from cells transduced with the GPS reporters. Analysis of the GFP/DsRed ratio was performed using FlowJo.

The GPS assay using GFP-fused C-degron reporter cell lines was described previously (9). Briefly, peptide 35 (GIPLRMNSLFRKRNKGK*) and the last 23 amino acids of MRPL28 (ELIQQLQQQALSEPAVVQKRASGQ*), XP_211896 (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGP*), ASCC3 (RRLDGKEEDEKMSRASDRFRGLR*), and XP_211896 (+AA), a variant that includes two additional terminal Ala residues (QPVPFPLTVPTLTRGRLTRNKGPAA*), were amplified by PCR from the C23mer peptidome library (9) and cloned and inserted into the GPS vector downstream of GFP using the BstBI and XhoI sites. To test the activity of APPBP2 mutants using the GPS assay, lentiviral vectors encoding WT or mutant versions of APPBP2 were packaged and introduced into control or APPBP2 KO HEK293T cells, followed by selection with puromycin (1 μg/mL) for 3 d to generate rescue cells stably expressing the APPBP2 proteins. APPBP2 stable cells were then used in a second round of transduction with the GPS APPBP2 substrate reporters. The GPS reporters were packaged and used to transduce rescue stable cells followed by blasticidin (20 μg/mL) selection for 3 d. Flow cytometry was used to record the fluorescence signals of GFP and DsRed from cells transduced with the GPS reporters. Analysis of the GFP/DsRed ratio was performed using FlowJo.

Western Blotting Analyses.Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM NaPO4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA pH 8, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% deoxycholic acid sodium salt, and 0.1% SDS) supplemented with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 25 min at 4 °C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C), and nuclear pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer, sonicated briefly, and reclarified. The protein concentration was determined by a standard Bradford assay (Bio-Rad #500-0006), a linear bovine serum albumin calibration curve, and an Epoch microplate spectrophotometer. Proteins were subsequently resolved by SDS–PAGE (Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gels, Bio-Rad) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Trans-Blot Turbo System, Bio-Rad), which was then blocked in 10% nonfat dry milk in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T). The membrane was incubated with primary antibody (mouse anti-Vinculin (Sigma–Aldrich, Cat#V9131); rabbit anti-HA, (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#3724) overnight at 4 °C, and then, following three washes with PBS-T, Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody [goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#111-035-003); goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#115-035-003)] was added for 1 h at room temperature. Following an additional three washes in PBS-T, reactive bands were visualized using SuperSignal West Femtochemiluminescence substrate (Pierce; #34095) or EZ-ECL (Biological Industries; #20-500-171) for 5 min. Reactive bands were visualized using ImageQuant TL software v8.2 on an Amersham Imager 680 (Cytiva).

Western Blotting Analyses.

Cells were lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM NaPO4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA pH 8, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% deoxycholic acid sodium salt, and 0.1% SDS) supplemented with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 25 min at 4 °C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C), and nuclear pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer, sonicated briefly, and reclarified. The protein concentration was determined by a standard Bradford assay (Bio-Rad #500-0006), a linear bovine serum albumin calibration curve, and an Epoch microplate spectrophotometer. Proteins were subsequently resolved by SDS–PAGE (Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gels, Bio-Rad) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Trans-Blot Turbo System, Bio-Rad), which was then blocked in 10% nonfat dry milk in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + 0.1% Tween-20 (PBS-T). The membrane was incubated with primary antibody (mouse anti-Vinculin (Sigma–Aldrich, Cat#V9131); rabbit anti-HA, (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#3724) overnight at 4 °C, and then, following three washes with PBS-T, Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody [goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#111-035-003); goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) HRP (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs, Cat#115-035-003)] was added for 1 h at room temperature. Following an additional three washes in PBS-T, reactive bands were visualized using SuperSignal West Femtochemiluminescence substrate (Pierce; #34095) or EZ-ECL (Biological Industries; #20-500-171) for 5 min. Reactive bands were visualized using ImageQuant TL software v8.2 on an Amersham Imager 680 (Cytiva).

Flow Cytometry.HEK293T cells were detached with trypsin, washed once with PBS, and then analyzed on an LSRFortessa instrument (Becton Dickinson) or CytoFLEX (Beckman Coulter), and the resulting data were analyzed using FlowJo.

Flow Cytometry.

HEK293T cells were detached with trypsin, washed once with PBS, and then analyzed on an LSRFortessa instrument (Becton Dickinson) or CytoFLEX (Beckman Coulter), and the resulting data were analyzed using FlowJo.

Supplementary MaterialAppendix 01 (PDF)Click here for additional data file.

Supplementary Material

Appendix 01 (PDF)

Click here for additional data file.
