---
pmid: '38446745'
title: ARGONAUTE1-binding Tudor domain proteins function in small interfering RNA
  production for RNA-directed DNA methylation.
authors:
- Takei T
- Tsukada M
- Tamura K
- Hara-Nishimura I
- Fukao Y
- Kurihara Y
- Matsui M
- Saze H
- Tsuzuki M
- Watanabe Y
- Hamada T
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiae135
---

# ARGONAUTE1-binding Tudor domain proteins function in small interfering RNA production for RNA-directed DNA methylation.
**Authors:** Takei T, Tsukada M, Tamura K, Hara-Nishimura I, Fukao Y, Kurihara Y, Matsui M, Saze H, Tsuzuki M, Watanabe Y, Hamada T
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/plphys/kiae135](https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiae135)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2024 May 31;195(2):1333-1346. doi: 10.1093/plphys/kiae135.

ARGONAUTE1-binding Tudor domain proteins function in small interfering RNA
production for RNA-directed DNA methylation.

Takei T(1)(2), Tsukada M(3), Tamura K(4), Hara-Nishimura I(5), Fukao Y(6),
Kurihara Y(3)(7), Matsui M(7)(8), Saze H(9), Tsuzuki M(10), Watanabe Y(3),
Hamada T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(2)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Life Science, Okayama University of
Science, Okayama 700-0005, Japan.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
(4)Department of Environmental and Life Sciences, School of Food and Nutritional
Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Science and Engineering, Konan University, Kobe 658-8501, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Life Science, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga
525-8577, Japan.
(7)Synthetic Genomics Research Group, RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource
Science, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(8)Graduate School of Nanobioscience, Department of Life and Environmental
System Science, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(9)Plant Epigenetics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan.
(10)Faculty of Agriculture and Marine Science, Kochi University, Kochi 783-8502,
Japan.

Transposable elements (TEs) contribute to plant evolution, development, and
adaptation to environmental changes, but the regulatory mechanisms are largely
unknown. RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) is 1 TE regulatory mechanism in
plants. Here, we identified that novel ARGONAUTE 1 (AGO1)-binding Tudor domain
proteins Precocious dissociation of sisters C/E (PDS5C/E) are involved in 24-nt
siRNA production to establish RdDM on TEs in Arabidopsis thaliana. PDS5 family
proteins are subunits of the eukaryote-conserved cohesin complex. However, the
double mutant lacking angiosperm-specific subfamily PDS5C and PDS5E (pds5c/e)
exhibited different developmental phenotypes and transcriptome compared with
those of the double mutant lacking eukaryote-conserved subfamily PDS5A and PDS5B
(pds5a/b), suggesting that the angiosperm-specific PDS5C/E subfamily has a
unique function in angiosperm plants. Proteome and imaging analyses revealed
that PDS5C/E interact with AGO1. The pds5c/e double mutant had defects in 24-nt
siRNA accumulation and CHH DNA methylation on TEs. In addition, some lncRNAs
that accumulated in the pds5c/e mutant were targeted by AGO1-loading 21-nt
miRNAs and 21-nt siRNAs. These results indicate that PDS5C/E and AGO1
participate in 24-nt siRNA production for RdDM in the cytoplasm. These findings
indicate that angiosperm plants evolved a new regulator, the PDS5C/E subfamily,
to control the increase in TEs during angiosperm evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American
Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please
contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All
other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please
contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plphys/kiae135
PMID: 38446745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
