---
pmid: '29191460'
title: The mitochondrial 2-oxoadipate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complexes share
  their E2 and E3 components for their function and both generate reactive oxygen
  species.
authors:
- Nemeria NS
- Gerfen G
- Nareddy PR
- Yang L
- Zhang X
- Szostak M
- Jordan F
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.11.018
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The mitochondrial 2-oxoadipate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complexes share their E2 and E3 components for their function and both generate reactive oxygen species.
**Authors:** Nemeria NS, Gerfen G, Nareddy PR, Yang L, Zhang X, Szostak M, Jordan F
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.11.018)

## Abstract

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2018 Feb 1;115:136-145. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.11.018. Epub 2017 Dec 1.

The mitochondrial 2-oxoadipate and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complexes share 
their E2 and E3 components for their function and both generate reactive oxygen 
species.

Nemeria NS(1), Gerfen G(2), Nareddy PR(3), Yang L(3), Zhang X(3), Szostak M(3), 
Jordan F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102-1811, USA. 
Electronic address: nemeria@newark.rutgers.edu.
(2)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461-2304, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102-1811, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102-1811, USA. 
Electronic address: frjordan@newark.rutgers.edu.

Herein are reported unique properties of the novel human thiamin diphosphate 
(ThDP)-dependent enzyme 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase (hE1a), known as 
dehydrogenase E1 and transketolase domain-containing protein 1 that is encoded 
by the DHTKD1 gene. It is involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of 
2-oxoadipate (OA) to glutaryl-CoA on the final degradative pathway of L-lysine 
and is critical for mitochondrial metabolism. Functionally active recombinant 
hE1a has been produced according to both kinetic and spectroscopic criteria in 
our toolbox leading to the following conclusions: (i) The hE1a has recruited the 
dihydrolipoyl succinyltransferase (hE2o) and the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase 
(hE3) components of the tricarboxylic acid cycle 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase 
complex (OGDHc) for its activity. (ii) 2-Oxoglutarate (OG) and 2-oxoadipate (OA) 
could be oxidized by hE1a, however, hE1a displays an approximately 49-fold 
preference in catalytic efficiency for OA over OG, indicating that hE1a is 
specific to the 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase complex. (iii) The hE1a forms the 
ThDP-enamine radical from OA according to electron paramagnetic resonance 
detection in the oxidative half reaction, and could produce superoxide and H2O2 
from decarboxylation of OA in the forward physiological direction, as also seen 
with the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase hE1o component. (iv) Once assembled to 
complex with the same hE2o and hE3 components, the hE1o and hE1a display 
strikingly different regulation: both succinyl-CoA and glutaryl-CoA 
significantly reduced the hE1o activity, but not the activity of hE1a.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2017.11.018
PMID: 29191460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
