---
pmid: '14657280'
title: 'Lamellipodium extension and cadherin adhesion: two cell responses to cadherin
  activation relying on distinct signalling pathways.'
authors:
- Gavard J
- Lambert M
- Grosheva I
- Marthiens V
- Irinopoulou T
- Riou JF
- Bershadsky A
- Mège RM
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00857
---

# Lamellipodium extension and cadherin adhesion: two cell responses to cadherin activation relying on distinct signalling pathways.
**Authors:** Gavard J, Lambert M, Grosheva I, Marthiens V, Irinopoulou T, Riou JF, Bershadsky A, Mège RM
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00857](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00857)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Jan 15;117(Pt 2):257-70. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00857. Epub 2003
Dec  2.

Lamellipodium extension and cadherin adhesion: two cell responses to cadherin 
activation relying on distinct signalling pathways.

Gavard J(1), Lambert M, Grosheva I, Marthiens V, Irinopoulou T, Riou JF, 
Bershadsky A, Mège RM.

Author information:
(1)Signalisation et Différenciation Cellulaires dans les Systèmes Nerveux et 
Musculaire, U440 INSERM-UPMC, Institut du Fer à Moulin, 17 rue du Fer à Moulin, 
75005 Paris, France.

Cell adhesion molecules of the cadherin family contribute to the regulation of 
cell shape and fate by mediating strong intercellular adhesion through 
Ca2+-dependent interaction of their ectodomain and association of their 
cytoplasmic tail to actin. However, the mechanisms co-ordinating 
cadherinmediated adhesion with the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton 
remain elusive. Here, the formation of de novo contacts was dissected by 
spreading cells on a highly active N-cadherin homophilic ligand. Cells responded 
to N-cadherin activation by extending lamellipodium and organizing 
cadherin-catenin complexes and actin filaments in cadherin adhesions. 
Lamellipodium protrusion, associated with actin polymerization at the leading 
edge sustained the extension of cadherin contacts through a phosphoinositide 
3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)-Rac1 pathway. Cadherin adhesions were formed by PI 
3-kinase-independent, Rac1-dependent co-recruitment of adhesion complexes and 
actin filaments. The expression and localization of p120 at the plasma membrane, 
associated with an increase in membrane-associated Rac1 was required for both 
cell responses, consistent with a major role of p120 in signalling pathways 
initiated by cadherin activation and contributing to Rac1-dependent contact 
extension and maturation. These results provide additional information on the 
mechanisms by which cadherin coordinates adhesion with dynamic changes in the 
cytoskeleton to control cell shape and intercellular junction organization.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00857
PMID: 14657280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
