---
pmid: '19490896'
title: Assembly pathway of the Mammalian proteasome base subcomplex is mediated by
  multiple specific chaperones.
authors:
- Kaneko T
- Hamazaki J
- Iemura S
- Sasaki K
- Furuyama K
- Natsume T
- Tanaka K
- Murata S
journal: Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.008
---

# Assembly pathway of the Mammalian proteasome base subcomplex is mediated by multiple specific chaperones.
**Authors:** Kaneko T, Hamazaki J, Iemura S, Sasaki K, Furuyama K, Natsume T, Tanaka K, Murata S
**Journal:** Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.008)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2009 May 29;137(5):914-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.008.

Assembly pathway of the Mammalian proteasome base subcomplex is mediated by 
multiple specific chaperones.

Kaneko T(1), Hamazaki J, Iemura S, Sasaki K, Furuyama K, Natsume T, Tanaka K, 
Murata S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The 26S proteasome is an enzymatic complex that degrades ubiquitinated proteins 
in eukaryotic cells. It is composed of the 20S core particle (CP) and the 19S 
regulatory particle (RP). The latter is further divided into the lid and base 
subcomplexes. While the mechanism involved in the assembly of the CP is well 
investigated, that of the RP is poorly understood. Here, we show that the 
formation of the mammalian base subcomplex involves three distinct modules, 
where specific pairs of ATPase subunits are associated with the distinct 
chaperones p28, S5b, or p27. The process of base formation starts from 
association of the p28-Rpt3-Rpt6-Rpn14 complex with the S5b-Rpt1-Rpt2-Rpn1 
complex, followed by incorporation of the p27-Rpt5-Rpt4 complex and Rpn2, where 
p28, S5b, and p27 regulate the associations between the modules. These 
chaperones dissociate before completion of 26S proteasome formation. Our results 
demonstrate that base assembly is facilitated by multiple proteasome-dedicated 
chaperones, like CP assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.008
PMID: 19490896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
