---
reference_id: PMID:19075007
title: Core glycosylation of collagen is initiated by two beta(1-O)galactosyltransferases.
authors:
- Schegg B
- Hülsmeier AJ
- Rutschmann C
- Maag C
- Hennet T
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.02085-07
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Core glycosylation of collagen is initiated by two beta(1-O)galactosyltransferases.
**Authors:** Schegg B, Hülsmeier AJ, Rutschmann C, Maag C, Hennet T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.02085-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.02085-07)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Feb;29(4):943-52. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02085-07. Epub 2008 Dec
 15.

Core glycosylation of collagen is initiated by two
beta(1-O)galactosyltransferases.

Schegg B(1), Hülsmeier AJ, Rutschmann C, Maag C, Hennet T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Collagen is a trimer of three left-handed alpha chains representing repeats of
the motif Gly-X-Y, where (hydroxy)proline and (hydroxy)lysine residues are often
found at positions X and Y. Selected hydroxylysines are further modified by the
addition of galactose and glucose-galactose units. Collagen glycosylation takes
place in the endoplasmic reticulum before triple-helix formation and is mediated
by beta(1-O)galactosyl- and alpha(1-2)glucosyltransferase enzymes. We have
identified two collagen galactosyltransferases using affinity chromatography and
tandem mass spectrometry protein sequencing. The two collagen
beta(1-O)galactosyltransferases corresponded to the GLT25D1 and GLT25D2
proteins. Recombinant GLT25D1 and GLT25D2 enzymes showed a strong
galactosyltransferase activity toward various types of collagen and toward the
serum mannose-binding lectin MBL, which contains a collagen domain. Amino acid
analysis of the products of GLT25D1 and GLT25D2 reactions confirmed the transfer
of galactose to hydroxylysine residues. The GLT25D1 gene is constitutively
expressed in human tissues, whereas the GLT25D2 gene is expressed only at low
levels in the nervous system. The GLT25D1 and GLT25D2 enzymes are similar to
CEECAM1, to which we could not attribute any collagen galactosyltransferase
activity. The GLT25D1 and GLT25D2 genes now allow addressing of the biological
significance of collagen glycosylation and the importance of this
posttranslational modification in the etiology of connective tissue disorders.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.02085-07
PMCID: PMC2643808
PMID: 19075007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]