---
pmid: '18346207'
title: A novel calcium-binding protein is associated with tau proteins in tauopathy.
authors:
- Vega IE
- Traverso EE
- Ferrer-Acosta Y
- Matos E
- Colon M
- Gonzalez J
- Dickson D
- Hutton M
- Lewis J
- Yen SH
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3696493
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05339.x
---

# A novel calcium-binding protein is associated with tau proteins in tauopathy.
**Authors:** Vega IE, Traverso EE, Ferrer-Acosta Y, Matos E, Colon M, Gonzalez J, Dickson D, Hutton M, Lewis J, Yen SH
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05339.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05339.x)
**PMC:** [PMC3696493](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3696493/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2008 Jul;106(1):96-106. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05339.x.
Epub  2008 Jul 1.

A novel calcium-binding protein is associated with tau proteins in tauopathy.

Vega IE(1), Traverso EE, Ferrer-Acosta Y, Matos E, Colon M, Gonzalez J, Dickson 
D, Hutton M, Lewis J, Yen SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras Campus, San 
Juan, Puerto Rico. irving_vega@uprrp.edu

Tauopathies are a group of neurological disorders characterized by the presence 
of intraneuronal hyperphosphorylated and filamentous tau. Mutations in the tau 
gene have been found in kindred with tauopathy. The expression of the human tau 
mutant in transgenic mice induced neurodegeneration, indicating that tau plays a 
central pathological role. However, the molecular mechanism leading to 
tau-mediated neurodegeneration is poorly understood. To gain insights into the 
role that tau plays in neurodegeneration, human tau proteins were 
immunoprecipitated from brain lysates of the tauopathy mouse model JNPL3, which 
develops neurodegeneration in age-dependent manner. In the present work, a novel 
EF-hand domain-containing protein was found associated with tau proteins in 
brain lysate of 12-month-old JNPL3 mice. The association between tau proteins 
and the novel identified protein appears to be induced by the neurodegeneration 
process as these two proteins were not found associated in young JNPL3 mice. 
Consistently, the novel protein co-purified with the pathological sarkosyl 
insoluble tau in terminally ill JNPL3 mice. Calcium-binding assays demonstrated 
that this protein binds calcium effectively. Finally, the association between 
tau and the novel calcium-binding protein is conserved in human and enriched in 
Alzheimer's disease brain. Taken together, the identification of a novel 
calcium-binding protein associated with tau protein in terminally ill tauopathy 
mouse model and its confirmation in human brain lysate suggests that this 
association may play an important physiological and/or pathological role.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2008.05339.x
PMCID: PMC3696493
PMID: 18346207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
