---
pmid: '33563064'
title: PRKAA/AMPKα phosphorylation switches the role of RASAL2 from a suppressor to
  an activator of autophagy.
authors:
- Bao Y
- Qian C
- Liu MY
- Jiang F
- Jiang X
- Liu H
- Zhang Z
- Sun F
- Fu N
- Hou Z
- Ke Y
- Li Y
- Qian ZM
journal: Autophagy
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8632340
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1886767
---

# PRKAA/AMPKα phosphorylation switches the role of RASAL2 from a suppressor to an activator of autophagy.
**Authors:** Bao Y, Qian C, Liu MY, Jiang F, Jiang X, Liu H, Zhang Z, Sun F, Fu N, Hou Z, Ke Y, Li Y, Qian ZM
**Journal:** Autophagy (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2021.1886767](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2021.1886767)
**PMC:** [PMC8632340](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8632340/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2021 Nov;17(11):3607-3621. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1886767. Epub
 2021 Feb 24.

PRKAA/AMPKα phosphorylation switches the role of RASAL2 from a suppressor to an 
activator of autophagy.

Bao Y(1)(2), Qian C(3), Liu MY(1), Jiang F(1), Jiang X(2), Liu H(2), Zhang Z(2), 
Sun F(2), Fu N(4), Hou Z(5), Ke Y(3), Li Y(5), Qian ZM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational and Precision Medicine, Nantong University, 
Nantong, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, Fudan University School of 
Pharmacy, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Gerald Choa Neuroscience Centre, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, 
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Cellular Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

RASAL2 (RAS protein activator like 2), a RASGTPase activating protein, can 
catalyze the hydrolysis of RAS-GTP into RAS-GDP to inactivate the RAS pathway in 
various types of cancer cells. However, the cellular function of RASAL2 remains 
elusive. Here we showed that RASAL2 can attenuate PRKAA/AMPKα phosphorylation by 
recruiting phosphatase PPM1B/pp2cβ, thus inhibiting the initiation of basal 
autophagy under normal conditions. In addition, we found that glucose starvation 
could induce dissociation of PPM1B from RASAL2 and then RASAL2 at S351 be 
phosphorylated by PRKAA, followed by the binding of phosphorylated-RASAL2 with 
to PIK3C3/VPS34-ATG14-BECN1/Beclin1 complex to increase PIK3C3 activity and 
autophagy. Furthermore, RASAL2 S351 phosphorylation facilitated breast tumor 
growth and correlated to poor clinical outcomes in breast cancer patients. Our 
study demonstrated that the phosphorylation status of RASAL2 S351 can function 
as a molecular switch to either suppress or promote AMPK-mediated autophagy. 
Inhibition of RASAL2 S351 phosphorylation might be a potential therapeutic 
strategy to overcome the resistance of AMPK-activation agents.Abbreviations: 
AICAR: aminoimidazole carboxamide ribonucleotide; AMPK: adenosine 
5'-monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase; ATG14: autophagy related 14; 
C.C: compound C; CQ: chloroquine; DKO: double-knockout; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule 
associated protein 1 light chain 3; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin 
kinase; PIK3C3/VPS34: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; 
PIK3R4/VPS15: phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 4; PPM1B/pp2cβ: 
protein phosphatase, Mg2+/Mn2+ dependent 1B; PRKAA/AMPKα: protein kinase 
AMP-activated catalytic subunit alpha; PtdIns: phosphatidylinositol; PtdIns3P: 
phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; RASAL2: RAS protein activator like 2; RasGAPs: 
RasGTPase activating proteins; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TNBC: triple-negative 
breast cancer.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2021.1886767
PMCID: PMC8632340
PMID: 33563064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest were 
disclosed.
