---
pmid: '22798687'
title: 'EH3 (ABHD9): the first member of a new epoxide hydrolase family with high
  activity for fatty acid epoxides.'
authors:
- Decker M
- Adamska M
- Cronin A
- Di Giallonardo F
- Burgener J
- Marowsky A
- Falck JR
- Morisseau C
- Hammock BD
- Gruzdev A
- Zeldin DC
- Arand M
journal: J Lipid Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3435537
doi: 10.1194/jlr.M024448
---

# EH3 (ABHD9): the first member of a new epoxide hydrolase family with high activity for fatty acid epoxides.
**Authors:** Decker M, Adamska M, Cronin A, Di Giallonardo F, Burgener J, Marowsky A, Falck JR, Morisseau C, Hammock BD, Gruzdev A, Zeldin DC, Arand M
**Journal:** J Lipid Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1194/jlr.M024448](https://doi.org/10.1194/jlr.M024448)
**PMC:** [PMC3435537](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3435537/)

## Abstract

1. J Lipid Res. 2012 Oct;53(10):2038-2045. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M024448. Epub 2012
Jul  12.

EH3 (ABHD9): the first member of a new epoxide hydrolase family with high 
activity for fatty acid epoxides.

Decker M(1), Adamska M(1), Cronin A(1), Di Giallonardo F(1), Burgener J(1), 
Marowsky A(1), Falck JR(2), Morisseau C(3), Hammock BD(3), Gruzdev A(4), Zeldin 
DC(4), Arand M(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Southwestern Medical Center, University of Texas, Dallas, TX 75390.
(3)Entomology and Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, University of 
California, Davis, CA 95616; and.
(4)Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709.
(5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: arand@pharma.uzh.ch.

Epoxide hydrolases are a small superfamily of enzymes important for the 
detoxification of chemically reactive xenobiotic epoxides and for the processing 
of endogenous epoxides that act as signaling molecules. Here, we report the 
identification of two human epoxide hydrolases: EH3 and EH4. They share 45% 
sequence identity, thus representing a new family of mammalian epoxide 
hydrolases. Quantitative RT-PCR from mouse tissue indicates strongest EH3 
expression in lung, skin, and upper gastrointestinal tract. The recombinant 
enzyme shows a high turnover number with 8,9-, 11,12-, and 
14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (EET), as well as 9,10-epoxyoctadec-11-enoic acid 
(leukotoxin). It is inhibited by a subclass of N,N'-disubstituted urea 
derivatives, including 12-(3-adamantan-1-yl-ureido)-dodecanoic acid, 
1-cyclohexyl-3-dodecylurea, and 
1-(1-acetylpiperidin-4-yl)-3-(4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl)urea, compounds so far 
believed to be selective inhibitors of mammalian soluble epoxide hydrolase 
(sEH). Its sensitivity to this subset of sEH inhibitors may have implications on 
the pharmacologic profile of these compounds. This is particularly relevant 
because sEH is a potential drug target, and clinical trials are under way 
exploring the value of sEH inhibitors in the treatment of hypertension and 
diabetes type II.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.M024448
PMCID: PMC3435537
PMID: 22798687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Epoxide hydrolases are a small superfamily of enzymes important for the detoxification of chemically reactive xenobiotic epoxides and for the processing of endogenous epoxides that act as signaling molecules. Here, we report the identification of two human epoxide hydrolases: EH3 and EH4. They share 45% sequence identity, thus representing a new family of mammalian epoxide hydrolases. Quantitative RT-PCR from mouse tissue indicates strongest EH3 expression in lung, skin, and upper gastrointestinal tract. The recombinant enzyme shows a high turnover number with 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (EET), as well as 9,10-epoxyoctadec-11-enoic acid (leukotoxin). It is inhibited by a subclass of N,N’-disubstituted urea derivatives, including 12-(3-adamantan-1-yl-ureido)-dodecanoic acid, 1-cyclohexyl-3-dodecylurea, and 1-(1-acetylpiperidin-4-yl)-3-(4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl)urea, compounds so far believed to be selective inhibitors of mammalian soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH). Its sensitivity to this subset of sEH inhibitors may have implications on the pharmacologic profile of these compounds. This is particularly relevant because sEH is a potential drug target, and clinical trials are under way exploring the value of sEH inhibitors in the treatment of hypertension and diabetes type II.

DISCUSSION

EH3 is a hitherto undiscovered mammalian epoxide hydrolase displaying a high turnover with fatty acid-derived epoxides, in particular EETs and leukotoxin, while being essentially inactive toward the generic EH substrate styrene oxide. This substrate selectivity suggests that the enzyme is implicated in processing of signaling molecules rather than detoxification of xenobiotic epoxides. It has the highest specific activity with EETs so far reported for an EH and a catalytic efficacy in the range of that of sEH, the major enzyme in EET turnover ( 20 ). Its expression pattern in the mammalian organism is quite different from that of the other well-characterized EHs in that it is poorly expressed in the liver but well expressed in skin, lung, and upper gastrointestinal tract. Based on this observation, it is tempting to speculate on a potential role of EH3 in barrier formation, because the above tissues represent the major contact surfaces with the outside. Indeed, EH3 has been identified as a candidate disease gene for ichthyosis based on comparative studies in human and mouse ( 37 ), which is compatible with such a function.

Furthermore, we found EH3 to be the most efficient catalyst for the hydrolysis of leukotoxin. The resulting metabolite has been reported to be a strong mediator of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) ( 19 ), which suggests that EH3 might contribute to leukotoxin toxicity, in particular as we found a particularly high EH3 expression in the mouse lung (see Fig. 4 ).

Intriguingly, EH3 is sensitive to inhibition by N,N’-disubstituted urea derivatives, a class of compounds that has been developed as selective inhibitors for the mammalian sEH ( 38 ). In contrast to the latter enzyme, EH3 seems to be inhibited only by a subset of these compounds. Urea derivatives have been developed as EH inhibitors with the aim to pharmacologically interfere with the EET metabolism and have been proposed as potentially useful agents to treat high blood pressure ( 10 ), pain ( 7 ), and recently, diabetes type II ( 39 ). Our present observation divides the urea derivatives into sEH-selective inhibitors and mixed sEH and EH3 inhibitors. This has to be taken into account for the interpretation of in vivo data obtained with the different sets of compounds. Whether sEH-selective or the mixed-type blockade of EET hydrolysis is more favorable in the treatment of diseases remains to be established.

The expression of the EPHX3 gene has been reported to be downregulated in a variety of tumors. Hypermethylation in the promoter region, associated with a reduced transcription rate, was observed in gastric cancer ( 40 ), prostate cancer ( 41 ), and melanoma ( 42 ). In view of the recently described potential of EETs to reactivate dormant tumors and foster metastasis ( 43 ), possibly related to the angiogenic properties of EETs ( 44 ), this suggests a potential role of EH3 in the prevention of malignancies.

Finally, it is reasonable to speculate about why there are (at least) three separate EHs for the breakdown of bioactive fatty acid epoxides, namely EH3, sEH, and mEH. Apart from the simple explanation that these differ somewhat in their substrate selectivity, there is an additional intriguing hypothesis: if we accept that the hydrolysis products, like the DHETs and the leukotoxin diol, have their own biologic activity as has been reported ( 19 , 45 ), sometimes distinct and possibly opposite to the effects elicited by the parent molecules, the local ratios in the concentration of epoxide to diol may dictate the signaling outcome. Among the several factors that influence this ratio, the above enzymes particularly differ in two of them, subcellular localization and K m . The effect of the subcellular localization is obvious. The ER-resident EHs may have a significant kinetic advantage being located in the same subcellular compartment as the epoxide-forming monooxygenase because they might directly hydrolyze the epoxide during their formation, yielding a high diol to epoxide ratio (at least at low epoxide formation rates), as already discussed earlier for mEH ( 17 ). The major difference between mEH and EH3, the two ER-resident EHs, is the enormous difference in their K m for fatty acid epoxides, while their catalytic efficacies are within the same range (see Table 1 ). The resulting consequences are best explained by looking at a kinetic diagram of the enzymes with a common substrate, 11,12-EET ( Fig. 7 ). While both enzymes should afford a similar diol to epoxide ratio at low epoxide formation rates, this ratio would strongly decrease with mEH once the substrate concentration increases over the low mEH K m , while the ratio would stay constant with EH3 due to its extremely high K m that lies even beyond the highest locally expected substrate concentration. Thus, EH3 would be the most suitable EH under conditions where a high diol formation rate with only small EET leakage is desired.
