---
pmid: '15509593'
title: HNF1beta/TCF2 mutations impair transactivation potential through altered co-regulator
  recruitment.
authors:
- Barbacci E
- Chalkiadaki A
- Masdeu C
- Haumaitre C
- Lokmane L
- Loirat C
- Cloarec S
- Talianidis I
- Bellanne-Chantelot C
- Cereghini S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh338
---

# HNF1beta/TCF2 mutations impair transactivation potential through altered co-regulator recruitment.
**Authors:** Barbacci E, Chalkiadaki A, Masdeu C, Haumaitre C, Lokmane L, Loirat C, Cloarec S, Talianidis I, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Cereghini S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh338](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh338)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec 15;13(24):3139-49. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh338. Epub 2004 
Oct 27.

HNF1beta/TCF2 mutations impair transactivation potential through altered 
co-regulator recruitment.

Barbacci E(1), Chalkiadaki A, Masdeu C, Haumaitre C, Lokmane L, Loirat C, 
Cloarec S, Talianidis I, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Cereghini S.

Author information:
(1)Biologie du Développement, UMR 7622, CNRS, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 
9 quai St Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Mutations in the HNF1beta gene, encoding the dimeric POU-homeodomain 
transcription factor HNF1beta (TCF2 or vHNF1), cause various phenotypes 
including maturity onset diabetes of the young 5 (MODY5), and abnormalities in 
kidney, pancreas and genital tract development. To gain insight into the 
molecular mechanisms underlying these phenotypes and into the structure of 
HNF1beta, we functionally characterized eight disease-causing mutations 
predicted to produce protein truncations, amino acids substitutions or 
frameshift deletions in different domains of the protein. Truncated mutations, 
retaining the dimerization domain, displayed defective nuclear localization and 
weak dominant-negative activity when co-expressed with the wild-type protein. A 
frameshift mutation located within the C-terminal QSP-rich domain partially 
reduced transcriptional activity, whereas selective deletion of this domain 
abolished transactivation. All five missense mutations, which concern 
POU-specific and homeodomain residues, were correctly expressed and localized to 
the nucleus. Although having different effects on DNA-binding capacity, which 
ranged from complete loss to a mild reduction, these mutations exhibited a 
severe reduction in their transactivation capacity. The transcriptional 
impairment of those mutants, whose DNA-binding activity was weakly or not 
affected, correlated with the loss of association with one of the 
histone-acetyltransferases CBP or PCAF. In contrast to wild-type HNF1beta, whose 
transactivation potential depends on the synergistic action of CBP and PCAF, the 
activity of these mutants was not increased by the synergistic action of these 
two coactivators or by treatment with the specific histone-deacetylase inhibitor 
TSA. Our findings suggest that the complex syndrome associated with 
HNF1beta-MODY5 mutations arise from either defective DNA-binding or 
transactivation function through impaired coactivator recruitment.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh338
PMID: 15509593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
