---
pmid: '20299451'
title: Human CRB2 inhibits gamma-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by
  binding to the presenilin complex.
authors:
- Mitsuishi Y
- Hasegawa H
- Matsuo A
- Araki W
- Suzuki T
- Tagami S
- Okochi M
- Takeda M
- Roepman R
- Nishimura M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2865292
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038760
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human CRB2 inhibits gamma-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by binding to the presenilin complex.
**Authors:** Mitsuishi Y, Hasegawa H, Matsuo A, Araki W, Suzuki T, Tagami S, Okochi M, Takeda M, Roepman R, Nishimura M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.038760](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.038760)
**PMC:** [PMC2865292](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2865292/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 14;285(20):14920-14931. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038760.
Epub  2010 Mar 18.

Human CRB2 inhibits gamma-secretase cleavage of amyloid precursor protein by 
binding to the presenilin complex.

Mitsuishi Y(1), Hasegawa H(1), Matsuo A(1), Araki W(2), Suzuki T(3), Tagami 
S(4), Okochi M(4), Takeda M(4), Roepman R(5), Nishimura M(6).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Shiga 520-2192, Japan.
(2)Department of Demyelinating Disease and Aging, National Institute of 
Neuroscience, NCNP, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.
(4)Department of Post-Genomics and Diseases, Division of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Proteomics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
565-0871, Japan.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
(6)Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Shiga 520-2192, Japan. Electronic address: mnishimu@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp.

Drosophila Crumbs has been reported to attenuate Notch signaling by inhibition 
of gamma-secretase cleavage at the wing margins. gamma-Secretase is an 
intramembrane protease that is responsible for the generation of amyloid-beta 
(Abeta) peptides from the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP). Here, we 
re-examined gamma-secretase inhibition by human CRB2, which is the most abundant 
Crumbs ortholog in the brain. Transfected CRB2 inhibited proteolytic production 
of Abeta and APP intracellular domains from APP C-terminal fragments in HEK293 
and SH-SY5Y cells. Conversely, knockdown of endogenous CRB2 increased 
gamma-secretase cleavage products in SH-SY5Y cells. CRB2 inhibition of 
gamma-cleavage was also detected in cell-free assays. CRB2 interacted with the 
gamma-secretase complex, but was not a competitive substrate for gamma-cleavage. 
The transmembrane domain of CRB2 was indispensable for inhibition of Abeta 
generation and mediated CRB2 binding with the gamma-secretase complex. In 
addition, the cytoplasmic domain appeared to play a supportive role in 
gamma-secretase inhibition, whereas mutational disruption of the two 
protein-binding motifs involved in the formation of cell adhesion complexes did 
not affect gamma-secretase inhibition. Co-overexpression of presenilin-1 or 
APH-1 abrogated gamma-secretase inhibition probably through prevention of the 
incorporation of CRB2 into the gamma-secretase complex. Our results suggest that 
CRB2 functions as an inhibitory binding protein that is involved in the 
formation of a mature but inactive pool of the gamma-secretase complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038760
PMCID: PMC2865292
PMID: 20299451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
