---
pmid: '21321938'
title: Interleukin-18/WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein-1 signaling mediates
  human saphenous vein smooth muscle cell proliferation.
authors:
- Reddy VS
- Valente AJ
- Delafontaine P
- Chandrasekar B
journal: J Cell Physiol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3111842
doi: 10.1002/jcp.22676
---

# Interleukin-18/WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein-1 signaling mediates human saphenous vein smooth muscle cell proliferation.
**Authors:** Reddy VS, Valente AJ, Delafontaine P, Chandrasekar B
**Journal:** J Cell Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jcp.22676](https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.22676)
**PMC:** [PMC3111842](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3111842/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Dec;226(12):3303-15. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22676.

Interleukin-18/WNT1-inducible signaling pathway protein-1 signaling mediates 
human saphenous vein smooth muscle cell proliferation.

Reddy VS(1), Valente AJ, Delafontaine P, Chandrasekar B.

Author information:
(1)Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, Texas.

We demonstrate for the first time that the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 
(IL)-18 stimulates rapid and significant proliferation of SMC derived from human 
saphenous vein (VSMC), but not coronary artery. IL-18 also stimulates VSMC 
growth. Further investigations revealed that IL-18-induced VSMC proliferation 
was Wnt inducible secreted protein-1 (WISP1) dependent. In addition to inducing 
its own expression via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt-dependent IKK/NF-κB 
activation, IL-18 stimulated glycogen synthase kinase 3β phosphorylation and 
degradation, β-catenin nuclear translocation and stabilization, T-cell 
factor-lymphoid enhancer binding factor (TCF-LEF) activation, and WISP1 
induction. Moreover, WISP1 induced its own expression, and that of survivin and 
multiple matrix metalloproteinases via β-catenin/TCF-LEF interaction. WISP1 also 
activated AP-1, but not NF-κB, and induced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)9 
transcription in part via AP-1. Interestingly, WISP1 failed to regulate tissue 
inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMP) expression. These novel findings 
indicate that IL-18 induces a series of signaling events that result in 
WISP1-mediated VSMC proliferation, survival and MMP induction that are key 
components of vein graft stenosis and this may be amplified by IL-18 and WISP1 
autoregulation and cross-regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.22676
PMCID: PMC3111842
PMID: 21321938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
