---
pmid: '18407956'
title: A multidimensional chromatography technology for in-depth phosphoproteome analysis.
authors:
- Albuquerque CP
- Smolka MB
- Payne SH
- Bafna V
- Eng J
- Zhou H
journal: Mol Cell Proteomics
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2493382
doi: 10.1074/mcp.M700468-MCP200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Evaluation Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A multidimensional chromatography technology for in-depth phosphoproteome analysis.
**Authors:** Albuquerque CP, Smolka MB, Payne SH, Bafna V, Eng J, Zhou H
**Journal:** Mol Cell Proteomics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/mcp.M700468-MCP200](https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M700468-MCP200)
**PMC:** [PMC2493382](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2493382/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008 Jul;7(7):1389-96. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M700468-MCP200. 
Epub 2008 Apr 11.

A multidimensional chromatography technology for in-depth phosphoproteome 
analysis.

Albuquerque CP(1), Smolka MB, Payne SH, Bafna V, Eng J, Zhou H.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Department of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, 
USA.

Protein phosphorylation is a post-translational modification widely used to 
regulate cellular responses. Recent studies showed that global phosphorylation 
analysis could be used to study signaling pathways and to identify targets of 
protein kinases in cells. A key objective of global phosphorylation analysis is 
to obtain an in-depth mapping of low abundance protein phosphorylation in cells; 
this necessitates the use of suitable separation techniques because of the 
complexity of the phosphoproteome. Here we developed a multidimensional 
chromatography technology, combining IMAC, hydrophilic interaction 
chromatography, and reverse phase LC, for phosphopeptide purification and 
fractionation. Its application to the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae after DNA 
damage led to the identification of 8764 unique phosphopeptides from 2278 
phosphoproteins using tandem MS. Analysis of two low abundance proteins, Rad9 
and Mrc1, revealed that approximately 50% of their phosphorylation was 
identified via this global phosphorylation analysis. Thus, this technology is 
suited for in-depth phosphoproteome studies.

DOI: 10.1074/mcp.M700468-MCP200
PMCID: PMC2493382
PMID: 18407956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
