---
pmid: '16420472'
title: Gene duplication and separation of functions in alphaB-crystallin from zebrafish
  (Danio rerio).
authors:
- Smith AA
- Wyatt K
- Vacha J
- Vihtelic TS
- Zigler JS Jr
- Wistow GJ
- Posner M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2908480
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05080.x
---

# Gene duplication and separation of functions in alphaB-crystallin from zebrafish (Danio rerio).
**Authors:** Smith AA, Wyatt K, Vacha J, Vihtelic TS, Zigler JS Jr, Wistow GJ, Posner M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05080.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05080.x)
**PMC:** [PMC2908480](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2908480/)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2006 Feb;273(3):481-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05080.x.

Gene duplication and separation of functions in alphaB-crystallin from zebrafish 
(Danio rerio).

Smith AA(1), Wyatt K, Vacha J, Vihtelic TS, Zigler JS Jr, Wistow GJ, Posner M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Ashland University, OH 44805, USA.

We previously reported that zebrafish alphaB-crystallin is not constitutively 
expressed in nervous or muscular tissue and has reduced chaperone-like activity 
compared with its human ortholog. Here we characterize the tissue expression 
pattern and chaperone-like activity of a second zebrafish alphaB-crystallin. 
Expressed sequence tag analysis of adult zebrafish lens revealed the presence of 
a novel alpha-crystallin transcript designated cryab2 and the resulting protein 
alphaB2-crystallin. The deduced protein sequence was 58.2% and 50.3% identical 
with human alphaB-crystallin and zebrafish alphaB1-crystallin, respectively. 
RT-PCR showed that alphaB2-crystallin is expressed predominantly in lens but, 
reminiscent of mammalian alphaB-crystallin, also has lower constitutive 
expression in heart, brain, skeletal muscle and liver. The chaperone-like 
activity of purified recombinant alphaB2 protein was assayed by measuring its 
ability to prevent the chemically induced aggregation of alpha-lactalbumin and 
lysozyme. At 25 degrees C and 30 degrees C, zebrafish alphaB2 showed greater 
chaperone-like activity than human alphaB-crystallin, and at 35 degrees C and 40 
degrees C, the human protein provided greater protection against aggregation. 2D 
gel electrophoresis indicated that alphaB2-crystallin makes up approximately 
0.16% of total zebrafish lens protein. Zebrafish is the first species known to 
express two different alphaB-crystallins. Differences in primary structure, 
expression and chaperone-like activity suggest that the two zebrafish 
alphaB-crystallins perform divergent physiological roles. After gene 
duplication, zebrafish alphaB2 maintained the widespread protective role also 
found in mammalian alphaB-crystallin, while zebrafish alphaB1 adopted a more 
restricted, nonchaperone role in the lens. Gene duplication may have allowed 
these functions to separate, providing a unique model for studying 
structure-function relationships and the regulation of tissue-specific 
expression patterns.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.05080.x
PMCID: PMC2908480
PMID: 16420472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
