---
pmid: '16327777'
title: Dissection of epistasis in oligogenic Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Badano JL
- Leitch CC
- Ansley SJ
- May-Simera H
- Lawson S
- Lewis RA
- Beales PL
- Dietz HC
- Fisher S
- Katsanis N
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature04370
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Dissection of epistasis in oligogenic Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Badano JL, Leitch CC, Ansley SJ, May-Simera H, Lawson S, Lewis RA, Beales PL, Dietz HC, Fisher S, Katsanis N
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature04370](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04370)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Jan 19;439(7074):326-30. doi: 10.1038/nature04370. Epub 2005 Dec
4.

Dissection of epistasis in oligogenic Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Badano JL(1), Leitch CC, Ansley SJ, May-Simera H, Lawson S, Lewis RA, Beales PL, 
Dietz HC, Fisher S, Katsanis N.

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, 
USA.

Epistatic interactions have an important role in phenotypic variability, yet the 
genetic dissection of such phenomena remains challenging. Here we report the 
identification of a novel locus, MGC1203, that contributes epistatic alleles to 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a pleiotropic, oligogenic disorder. MGC1203 encodes 
a pericentriolar protein that interacts and colocalizes with the BBS proteins. 
Sequencing of two independent BBS cohorts revealed a significant enrichment of a 
heterozygous C430T mutation in patients, and a transmission disequilibrium test 
(TDT) showed strong over-transmission of this variant. Further analyses showed 
that the 430T allele enhances the use of a cryptic splice acceptor site, causing 
the introduction of a premature termination codon (PTC) and the reduction of 
steady-state MGC1203 messenger RNA levels. Finally, recapitulation of the human 
genotypes in zebrafish shows that modest suppression of mgc1203 exerts an 
epistatic effect on the developmental phenotype of BBS morphants. Our data 
demonstrate how the combined use of biochemical, genetic and in vivo tools can 
facilitate the dissection of epistatic phenomena, and enhance our appreciation 
of the genetic basis of phenotypic variability.

DOI: 10.1038/nature04370
PMID: 16327777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
