---
pmid: '10542258'
title: A novel NE-dlg/SAP102-associated protein, p51-nedasin, related to the amidohydrolase
  superfamily, interferes with the association between NE-dlg/SAP102 and N-methyl-D-aspartate
  receptor.
authors:
- Kuwahara H
- Araki N
- Makino K
- Masuko N
- Honda S
- Kaibuchi K
- Fukunaga K
- Miyamoto E
- Ogawa M
- Saya H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.45.32204
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A novel NE-dlg/SAP102-associated protein, p51-nedasin, related to the amidohydrolase superfamily, interferes with the association between NE-dlg/SAP102 and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.
**Authors:** Kuwahara H, Araki N, Makino K, Masuko N, Honda S, Kaibuchi K, Fukunaga K, Miyamoto E, Ogawa M, Saya H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.45.32204](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.45.32204)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32204-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.45.32204.

A novel NE-dlg/SAP102-associated protein, p51-nedasin, related to the 
amidohydrolase superfamily, interferes with the association between 
NE-dlg/SAP102 and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.

Kuwahara H(1), Araki N, Makino K, Masuko N, Honda S, Kaibuchi K, Fukunaga K, 
Miyamoto E, Ogawa M, Saya H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, 2-2-1 
Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The membrane-associated guanylate kinase proteins have been known to interact 
various membrane receptors with their N-terminal segments designated the PDZ 
domains and to cluster these receptors at the target site of the cell membrane. 
NE-dlg/SAP102, a neuronal and endocrine tissue-specific MAGUK family protein, 
was found to be expressed in both dendrites and cell bodies in neuronal cells. 
Although NE-dlg/SAP102 localized at dendrites was shown to interact with 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor 2B via the PDZ domains to compose postsynaptic 
density, the binding proteins existing in the cell body of the neuron are still 
unknown. Here we report the isolation of a novel NE-dlg/SAP102-associated 
protein, p51-nedasin. Nedasin has a significant homology with amidohydrolase 
superfamily proteins and shows identical sequences to a recently identified 
protein that has guanine aminohydrolase activity. Nedasin has four alternative 
splice variants (S, V1, V2, and V3) that exhibited different C-terminal 
structures. NE-dlg/SAP102 is shown to interact with only the S form of nedasin 
which is predominantly expressed in brain. The expression of nedasin in neuronal 
cells increases in parallel with the progress of synaptogenesis and is mainly 
detected in cell bodies where it co-localizes with NE-dlg/SAP102. Furthermore, 
nedasin interferes with the association between NE-dlg/SAP102 and NMDA receptor 
2B in vitro. These findings suggest that alternative splicing of nedasin may 
play a role in the formation and/or structural change in synapses during 
neuronal development by modifying clustering of neurotransmitter receptors at 
the synaptic sites.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.45.32204
PMID: 10542258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
