---
pmid: '16567967'
title: Influence of angiogenin on the growth of A375 human melanoma cells and the
  expression of basic fibroblast growth factor.
authors:
- Song J
- Wang J
- Yang J
- Jiang C
- Shen W
- Wang L
journal: Melanoma Res
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1097/01.cmr.0000215029.62199.4c
---

# Influence of angiogenin on the growth of A375 human melanoma cells and the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor.
**Authors:** Song J, Wang J, Yang J, Jiang C, Shen W, Wang L
**Journal:** Melanoma Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.cmr.0000215029.62199.4c](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.cmr.0000215029.62199.4c)

## Abstract

1. Melanoma Res. 2006 Apr;16(2):119-26. doi: 10.1097/01.cmr.0000215029.62199.4c.

Influence of angiogenin on the growth of A375 human melanoma cells and the 
expression of basic fibroblast growth factor.

Song J(1), Wang J, Yang J, Jiang C, Shen W, Wang L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, School of Life Science, Northeast Normal 
University, Changchun, PR China.

Angiogenin was isolated as a tumor angiogenic factor solely on the basis of its 
angiogenic activity. Its expression is essential for melanoma progression and 
metastasis. Many studies have mainly focused on how it induces angiogenesis, 
which allows further melanoma growth and metastasis. Here, we investigated the 
effects of angiogenin on melanoma cell growth and studied its influence on the 
expression and function of the basic fibroblast growth factor. We transfected 
the angiogenin gene in the sense and antisense orientation into A375 cells, and 
obtained stable angiogenin under-expressing and over-expressing transfectants. 
We found that in the angiogenin antisense transfectants, the cell proliferation 
was decreased and the basic fibroblast growth factor-induced cell proliferation 
was inhibited, but the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor was 
increased. In contrast, in the angiogenin sense transfectants, the cell 
proliferation was increased, and the basic fibroblast growth factor-induced cell 
proliferation was also increased. The expression of basic fibroblast growth 
factor, however, was decreased. In conclusion, we demonstrated that, besides its 
angiogenic activity, angiogenin also directly contributes to A375 cell 
proliferation and is required for the basic fibroblast growth factor to induce 
cell proliferation. We also demonstrated that the endogenous angiogenin 
expression levels affect the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in 
A375 cells. By targeting angiogenin, therefore, one may find a potential 
therapeutic approach to human malignant melanoma.

DOI: 10.1097/01.cmr.0000215029.62199.4c
PMID: 16567967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
