---
pmid: '16480936'
title: The role of beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2GPI) in the activation of plasminogen.
authors:
- López-Lira F
- Rosales-León L
- Martínez VM
- Ruiz Ordaz BH
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.12.020
---

# The role of beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2GPI) in the activation of plasminogen.
**Authors:** López-Lira F, Rosales-León L, Martínez VM, Ruiz Ordaz BH
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.12.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.12.020)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Apr;1764(4):815-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.12.020. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

The role of beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2GPI) in the activation of plasminogen.

López-Lira F(1), Rosales-León L, Martínez VM, Ruiz Ordaz BH.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, UNAM, Ciudad Universitaria 04510, México, D.F., 
Mexico.

Beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2GPI) is a glycoprotein of unknown physiological 
function. It is the main target antigen for antiphospholipid antibodies in 
patients with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). beta2GPI binds with high affinity 
to the atherogenic lipoprotein Lp(a) which shares structural homology with 
plasminogen, a key molecule in the fibrinolytic system. Impaired fibrinolysis 
has been described in APS. The present work reports the interaction between 
beta2GPI and Glu-Plasminogen which may explain the recently described 
proteolytic effect of plasmin on beta2GPI. In the process of Glu-Plasminogen 
activation, we found an increase in plasmin generation both at fibrin and 
cellular surface level as a function of the concentration of beta2GPI added, 
suggesting an important role as a cofactor in the trimolecular complex 
beta2GPI-Plasminogen-tPA. This phenomenon represents a novel regulatory step 
both in the positive feedback mechanism for extrinsic fibrinolysis and in 
antithrombotic regulation. IgG anti-beta2GPI antibodies recognized the beta2GPI 
at the endothelial surface inducing its activation with an increase of ICAM-I 
and a decrease in the expression of thrombomodulin favoring a pro-thrombotic 
state in the vascular endothelium. The interference in the plasmin conversion by 
anti-beta2GPI antibodies could generate thrombosis as observed in APS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.12.020
PMID: 16480936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
