---
reference_id: PMID:18156256
title: "lfnA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa O12 and wbuX from Escherichia coli O145 encode membrane-associated proteins and are required for expression of 2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamidino-L-galactose in lipopolysaccharide O antigen."
authors:
- King JD
- Mulrooney EF
- Vinogradov E
- Kneidinger B
- Mead K
- Lam JS
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1128/JB.01708-07
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# lfnA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa O12 and wbuX from Escherichia coli O145 encode membrane-associated proteins and are required for expression of 2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamidino-L-galactose in lipopolysaccharide O antigen.
**Authors:** King JD, Mulrooney EF, Vinogradov E, Kneidinger B, Mead K, Lam JS
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JB.01708-07](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.01708-07)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 2008 Mar;190(5):1671-9. doi: 10.1128/JB.01708-07. Epub 2007 Dec
21.

lfnA from Pseudomonas aeruginosa O12 and wbuX from Escherichia coli O145 encode 
membrane-associated proteins and are required for expression of 
2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamidino-L-galactose in lipopolysaccharide O antigen.

King JD(1), Mulrooney EF, Vinogradov E, Kneidinger B, Mead K, Lam JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, 
Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.

The rare sugar 2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamidino-L-galactose (L-FucNAm) is found only in 
bacteria and is a component of cell surface glycans in a number of pathogenic 
species, including the O antigens of Pseudomonas aeruginosa serotype O12 and 
Escherichia coli O145. P. aeruginosa is an important opportunistic pathogen, and 
the O12 serotype is associated with multidrug-resistant epidemic outbreaks. O145 
is one of the classic non-O157 serotypes associated with Shiga toxin-producing, 
enterohemorrhagic E. coli. The acetamidino (NAm) moiety of L-FucNAm is of 
interest, because at neutral pH it contributes a positive charge to the cell 
surface, and we aimed to characterize the biosynthesis of this functional group. 
The pathway is not known, but expression of NAm-modified sugars coincides with 
the presence of a pseA homologue in the relevant biosynthetic locus. PseA is a 
putative amidotransferase required for synthesis of a NAm-modified sugar in 
Campylobacter jejuni. In P. aeruginosa O12 and E. coli O145, the pseA homologues 
are lfnA and wbuX, respectively, and we hypothesized that these genes function 
in L-FucNAm biosynthesis. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis, Western blotting, and nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of 
the lfnA mutant O-antigen structure indicated that the mutant expresses 
2,6-dideoxy-2-acetamido-L-galactose (L-FucNAc) in place of L-FucNAm. The 
mutation could be complemented by expression of either His(6)-tagged lfnA or 
wbuX in trans, confirming that these genes are functional homologues and that 
they are required for NAm moiety synthesis. Both proteins retained their 
activity when fused to a His(6) tag and localized to the membrane fraction. 
These data will assist future biochemical investigation of this pathway.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01708-07
PMCID: PMC2258674
PMID: 18156256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]