---
pmid: '15182668'
title: Spindle checkpoint protein dynamics at kinetochores in living cells.
authors:
- Howell BJ
- Moree B
- Farrar EM
- Stewart S
- Fang G
- Salmon ED
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.053
---

# Spindle checkpoint protein dynamics at kinetochores in living cells.
**Authors:** Howell BJ, Moree B, Farrar EM, Stewart S, Fang G, Salmon ED
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.053)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2004 Jun 8;14(11):953-64. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.053.

Spindle checkpoint protein dynamics at kinetochores in living cells.

Howell BJ(1), Moree B, Farrar EM, Stewart S, Fang G, Salmon ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, CB#3280, 607 Fordham Hall, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA.

BACKGROUND: To test current models for how unattached and untense kinetochores 
prevent Cdc20 activation of the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) 
throughout the spindle and the cytoplasm, we used GFP fusions and live-cell 
imaging to quantify the abundance and dynamics of spindle checkpoint proteins 
Mad1, Mad2, Bub1, BubR1, Mps1, and Cdc20 at kinetochores during mitosis in 
living PtK2 cells.
RESULTS: Unattached kinetochores in prometaphase bound on average only a small 
fraction (estimated at 500-5000 molecules) of the total cellular pool of each 
spindle checkpoint protein. Measurements of fluorescence recovery after 
photobleaching (FRAP) showed that GFP-Cdc20 and GFP-BubR1 exhibit biphasic 
exponential kinetics at unattached kinetochores, with approximately 50% 
displaying very fast kinetics (t1/2 of approximately 1-3 s) and approximately 
50% displaying slower kinetics similar to the single exponential kinetics of 
GFP-Mad2 and GFP-Bub3 (t1/2 of 21-23 s). The slower phase of GFP-Cdc20 likely 
represents complex formation with Mad2 since it was tension insensitive and, 
unlike the fast phase, it was absent at metaphase kinetochores that lack Mad2 
but retain Cdc20 and was absent at unattached prometaphase kinetochores for the 
Cdc20 derivative GFP-Cdc20delta1-167, which lacks the major Mad2 binding domain 
but retains kinetochore localization. GFP-Mps1 exhibited single exponential 
kinetics at unattached kinetochores with a t1/2 of approximately 10 s, whereas 
most GFP-Mad1 and GFP-Bub1 were much more stable components.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support catalytic models of checkpoint activation where 
Mad1 and Bub1 are mainly resident, Mad2 free of Mad1, BubR1 and Bub3 free of 
Bub1, Cdc20, and Mps1 dynamically exchange as part of the diffuse wait-anaphase 
signal; and Mad2 interacts with Cdc20 at unattached kinetochores.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2004.05.053
PMID: 15182668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
