---
pmid: '9869408'
title: Identification of class B and class C floral organ identity genes from rice
  plants.
authors:
- Kang HG
- Jeon JS
- Lee S
- An G
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1006051911291
---

# Identification of class B and class C floral organ identity genes from rice plants.
**Authors:** Kang HG, Jeon JS, Lee S, An G
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1006051911291](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1006051911291)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Dec;38(6):1021-9. doi: 10.1023/a:1006051911291.

Identification of class B and class C floral organ identity genes from rice 
plants.

Kang HG(1), Jeon JS, Lee S, An G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and technology, 
Republic of Korea.

The functions of two rice MADS-box genes were studied by the loss-of-function 
approach. The first gene, OsMADS4, shows a significant homology to members in 
the PISTILLATA (PI) family, which is required to specify petal and stamen 
identity. The second gene, OsMADS3, is highly homologous to the members in the 
AGAMOUS (AG) family that is essential for the normal development of the internal 
two whorls, the stamen and carpel, of the flower. These two rice MADS box cDNA 
clones were connected to the maize ubiquitin promoter in an antisense 
orientation and the fusion molecules were introduced to rice plants by the 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation method. Transgenic plants expressing 
antisense OsMADS4 displayed alterations of the second and third whorls. The 
second-whorl lodicules, which are equivalent to the petals of dicot plants in 
grasses, were altered into palea/lemma-like organs, and the third whorl stamens 
were changed to carpel-like organs. Loss-of-function analysis of OsMADS3 showed 
alterations in the third and fourth whorls. In the third whorl, the filaments of 
the transgenic plants were changed into thick and fleshy bodies, similar to 
lodicules. Rather than making a carpel, the fourth whorl produced several 
abnormal flowers. These phenotypes are similar to those of the agamous and plena 
mutants in Arabidopsis and Antirrhinum, respectively. These results suggest that 
OsMADS4 belongs to the class B gene family and OsMADS3 belongs to the class C 
gene family of floral organ identity determination.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1006051911291
PMID: 9869408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
