---
pmid: '25218637'
title: RASSF1A-LATS1 signalling stabilizes replication forks by restricting CDK2-mediated
  phosphorylation of BRCA2.
authors:
- Pefani DE
- Latusek R
- Pires I
- Grawenda AM
- Yee KS
- Hamilton G
- van der Weyden L
- Esashi F
- Hammond EM
- O'Neill E
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4861244
doi: 10.1038/ncb3035
---

# RASSF1A-LATS1 signalling stabilizes replication forks by restricting CDK2-mediated phosphorylation of BRCA2.
**Authors:** Pefani DE, Latusek R, Pires I, Grawenda AM, Yee KS, Hamilton G, van der Weyden L, Esashi F, Hammond EM, O'Neill E
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb3035](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3035)
**PMC:** [PMC4861244](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4861244/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;16(10):962-71, 1-8. doi: 10.1038/ncb3035. Epub 2014
Sep  14.

RASSF1A-LATS1 signalling stabilizes replication forks by restricting 
CDK2-mediated phosphorylation of BRCA2.

Pefani DE(1), Latusek R(1), Pires I(1), Grawenda AM(1), Yee KS(1), Hamilton 
G(1), van der Weyden L(2), Esashi F(3), Hammond EM(1), O'Neill E(1).

Author information:
(1)CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, 
Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK.
(2)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1HH, UK.
(3)Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 
3RE, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;17(4):531. doi: 10.1038/ncb3152.

Genomic instability is a key hallmark of cancer leading to tumour heterogeneity 
and therapeutic resistance. BRCA2 has a fundamental role in error-free DNA 
repair but also sustains genome integrity by promoting RAD51 nucleofilament 
formation at stalled replication forks. CDK2 phosphorylates BRCA2 (pS3291-BRCA2) 
to limit stabilizing contacts with polymerized RAD51; however, how replication 
stress modulates CDK2 activity and whether loss of pS3291-BRCA2 regulation 
results in genomic instability of tumours are not known. Here we demonstrate 
that the Hippo pathway kinase LATS1 interacts with CDK2 in response to genotoxic 
stress to constrain pS3291-BRCA2 and support RAD51 nucleofilaments, thereby 
maintaining genomic fidelity during replication stalling. We also show that 
LATS1 forms part of an ATR-mediated response to replication stress that requires 
the tumour suppressor RASSF1A. Importantly, perturbation of the 
ATR-RASSF1A-LATS1 signalling axis leads to genomic defects associated with loss 
of BRCA2 function and contributes to genomic instability and 'BRCA-ness' in lung 
cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb3035
PMCID: PMC4861244
PMID: 25218637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
