---
pmid: '15217342'
title: The synaptic vesicle cycle.
authors:
- Sudhof TC
journal: Annu Rev Neurosci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412
---

# The synaptic vesicle cycle.
**Authors:** Sudhof TC
**Journal:** Annu Rev Neurosci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2004;27:509-47. doi:
10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412.

The synaptic vesicle cycle.

Sudhof TC(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, Department of Molecular Genetics, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9111, USA.Thomas. Sudhof@UTSouthwestern.edu

Neurotransmitter release is mediated by exocytosis of synaptic vesicles at the 
presynaptic active zone of nerve terminals. To support rapid and repeated rounds 
of release, synaptic vesicles undergo a trafficking cycle. The focal point of 
the vesicle cycle is Ca2+-triggered exocytosis that is followed by different 
routes of endocytosis and recycling. Recycling then leads to the docking and 
priming of the vesicles for another round of exo- and endocytosis. Recent 
studies have led to a better definition than previously available of how Ca2+ 
triggers exocytosis and how vesicles recycle. In particular, insight into how 
Munc18-1 collaborates with SNARE proteins in fusion, how the vesicular Ca2+ 
sensor synaptotagmin 1 triggers fast release, and how the vesicular Rab3 protein 
regulates release by binding to the active zone proteins RIM1 alpha and RIM2 
alpha has advanced our understanding of neurotransmitter release. The present 
review attempts to relate these molecular data with physiological results in an 
emerging view of nerve terminals as macromolecular machines.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.041002.131412
PMID: 15217342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
