---
pmid: '11278511'
title: Structure of human thymidylate synthase suggests advantages of chemotherapy
  with noncompetitive inhibitors.
authors:
- Phan J
- Steadman DJ
- Koli S
- Ding WC
- Minor W
- Dunlap RB
- Berger SH
- Lebioda L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009493200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structure of human thymidylate synthase suggests advantages of chemotherapy with noncompetitive inhibitors.
**Authors:** Phan J, Steadman DJ, Koli S, Ding WC, Minor W, Dunlap RB, Berger SH, Lebioda L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M009493200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M009493200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14170-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009493200. Epub
2001  Jan 24.

Structure of human thymidylate synthase suggests advantages of chemotherapy with 
noncompetitive inhibitors.

Phan J(1), Steadman DJ, Koli S, Ding WC, Minor W, Dunlap RB, Berger SH, Lebioda 
L.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina, 
Columbia 92908, USA.

Thymidylate synthase (TS) is a major target in the chemotherapy of colorectal 
cancer and some other neoplasms. The emergence of resistance to the treatment is 
often related to the increased levels of TS in cancer cells, which have been 
linked to the elimination of TS binding to its own mRNA upon drug binding, a 
feedback regulatory mechanism, and/or to the increased stability to 
intracellular degradation of TS.drug complexes (versus unliganded TS). The 
active site loop of human TS (hTS) has a unique conformation resulted from a 
rotation by 180 degrees relative to its orientation in bacterial TSs. In this 
conformation, the enzyme must be inactive, because the catalytic cysteine is no 
longer positioned in the ligand-binding pocket. The ordered solvent structure 
obtained from high resolution crystallographic data (2.0 A) suggests that the 
inactive loop conformation promotes mRNA binding and intracellular degradation 
of the enzyme. This hypothesis is supported by fluorescence studies, which 
indicate that in solution both active and inactive forms of hTS are present. The 
binding of phosphate ion shifts the equilibrium toward the inactive 
conformation; subsequent dUMP binding reverses the equilibrium toward the active 
form. Thus, TS inhibition via stabilization of the inactive conformation should 
lead to less resistance than is observed with presently used drugs, which are 
analogs of its substrates, dUMP and CH(2)H(4)folate, and bind in the active 
site, promoting the active conformation. The presence of an extension at the N 
terminus of native hTS has no significant effect on kinetic properties or 
crystal structure.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009493200
PMID: 11278511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
