---
pmid: '18287031'
title: CNK and HYP form a discrete dimer by their SAM domains to mediate RAF kinase
  signaling.
authors:
- Rajakulendran T
- Sahmi M
- Kurinov I
- Tyers M
- Therrien M
- Sicheri F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2268546
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0709705105
---

# CNK and HYP form a discrete dimer by their SAM domains to mediate RAF kinase signaling.
**Authors:** Rajakulendran T, Sahmi M, Kurinov I, Tyers M, Therrien M, Sicheri F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0709705105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0709705105)
**PMC:** [PMC2268546](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2268546/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 26;105(8):2836-41. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0709705105. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

CNK and HYP form a discrete dimer by their SAM domains to mediate RAF kinase 
signaling.

Rajakulendran T(1), Sahmi M, Kurinov I, Tyers M, Therrien M, Sicheri F.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Systems Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

RAF kinase functions in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway to 
transmit growth signals to the downstream kinases MEK and ERK. Activation of RAF 
catalytic activity is facilitated by a regulatory complex comprising the 
proteins CNK (Connector enhancer of KSR), HYP (Hyphen), and KSR (Kinase 
Suppressor of Ras). The sterile alpha-motif (SAM) domain found in both CNK and 
HYP plays an essential role in complex formation. Here, we have determined the 
x-ray crystal structure of the SAM domain of CNK in complex with the SAM domain 
of HYP. The structure reveals a single-junction SAM domain dimer of 1:1 
stoichiometry in which the binding mode is a variation of polymeric SAM domain 
interactions. Through in vitro and in vivo mutational analyses, we show that the 
specific mode of dimerization revealed by the crystal structure is essential for 
RAF signaling and facilitates the recruitment of KSR to form the CNK/HYP/KSR 
regulatory complex. We present two docking-site models to account for how SAM 
domain dimerization might influence the formation of a higher-order CNK/HYP/KSR 
complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0709705105
PMCID: PMC2268546
PMID: 18287031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
