---
pmid: '9774392'
title: Protein folding activity of Hsp70 is modified differentially by the hsp40 co-chaperones
  Sis1 and Ydj1.
authors:
- Lu Z
- Cyr DM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.43.27824
---

# Protein folding activity of Hsp70 is modified differentially by the hsp40 co-chaperones Sis1 and Ydj1.
**Authors:** Lu Z, Cyr DM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.43.27824](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.43.27824)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):27824-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.43.27824.

Protein folding activity of Hsp70 is modified differentially by the hsp40 
co-chaperones Sis1 and Ydj1.

Lu Z(1), Cyr DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama Medical 
Center, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0005, USA.

Specification of Hsp70 action in cellular protein metabolism may occur through 
the formation of specialized Hsp70:Hsp40 pairs. To test this model, we compared 
the ability of purified Sis1 and Ydj1 to regulate the ATPase and protein-folding 
activity of Hsp70 Ssa1 and Ssb1/2 proteins. Ydj1 and Sis1 could both 
functionally interact with Ssa1, but not the Ssb1/2 proteins, to refold 
luciferase. Interestingly, Ydj1:Ssa1 could promote up to four times more 
luciferase folding than Sis1:Ssa1. This functional difference was explored and 
could not be accounted for by differences in the ability of Sis1 and Ydj1 to 
regulate Ssa1 ATPase activity. Instead, differences in the chaperone function of 
Ydj1 and Sis1 were observed. Ydj1 was dramatically more effective than Sis1 at 
suppressing the thermally induced aggregation of luciferase. Paradoxically, Sis1 
and Ydj1 could bind similar quantities of chemically denatured luciferase. The 
polypeptide binding domain of Sis1 was found to lie between residues 171-352 and 
correspond to its conserved carboxyl terminus. The conserved carboxyl terminus 
of Ydj1 is also known to participate in the binding of nonnative polypeptides. 
Thus, Ydj1 appears more efficient at assisting Ssa1 in folding luciferase 
because its contains a zinc finger-like region that is absent from Sis1. Ydj1 
and Sis1 are structurally and functionally distinct Hsp40 proteins that can 
specify Ssa1 action by generating Hsp70:Hsp40 pairs that exhibit different 
chaperone activities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.43.27824
PMID: 9774392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
