---
pmid: '12435362'
title: The GLH proteins, Caenorhabditis elegans P granule components, associate with
  CSN-5 and KGB-1, proteins necessary for fertility, and with ZYX-1, a predicted cytoskeletal
  protein.
authors:
- Smith P
- Leung-Chiu WM
- Montgomery R
- Orsborn A
- Kuznicki K
- Gressman-Coberly E
- Mutapcic L
- Bennett K
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0832
---

# The GLH proteins, Caenorhabditis elegans P granule components, associate with CSN-5 and KGB-1, proteins necessary for fertility, and with ZYX-1, a predicted cytoskeletal protein.
**Authors:** Smith P, Leung-Chiu WM, Montgomery R, Orsborn A, Kuznicki K, Gressman-Coberly E, Mutapcic L, Bennett K
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/dbio.2002.0832](https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2002.0832)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2002 Nov 15;251(2):333-47. doi: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0832.

The GLH proteins, Caenorhabditis elegans P granule components, associate with 
CSN-5 and KGB-1, proteins necessary for fertility, and with ZYX-1, a predicted 
cytoskeletal protein.

Smith P(1), Leung-Chiu WM, Montgomery R, Orsborn A, Kuznicki K, Gressman-Coberly 
E, Mutapcic L, Bennett K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, 65212, USA.

The GLH proteins belong to a family of four germline RNA helicases in 
Caenorhabditis elegans. These putative ATP-dependent enzymes localize to the P 
granules, which are nonmembranous complexes of protein and RNA exclusively found 
in the cytoplasm of all C. elegans germ cells and germ cell precursors. To 
determine what proteins the GLHs bind, C. elegans cDNA libraries were screened 
by the yeast two-hybrid method, using GLHs as bait. Three interacting proteins, 
CSN-5, KGB-1, and ZYX-1, were identified and further characterized. GST 
pull-down assays independently established that these proteins bind GLHs. CSN-5 
is closely related to the subunit 5 protein of COP9 signalosomes, conserved 
multiprotein complexes of plants and animals. RNA interference (RNAi) with csn-5 
results in sterile worms with small gonads and no oocytes, a defect essentially 
identical to that produced by RNAi with a combination of glh-1 and glh-4. KGB-1 
is a putative JNK MAP kinase that GLHs bind. A kgb-1 deletion strain has a 
temperature-sensitive, sterile phenotype characterized by the absence of mature 
oocytes and the presence of trapped, immature oocytes that have undergone 
endoreplication. ZYX-1 is a LIM domain protein most like vertebrate Zyxin, a 
cytoskeletal adaptor protein. In C. elegans, while zyx-1 appears to be a single 
copy gene, neither RNAi depletion nor a zyx-1 deletion strain results in an 
obvious phenotype. These three conserved proteins are the first members in each 
of their families reported to associate with germline helicases. Similar to the 
loss of GLH-1 and GLH-4, loss of either CSN-5 or KGB-1 causes oogenesis to 
cease, but does not affect the initial assembly of P granules.

DOI: 10.1006/dbio.2002.0832
PMID: 12435362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
