---
pmid: '20810993'
title: 'An alternative role of C1q in cell migration and tissue remodeling: contribution
  to trophoblast invasion and placental development.'
authors:
- Agostinis C
- Bulla R
- Tripodo C
- Gismondi A
- Stabile H
- Bossi F
- Guarnotta C
- Garlanda C
- De Seta F
- Spessotto P
- Santoni A
- Ghebrehiwet B
- Girardi G
- Tedesco F
journal: J Immunol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903215
---

# An alternative role of C1q in cell migration and tissue remodeling: contribution to trophoblast invasion and placental development.
**Authors:** Agostinis C, Bulla R, Tripodo C, Gismondi A, Stabile H, Bossi F, Guarnotta C, Garlanda C, De Seta F, Spessotto P, Santoni A, Ghebrehiwet B, Girardi G, Tedesco F
**Journal:** J Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.0903215](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.0903215)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2010 Oct 1;185(7):4420-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903215. Epub 2010 
Sep 1.

An alternative role of C1q in cell migration and tissue remodeling: contribution 
to trophoblast invasion and placental development.

Agostinis C(1), Bulla R, Tripodo C, Gismondi A, Stabile H, Bossi F, Guarnotta C, 
Garlanda C, De Seta F, Spessotto P, Santoni A, Ghebrehiwet B, Girardi G, Tedesco 
F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, for Maternal and Child Health, Burlo Garofolo, 
University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Fetal trophoblast cells invading the decidua in the early phase of pregnancy 
establish complex interaction with the maternal extracellular matrix. We 
discovered that C1q was widely distributed in human decidual stroma in the 
absence of C4 and C3 and was actively synthesized by migrating extravillous 
trophoblasts. The cells expressed the messages for the three chains of C1q and 
secreted this complement component that interacted with the proteins of the 
decidual extracellular matrix. Solid phase-bound C1q promoted trophoblast 
adhesion and migration, and cell binding to C1q resulted in activation of ERK1/2 
MAPKs. Ab inhibition experiments showed that the receptors for the globular head 
of C1q/p33 and α(4)β(1) integrin were both involved in this process and were 
colocalized on the cell surface following binding of C1q to trophoblasts. We 
also found that C1q(-/-) mice manifested increased frequency of fetal 
resorption, reduced fetal weight, and smaller litter sizes compared with 
wild-type mice. C1q deficiency was associated with impaired labyrinth 
development and decidual vessel remodeling. Collectively, these data suggest 
that C1q plays an important role in promoting trophoblast invasion of decidua 
and that defective local production of C1q may be involved in pregnancy 
disorders, such as pre-eclampsia, characterized by poor trophoblast invasion.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903215
PMID: 20810993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
