---
pmid: '17417653'
title: Structure of the human GINS complex and its assembly and functional interface
  in replication initiation.
authors:
- Kamada K
- Kubota Y
- Arata T
- Shindo Y
- Hanaoka F
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1231
---

# Structure of the human GINS complex and its assembly and functional interface in replication initiation.
**Authors:** Kamada K, Kubota Y, Arata T, Shindo Y, Hanaoka F
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1231](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1231)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 May;14(5):388-96. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1231. Epub 2007
Apr  8.

Structure of the human GINS complex and its assembly and functional interface in 
replication initiation.

Kamada K(1), Kubota Y, Arata T, Shindo Y, Hanaoka F.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Physiology Laboratory, RIKEN Discovery Research Institute, 2-1 
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. kamadak@riken.jp

The eukaryotic GINS complex is essential for the establishment of DNA 
replication forks and replisome progression. We report the crystal structure of 
the human GINS complex. The heterotetrameric complex adopts a pseudo symmetrical 
layered structure comprising two heterodimers, creating four subunit-subunit 
interfaces. The subunit structures of the heterodimers consist of two 
alternating domains. The C-terminal domains of the Sld5 and Psf1 subunits are 
connected by linker regions to the core complex, and the C-terminal domain of 
Sld5 is important for core complex assembly. In contrast, the C-terminal domain 
of Psf1 does not contribute to the stability of the complex but is crucial for 
chromatin binding and replication activity. These data suggest that the core 
complex ensures a stable platform for the C-terminal domain of Psf1 to act as a 
key interaction interface for other proteins in the replication-initiation 
process.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1231
PMID: 17417653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
