---
pmid: '10099709'
title: 'Genetics of synaptic vesicle function: toward the complete functional anatomy
  of an organelle.'
authors:
- Fernández-Chacón R
- Südhof TC
journal: Annu Rev Physiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.61.1.753
---

# Genetics of synaptic vesicle function: toward the complete functional anatomy of an organelle.
**Authors:** Fernández-Chacón R, Südhof TC
**Journal:** Annu Rev Physiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.physiol.61.1.753](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physiol.61.1.753)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Physiol. 1999;61:753-76. doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.61.1.753.

Genetics of synaptic vesicle function: toward the complete functional anatomy of 
an organelle.

Fernández-Chacón R(1), Südhof TC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas 75235-9050, USA. 
RFerna@mednet.swmed.edu

Synaptic transmission starts with the release of neurotransmitters by exocytosis 
of synaptic vesicles. As a relatively simple organelle with a limited number of 
components, synaptic vesicles are in principle accessible to complete structural 
and functional genetic analysis. At present, the majority of synaptic vesicle 
proteins has been characterized, and many have been genetically analyzed in 
mice, Drosophila, and Caenorhabditis elegans. These studies have shown that 
synaptic vesicles contain proteins with diverse structures and functions. 
Although the genetic studies are as yet unfinished, they promise to lead to a 
full description of synaptic vesicles as macromolecular machines involved in all 
aspects of presynaptic neurotransmitter release.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.61.1.753
PMID: 10099709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
