---
pmid: '11910010'
title: Fertile hypomorphic ARGONAUTE (ago1) mutants impaired in post-transcriptional
  gene silencing and virus resistance.
authors:
- Morel JB
- Godon C
- Mourrain P
- Béclin C
- Boutet S
- Feuerbach F
- Proux F
- Vaucheret H
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC150585
doi: 10.1105/tpc.010358
---

# Fertile hypomorphic ARGONAUTE (ago1) mutants impaired in post-transcriptional gene silencing and virus resistance.
**Authors:** Morel JB, Godon C, Mourrain P, Béclin C, Boutet S, Feuerbach F, Proux F, Vaucheret H
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.010358](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.010358)
**PMC:** [PMC150585](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC150585/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2002 Mar;14(3):629-39. doi: 10.1105/tpc.010358.

Fertile hypomorphic ARGONAUTE (ago1) mutants impaired in post-transcriptional
gene silencing and virus resistance.

Morel JB(1), Godon C, Mourrain P, Béclin C, Boutet S, Feuerbach F, Proux F,
Vaucheret H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, 78026 Versailles Cedex, France.

Transgene-induced post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) results from
specific degradation of RNAs that are homologous with the transgene transcribed
sequence. This phenomenon, also known as cosuppression in plants and quelling in
fungi, resembles RNA interference (RNAi) in animals. Indeed,
cosuppression/quelling/RNAi require related PAZ/PIWI proteins
(AGO1/QDE-2/RDE-1), indicating that these mechanisms are related. Unlike
Neurospora crassa qde-2 and Caenorhabditis elegans rde-1 mutants, which are
morphologically normal, the 24 known Arabidopsis ago1 mutants display severe
developmental abnormalities and are sterile. Here, we report the isolation of
hypomorphic ago1 mutants, including fertile ones. We show that these hypomorphic
ago1 mutants are defective for PTGS, like null sgs2, sgs3, and ago1 mutants,
suggesting that PTGS is more sensitive than development to perturbations in
AGO1. Conversely, a mutation in ZWILLE/PINHEAD, another member of the
Arabidopsis AGO1 gene family, affects development but not PTGS. Similarly,
mutations in ALG-1 and ALG-2, two members of the C. elegans RDE-1 gene family,
affect development but not RNAi, indicating that the control of PTGS/RNAi and
development by PAZ/PIWI proteins can be uncoupled. Finally, we show that
hypomorphic ago1 mutants are hypersensitive to virus infection, confirming the
hypothesis that in plants PTGS is a mechanism of defense against viruses.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.010358
PMCID: PMC150585
PMID: 11910010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
