---
pmid: '12108949'
title: The role of STATs in apoptosis.
authors:
- Battle TE
- Frank DA
journal: Curr Mol Med
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.2174/1566524023362456
---

# The role of STATs in apoptosis.
**Authors:** Battle TE, Frank DA
**Journal:** Curr Mol Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1566524023362456](https://doi.org/10.2174/1566524023362456)

## Abstract

1. Curr Mol Med. 2002 Jun;2(4):381-92. doi: 10.2174/1566524023362456.

The role of STATs in apoptosis.

Battle TE(1), Frank DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are transcription 
factors that mediate cytokine and growth factor induced signals that culminate 
in various biological responses, including proliferation and differentiation. 
Recent studies indicate a role for STATs in apoptosis as well. Depending upon 
the particular stimulus or cell type, STATs can mediate either pro-apoptotic 
signals or anti-apoptotic signals. STAT1 and, under some circums-tances. STAT3 
are important for transducing pro-apoptotic signals whereas STAT3 and STAT5 have 
been implicated in promoting cell survival. Recent studies demonstrate that 
regulation of apoptotic pathways by STATs is largely due to transcriptional 
activation of genes that encode proteins that mediate or trigger the cell death 
process, such as Bcl-xL, caspases, Fas and TRAIL as well as those that regulate 
cell cycle progression, such as p21waf1. Interestingly, STAT proteins may also 
regulate apoptosis through a non-transcriptional mechanism by inhibiting the 
anti-apoptotic protein NF-kappaB. Considering that dysregulation of the STAT 
signaling pathway is commonly found in clinical tumor samples, understanding the 
mechanisms underlying STAT regulation of cell survival may lead to successful 
strategies for targeting STATs in cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524023362456
PMID: 12108949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
