---
pmid: '9716598'
title: SLP-76-Cbl-Grb2-Shc interactions in FcgammaRI signaling.
authors:
- Chu J
- Liu Y
- Koretzky GA
- Durden DL
journal: Blood
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
---

# SLP-76-Cbl-Grb2-Shc interactions in FcgammaRI signaling.
**Authors:** Chu J, Liu Y, Koretzky GA, Durden DL
**Journal:** Blood (1998)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 1998 Sep 1;92(5):1697-706.

SLP-76-Cbl-Grb2-Shc interactions in FcgammaRI signaling.

Chu J(1), Liu Y, Koretzky GA, Durden DL.

Author information:
(1)Neil Bogart Memorial Laboratories, Division of Hematology-Oncology, Childrens 
Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

SLP-76 and Cbl are complex adapter proteins that have the capacity to bind to 
smaller adapter proteins, such as Grb2, which subsequently binds the nucleotide 
exchange protein Sos in the transmission of intracellular signals. SLP-76, Cbl, 
Shc, and Grb2 have been implicated in immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation 
motif (ITAM) signaling, leading to activation of Ras. However, their mechanism 
of action has not been determined. To date, there have been no reports of SLP-76 
involvement in FcgammaRI-receptor signaling and no data exist for an interaction 
between Cbl, Shc, and SLP-76 in vivo. We provide evidence that SLP-76, Cbl, and 
Shc are tyrosine phosphorylated on FcgammaRI-receptor stimulation and are 
associated with the adapter protein Grb2 in gamma-interferon-differentiated U937 
cells (U937IF). The interactions between SLP-76 and Cbl and SLP-76 and Grb2 are 
present in resting U937IF cells. However, the interaction between SLP-76 and 
Grb2 becomes augmented twofold on FcgammaRI-receptor aggregation. Our results 
provide the first evidence for a phosphorylation-dependent interaction between 
SLP-76 and Shc, induced at least 10-fold on FcgammaRI receptor stimulation. Our 
data indicate that a significant portion of a multimolecular complex containing 
Cbl, SLP-76, Shc, and Grb2 is distinct from a trimolecular complex containing 
the Ras guanine nucleotide exchanger Sos, Shc, and Grb2. FcgammaRI-induced 
tyrosine phosphorylation of SLP-76, Cbl, Shc, and the highly induced SLP-76-Shc 
interaction provide the first evidence that SLP-76 and Cbl are involved in 
FcgammaRI signaling and suggest a functional significance for these interactions 
in FcgammaRI signal relay in the control of Ras in myeloid cells.

Copyright 1998 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 9716598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
