---
pmid: '25219498'
title: Modification of ASC1 by UFM1 is crucial for ERα transactivation and breast
  cancer development.
authors:
- Yoo HM
- Kang SH
- Kim JY
- Lee JE
- Seong MW
- Lee SW
- Ka SH
- Sou YS
- Komatsu M
- Tanaka K
- Lee ST
- Noh DY
- Baek SH
- Jeon YJ
- Chung CH
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007
---

# Modification of ASC1 by UFM1 is crucial for ERα transactivation and breast cancer development.
**Authors:** Yoo HM, Kang SH, Kim JY, Lee JE, Seong MW, Lee SW, Ka SH, Sou YS, Komatsu M, Tanaka K, Lee ST, Noh DY, Baek SH, Jeon YJ, Chung CH
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 23;56(2):261-274. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007. Epub 
2014 Sep 11.

Modification of ASC1 by UFM1 is crucial for ERα transactivation and breast 
cancer development.

Yoo HM(1), Kang SH(1), Kim JY(1), Lee JE(2), Seong MW(1), Lee SW(1), Ka SH(1), 
Sou YS(3), Komatsu M(3), Tanaka K(3), Lee ST(2), Noh DY(2), Baek SH(1), Jeon 
YJ(4), Chung CH(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Surgery, and Neurology, College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-744, Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Frontier Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Electronic address: gydbs98@snu.ac.kr.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National 
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Electronic address: chchung@snu.ac.kr.

Biological roles for UFM1, a ubiquitin-like protein, are largely unknown, and 
therefore we screened for targets of ufmylation. Here we show that ufmylation of 
the nuclear receptor coactivator ASC1 is a key step for ERα transactivation in 
response to 17β-estradiol (E2). In the absence of E2, the UFM1-specific protease 
UfSP2 was bound to ASC1, which maintains ASC1 in a nonufmylated state. In the 
presence of E2, ERα bound ASC1 and displaced UfSP2, leading to ASC1 ufmylation. 
Polyufmylation of ASC1 enhanced association of p300, SRC1, and ASC1 at promoters 
of ERα target genes. ASC1 overexpression or UfSP2 knockdown promoted 
ERα-mediated tumor formation in vivo, which could be abrogated by treatment with 
the anti-breast cancer drug tamoxifen. In contrast, expression of 
ufmylation-deficient ASC1 mutant or knockdown of the UFM1-activating E1 enzyme 
UBA5 prevented tumor growth. These findings establish a role for ASC1 ufmylation 
in breast cancer development by promoting ERα transactivation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007
PMID: 25219498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
