---
pmid: '20847002'
title: The integral membrane FtsW protein and peptidoglycan synthase PBP3 form a subcomplex
  in Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Fraipont C
- Alexeeva S
- Wolf B
- van der Ploeg R
- Schloesser M
- den Blaauwen T
- Nguyen-Distèche M
journal: Microbiology (Reading)
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1099/mic.0.040071-0
---

# The integral membrane FtsW protein and peptidoglycan synthase PBP3 form a subcomplex in Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Fraipont C, Alexeeva S, Wolf B, van der Ploeg R, Schloesser M, den Blaauwen T, Nguyen-Distèche M
**Journal:** Microbiology (Reading) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1099/mic.0.040071-0](https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.040071-0)

## Abstract

1. Microbiology (Reading). 2011 Jan;157(Pt 1):251-259. doi:
10.1099/mic.0.040071-0.  Epub 2010 Sep 16.

The integral membrane FtsW protein and peptidoglycan synthase PBP3 form a 
subcomplex in Escherichia coli.

Fraipont C(1), Alexeeva S(2), Wolf B(1), van der Ploeg R(2), Schloesser M(1), 
den Blaauwen T(2), Nguyen-Distèche M(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Ingénierie des Protéines, Université de Liège, Institut de Chimie, 
B6a, B-4000 Sart-Tilman, Belgium.
(2)Molecular Cytology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of 
Amsterdam, Science Park 1098 XH Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

During the cell cycle of rod-shaped bacteria, two morphogenetic processes can be 
discriminated: length growth of the cylindrical part of the cell and cell 
division by formation of two new cell poles. The morphogenetic protein complex 
responsible for the septation during cell division (the divisome) includes class 
A and class B penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs). In Escherichia coli, the class 
B PBP3 is specific for septal peptidoglycan synthesis. It requires the putative 
lipid II flippase FtsW for its localization at the division site and is 
necessary for the midcell localization of the class A PBP1B. In this work we 
show direct interactions between FtsW and PBP3 in vivo and in vitro by FRET 
(Förster resonance energy transfer) and co-immunoprecipitation experiments. 
These proteins are able to form a discrete complex independently of the other 
cell-division proteins. The K2-V42 peptide of PBP3 containing the 
membrane-spanning sequence is a structural determinant sufficient for 
interaction with FtsW and for PBP3 dimerization. By using a two-hybrid assay, 
the class A PBP1B was shown to interact with FtsW. However, it could not be 
detected in the immunoprecipitated FtsW-PBP3 complex. The periplasmic loop 9/10 
of FtsW appeared to be involved in the interaction with both PBP1B and PBP3. It 
might play an important role in the positioning of these proteins within the 
divisome.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.040071-0
PMID: 20847002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
