---
pmid: '10869431'
title: 'In organello formaldehyde crosslinking of proteins to mtDNA: identification
  of bifunctional proteins.'
authors:
- Kaufman BA
- Newman SM
- Hallberg RL
- Slaughter CA
- Perlman PS
- Butow RA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC16620
doi: 10.1073/pnas.140063197
---

# In organello formaldehyde crosslinking of proteins to mtDNA: identification of bifunctional proteins.
**Authors:** Kaufman BA, Newman SM, Hallberg RL, Slaughter CA, Perlman PS, Butow RA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.140063197](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.140063197)
**PMC:** [PMC16620](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC16620/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Jul 5;97(14):7772-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.140063197.

In organello formaldehyde crosslinking of proteins to mtDNA: identification of 
bifunctional proteins.

Kaufman BA(1), Newman SM, Hallberg RL, Slaughter CA, Perlman PS, Butow RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, 
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The segregating unit of mtDNA is a protein-DNA complex called the nucleoid. In 
an effort to understand how nucleoid proteins contribute to mtDNA organization 
and inheritance, we have developed an in organello formaldehyde crosslinking 
procedure to identify proteins associated with mtDNA. Using highly purified 
mitochondria, we observed a time-dependent crosslinking of protein to mtDNA as 
determined by sedimentation through isopycnic cesium chloride gradients. We 
detected approximately 20 proteins crosslinked to mtDNA and identified 11, 
mostly by mass spectrometry. Among them is Abf2p, an abundant, high-mobility 
group protein that is known to function in nucleoid morphology, and in mtDNA 
transactions. In addition to several other proteins with known DNA binding 
properties or that function in mtDNA maintenance, we identified other 
mtDNA-associated proteins that were not anticipated, such as the molecular 
chaperone Hsp60p and a Krebs cycle protein, Kgd2p. Genetic experiments indicate 
that hsp60-ts mutants have a petite-inducing phenotype at the permissive 
temperature and that a kgd2Delta mutation increases the petite-inducing 
phenotype of an abf2Delta mutation. Crosslinking and DNA gel shift experiments 
show that Hsp60p binds to single-stranded DNA with high specificity for the 
template strand of a putative origin of mtDNA replication. These data identify 
bifunctional proteins that participate in the stability of rho(+) mtDNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.140063197
PMCID: PMC16620
PMID: 10869431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
