---
pmid: '29150432'
title: The IKK-related kinase TBK1 activates mTORC1 directly in response to growth
  factors and innate immune agonists.
authors:
- Bodur C
- Kazyken D
- Huang K
- Ekim Ustunel B
- Siroky KA
- Tooley AS
- Gonzalez IE
- Foley DH
- Acosta-Jaquez HA
- Barnes TM
- Steinl GK
- Cho KW
- Lumeng CN
- Riddle SM
- Myers MG Jr
- Fingar DC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5753041
doi: 10.15252/embj.201696164
---

# The IKK-related kinase TBK1 activates mTORC1 directly in response to growth factors and innate immune agonists.
**Authors:** Bodur C, Kazyken D, Huang K, Ekim Ustunel B, Siroky KA, Tooley AS, Gonzalez IE, Foley DH, Acosta-Jaquez HA, Barnes TM, Steinl GK, Cho KW, Lumeng CN, Riddle SM, Myers MG Jr, Fingar DC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201696164](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201696164)
**PMC:** [PMC5753041](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5753041/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2018 Jan 4;37(1):19-38. doi: 10.15252/embj.201696164. Epub 2017 Nov
17.

The IKK-related kinase TBK1 activates mTORC1 directly in response to growth 
factors and innate immune agonists.

Bodur C(1), Kazyken D(1), Huang K(1), Ekim Ustunel B(1), Siroky KA(1), Tooley 
AS(1), Gonzalez IE(1), Foley DH(1), Acosta-Jaquez HA(1), Barnes TM(2), Steinl 
GK(2), Cho KW(3), Lumeng CN(3), Riddle SM(4), Myers MG Jr(2), Fingar DC(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Illumina, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA dfingar@umich.edu.

The innate immune kinase TBK1 initiates inflammatory responses to combat 
infectious pathogens by driving production of type I interferons. TBK1 also 
controls metabolic processes and promotes oncogene-induced cell proliferation 
and survival. Here, we demonstrate that TBK1 activates mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) 
directly. In cultured cells, TBK1 associates with and activates mTORC1 through 
site-specific mTOR phosphorylation (on S2159) in response to certain growth 
factor receptors (i.e., EGF-receptor but not insulin receptor) and pathogen 
recognition receptors (PRRs) (i.e., TLR3; TLR4), revealing a stimulus-selective 
role for TBK1 in mTORC1 regulation. By studying cultured macrophages and those 
isolated from genome edited mTOR S2159A knock-in mice, we show that mTOR S2159 
phosphorylation promotes mTORC1 signaling, IRF3 nuclear translocation, and IFN-β 
production. These data demonstrate a direct mechanistic link between TBK1 and 
mTORC1 function as well as physiologic significance of the TBK1-mTORC1 axis in 
control of innate immune function. These data unveil TBK1 as a direct mTORC1 
activator and suggest unanticipated roles for mTORC1 downstream of TBK1 in 
control of innate immunity, tumorigenesis, and disorders linked to chronic 
inflammation.

© 2017 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201696164
PMCID: PMC5753041
PMID: 29150432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The innate immune kinase TBK1 initiates inflammatory responses to combat infectious pathogens by driving production of type I interferons. TBK1 also controls metabolic processes and promotes oncogene‐induced cell proliferation and survival. Here, we demonstrate that TBK1 activates mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) directly. In cultured cells, TBK1 associates with and activates mTORC1 through site‐specific mTOR phosphorylation (on S2159) in response to certain growth factor receptors (i.e., EGF‐receptor but not insulin receptor) and pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) (i.e., TLR3; TLR4), revealing a stimulus‐selective role for TBK1 in mTORC1 regulation. By studying cultured macrophages and those isolated from genome edited mTOR S2159A knock‐in mice, we show that mTOR S2159 phosphorylation promotes mTORC1 signaling, IRF3 nuclear translocation, and IFN‐β production. These data demonstrate a direct mechanistic link between TBK1 and mTORC1 function as well as physiologic significance of the TBK1‐mTORC1 axis in control of innate immune function. These data unveil TBK1 as a direct mTORC1 activator and suggest unanticipated roles for mTORC1 downstream of TBK1 in control of innate immunity, tumorigenesis, and disorders linked to chronic inflammation.

Introduction

TANK‐binding kinase 1 (TBK1; aka NAK or T2K) and IKKε (IkB kinase ε) (aka IKKi, for “inducible”) represent non‐canonical IKK‐related innate immune kinases that mediate production of interferons and interferon‐stimulated genes (ISGs) downstream of Toll‐like receptors (TLRs), which function as pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs; Hacker & Karin, 2006 ; Clement et al , 2008 ; Mogensen, 2009 ). Upon PRR activation by pathogen‐associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), TLR signaling initiates host defense responses that eliminate pathogenic microbes (Mogensen, 2009 ; O'Neill et al , 2013 ). TANK‐binding kinase 1 expression is ubiquitous while IKKε expression is tissue‐restricted but inducible (Hacker & Karin, 2006 ; Clement et al , 2008 ). While the canonical IKKs (i.e.,IKKα; IKKβ) promote NF‐κB‐mediated pro‐inflammatory gene expression, TBK1 and IKKε phosphorylate the transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7 and promote their dimerization, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activation, resulting in transcriptional induction of type I interferons (e.g., IFN‐α; IFN‐β; Fitzgerald et al , 2003 ; Hacker & Karin, 2006 ; Karin, 2009 ; Mogensen, 2009 ). TLR3 and TLR4 signal through the adaptor TRIF to activate TBK1 by an incompletely defined mechanism that involves TBK1 dimerization, K63‐linked polyubiquitination, and activation loop phosphorylation by an unknown kinase and/or by auto‐phosphorylation (Hacker & Karin, 2006 ; Mogensen, 2009 ; Ma et al , 2012 ; Tu et al , 2013 ). In addition to well‐defined roles in innate immunity, emerging work suggests that TBK1 and IKKε contribute to various pathological conditions including autoimmune diseases, obesity‐associated metabolic disorders, and cancer (Chiang et al , 2009 ; Grivennikov et al , 2010 ; Shen & Hahn, 2011 ; Yu et al , 2012 ; Reilly et al , 2013 ). In oncogenic KRAS transformed cells, TBK1 is required for anchorage‐independent cell proliferation and survival, as well as the growth of tumor explants in vivo (Chien et al , 2006 ; Clement et al , 2008 ; Barbie et al , 2009 ; Ou et al , 2011 ; Xie et al , 2011 ). In addition, IKKε contributes to cell transformation and exhibits amplification in breast cancer cells (Boehm et al , 2007 ).

Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), an evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine protein kinase, integrates diverse environmental signals and translates these cues into appropriate cellular responses (Huang & Fingar, 2014 ; Dibble & Cantley, 2015 ; Saxton & Sabatini, 2017 ). Mechanistic target of rapamycin promotes cell growth, proliferation, and survival and modulates immune function and cell metabolism. Consequently, aberrant mTOR signaling has been linked to myriad pathologic states including cancer and obesity‐linked diabetes (Zoncu et al , 2011 ; Laplante & Sabatini, 2012 ; Cornu et al , 2013 ). Despite the clear physiologic and therapeutic importance of mTOR, the biochemical pathways and molecular mechanisms that regulate mTOR function in response to diverse cellular cues and physiologic contexts remain incompletely deciphered. mTOR forms the catalytic core of two functionally distinct complexes defined by distinct partner proteins and sensitivities to the allosteric mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. The mTOR interacting protein raptor defines mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1; sensitive to acute rapamycin) while rictor defines mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2; insensitive to acute rapamycin; Hara et al , 2002 ; Kim et al , 2002 ; Sarbassov et al , 2004 ; Thoreen & Sabatini, 2009 ; Laplante & Sabatini, 2012 ; Cornu et al , 2013 ). Well‐described substrates of mTORC1 include S6K1 (ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1) and the translational repressor 4EBP1 (eIF4E‐binding protein 1; Jacinto & Lorberg, 2008 ; Magnuson et al , 2012 ; Huang & Fingar, 2014 ). Anabolic cellular signals such as growth factors (i.e., insulin; EGF) and nutrients (i.e., amino acids, glucose) promote mTORC1 signaling to increase protein, lipid, and nucleotide synthesis (Ma & Blenis, 2009 ; Dibble & Manning, 2013 ; Howell et al , 2013 ; Ricoult & Manning, 2013 ). While the regulation of mTORC2 remains less defined, mTORC2 phosphorylates Akt to modulate cell metabolism and promote cell survival (Sarbassov et al , 2005 ; Alessi et al , 2009 ).

Here, we demonstrate that the innate immune kinase TBK1 associates with and promotes mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) catalytic activity and downstream signaling directly through site‐specific mTOR phosphorylation, thus unveiling new crosstalk between these important signaling systems. Although not mechanistically defined here, our data also indicate that TBK1 promotes mTORC2 signaling, which supports published work (Ou et al , 2011 ; Xie et al , 2011 ). EGF‐ but not insulin‐receptor‐mediated mTORC1 signaling requires TBK1 and mTOR S2159 phosphorylation, indicating a stimulus‐selective role for TBK1 in mTORC1 regulation by growth factors. During innate immune signaling, TRL3‐ and TLR4‐induced mTORC1 signaling also requires TBK1 and mTOR S2159 phosphorylation. By studying IFN‐β production in cultured and primary macrophages, we demonstrate that the TBK1‐mTORC1 axis controls physiologically relevant innate immune function. mTORC1 inhibition with rapamycin suppresses TLR3‐induced IFN‐β production by blunting the translocation of IRF3 from the cytosol to nucleus. Moreover, primary macrophages isolated from genome edited mice bearing a germline mTOR S2159A knock‐in allele show impaired mTORC1 signaling, IRF3 translocation, and IFN‐β production. Taken together, these data unveil TBK1 as a direct activator of mTORC1 and suggest roles for mTORC1 downstream of TBK1, which may improve our understanding of innate immunity as well as disorders linked to chronic low‐grade inflammation such as cancer, diabetes, and autoimmune diseases.

Discussion

In addition to classical roles in innate immunity and inflammation to combat infectious pathogens, TBK1 and IKKε have been linked to tumorigenesis during oncogenic stress and metabolic control during obesity (Chiang et al , 2009 ; Shen & Hahn, 2011 ; Helgason et al , 2013 ; Reilly et al , 2013 ). The role of TBK1/IKKε in diverse cellular processes suggests that these kinases likely possess multiple substrates that control cell physiology in cell context‐dependent manners. Here we demonstrate that TBK1 phosphorylates mTOR directly to increase mTORC1 catalytic activity and signaling, thus identifying mTORC1 as a new TBK1 substrate and TBK1 as a new mTORC1 activator. While challenging to prove definitively that a kinase phosphorylates a substrate directly in intact cells, our collective data support the notion that mTORC1 represents a bona fide TBK1 substrate. For example, recombinant TBK1 as well as Flag‐TBK1 immunoprecipitated from intact cells phosphorylates mTOR in vitro , Flag‐TBK1 expressed ectopically in cells increases mTOR phosphorylation, treatment of cells with EGF increases mTOR phosphorylation in TBK1 +/+ but not TBK1 −/− MEFs, and TBK1 interacts with mTORC1 in intact cells. Multiple approaches including genetic knockout and knock‐in, pharmacological inhibition, and RNAi demonstrate that mTORC1 signaling requires TBK1 downstream of EGF‐receptor and TLR3/4. By studying cultured cells expressing an ectopic mTOR S2159 Ala substitution mutant or primary macrophages derived from genetically modified mice bearing germline mTOR S2159A knock‐in mutation (mTOR A/A ), we show that phosphorylation of mTOR on a TBK1 site (S2159) promotes mTORC1 signaling in response to EGF and innate immune agonists. These data demonstrate a direct mechanistic link between TBK1 and mTORC1 and cross talk between these important signaling systems. To gain greater insight into the physiologic relevance of the TBK1‐mTORC1 axis in control of innate immune function, we measured IFN‐β production, a major cellular function controlled by TBK1. Pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1 with rapamycin in cultured macrophages (RAW264.7) and primary macrophages (BMDMs) suppressed IFN‐β production upon TLR3 or TLR4 activation through a mechanism involving reduced translocation of the transcription factor IRF3 from the cytosol into the nucleus. Analysis of primary macrophages derived from our mTOR A/A knock‐in mice revealed that TBK1 promotes IRF3 translocation and IFN‐β production through site‐specific mTOR phosphorylation.

Consistent with our work, other studies reported that TBK1 interacts with mTOR (Kim et al , 2013 ; Hasan et al , 2017 ). Paradoxically, however, these studies concluded that TBK1 inhibits mTORC1. While we do not fully understand this discrepancy, the cellular contexts of these studies were quite different from ours. Kim et al ( 2013 ) studied prostate cancer cells and found that overexpression of TBK1 reduced S6K1 T389 phosphorylation. Similarly, we find that TBK1 overexpression inhibits mTORC1 signaling (see Fig EV2 B). We have thus avoided TBK1 overexpression as an approach when studying mTORC1 signaling. It is important to note that raptor, a scaffolding protein and mTOR partner essential for mTORC1 signaling, also suppresses S6K1 phosphorylation when overexpressed. Hasan et al ( 2017 ) studied MEFs from mice lacking Trex, a clinical model of autoimmune/autoinflammatory disease. Knockout of the Trex exonuclease in MEFs activates the cytosolic DNA sensing cGAS‐STING‐TBK1 pathway; these MEFs also exhibit reduced mTORC1 signaling relative to Trex +/+ MEFs (Hasan et al , 2017 ). As both TBK1 and mTORC1 engage in negative feedback, it is possible that chronic loss of Trex re‐wires cell signaling that impacts the mTORC1 pathway negatively.

Our work demonstrates a dominant role for TBK1 in EGF‐ but not insulin‐stimulated mTORC1 signaling, revealing a stimulus‐selective role for TBK1 in mTORC1 regulation by growth factors. Interestingly, data shown but not discussed in an earlier report agrees with this finding (Ou et al , 2011 ). Consistently, cells reliant on an mTOR S2159A allele show impaired mTORC1 signaling in response to EGF but not insulin [see Fig 4 A and Ekim et al ( 2011 )]. How TBK1 contributes selectively to mTORC1 activation by growth factors remains an important question. EGF but not insulin may activate TBK1. Indeed, an earlier report found that cellular EGF stimulation increases the kinase activity of immunoprecipitated TBK1 toward substrate in vitro (Ou et al , 2011 ), suggesting that EGF‐receptor signaling increases TBK1 intrinsic catalytic activity. Consistently, we found that EGF but not insulin increases mTOR S2159 phosphorylation in intact cells (see Fig 2 H). As TBK1 interacts with mutually exclusive scaffolding partners, TBK1 activation may be governed by recruitment of TBK1 to specific signaling platforms (Ma et al , 2012 ; Helgason et al , 2013 ). These platforms may contain a TBK1 activating kinase or promote local clustering of TBK1, enabling kinase domain interaction and activation loop swapping, leading to trans auto‐phosphorylation and auto‐activation (Ma et al , 2012 ; Helgason et al , 2013 ). Alternately, the EGF but not insulin pathway may drive co‐localization of TBK1 with substrate (i.e., mTOR) (Helgason et al , 2013 ). It is important to note that while LPS or poly(I:C) increased TBK1 S172 phosphorylation and mTORC1 signaling in MEFs and HEK293/TLR3 cells, respectively, EGF failed to increase P‐TBK1‐S172 (see Fig EV2 A and B) while it increased mTORC1 signaling. What do these unexpected observations mean? While we do not know at the moment, these data may suggest that EGF‐receptor signaling does not increase TBK1 intrinsic catalytic activity, which can be monitored by phosphorylation on the TBK1 activation loop site (S172). In this case, basal TBK1 kinase activity would “prime” mTOR for EGF‐stimulated activation of mTORC1. Alternately, the data may suggest that the mechanism by which innate immune agonists vs. EGF activate TBK1 differs; in this scenario, immunoblotting with P‐TBK1‐S172 antibodies does not represent a reliable readout for TBK1 activation in response to EGF.

Downstream of EGF‐receptor, KRAS signaling activates TBK1 through Ral‐GEF, the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the RalA and RalB GTPases (Zhu et al , 2014 ; Kitajima et al , 2016 ). Active GTP‐loaded RalB and its effector Sec5 recruit and activate TBK1 by an unclear mechanism (Chien et al , 2006 ). Interestingly, RalB and Sec5 were reported to promote mTORC1 signaling through an unknown mechanism (Martin et al , 2014 ). Our work suggests that TBK1 may represent the missing link between RalB/Sec5 and mTORC1. Our data also demonstrate that EGF and insulin increase Akt S473 phosphorylation in a TBK1‐ and mTOR‐dependent manner (see Fig 2 F). While not defined mechanistically at this time, these data indicate that TBK1 contributes to mTORC2 activation in response to both EGF and insulin. It is important to note that our observed dependency of Akt S473 phosphorylation on TBK1 agrees with published work (Joung et al , 2011 ; Ou et al , 2011 ; Xie et al , 2011 ). Two of these studies concluded, however, that TBK1 phosphorylates Akt S473 directly independently of mTORC2 (Ou et al , 2011 ; Xie et al , 2011 ). In the cells studied here, however (i.e., MEFs; HEK293; RAW264.7), Akt S473 phosphorylation stimulated by growth factors or innate immune agonists depended strongly on mTOR. Perhaps TBK1 phosphorylates Akt directly in certain physiologic or pathological contexts.

Our results provide greater mechanistic insight into how mTORC1 modulates innate immune function, identifying mTORC1 as a direct effector of TBK1 that promotes IRF3 nuclear translocation and IFN‐β production. While it is well established that TBK1 induces IFN‐β production downstream of TLR3 and TLR4 by promoting the dimerization, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activation of IRF3 in cooperation with the co‐activator CBP/p300 (McWhirter et al , 2004 ; Mori et al , 2004 ; TenOever et al , 2004 ; Hiscott, 2007 ), many unresolved issues remain regarding the kinases that phosphorylate IRF3 on its many sites and the functional consequences of these phosphorylation events. It has been suggested that TBK1‐mediated phosphorylation of a cluster of C‐terminal sites (S396; S398; S402; T404; S405) alleviates structural auto‐inhibition and increases transcriptional activity, enabling IRF3 phosphorylation on nearby sites (S385; S386), which induces dimerization and nuclear translocation (McWhirter et al , 2004 ; Mori et al , 2004 ; Panne et al , 2007 ). As mTORC1 function is required for IRF3 nuclear translocation, it is tempting to speculate that mTORC1 itself or a downstream kinase (i.e., S6K1) may phosphorylate IRF3 to promote dimerization and/or nuclear translocation, thus cooperating with TBK1 to drive IFN‐β production.

It is important to note that a limited number of reports in the literature have noted connections between the mTORC1 pathway and TLR‐mediated innate immune responses. Rapamycin suppressed IFN‐β production upon TLR3 activation in human oral keratinocytes (Zhao et al , 2010 ), and rapamycin administered in vivo delayed the mortality of mice injected with a lethal dose of LPS (aka endotoxin) by blunting production of several cytokines including IFN‐γ (Lee et al , 2010 ). In response to vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), which activates TBK1 (TenOever et al , 2007 ), mice and MEFs lacking S6K1 and 2 were more susceptible to infection than wild‐type controls due to impaired production of type I interferons (Alain et al , 2010 ). In addition, MEFs lacking other mTORC1 substrates‐ 4EBP1 and 4EBP2, repressors of eIF4E controlled cap‐dependent translation‐ produced higher levels of type I IFNs in response to TLR3 activation (Colina et al , 2008 ; Erickson & Gale, 2008 ). Moreover, these 4EBP1/2 knockout mice exhibited resistance to VSV infection (Colina et al , 2008 ; Erickson & Gale, 2008 ). Increased translational efficiency of IRF7, which drives IFN‐β expression to high levels after an initial wave of IRF3‐mediated transcriptional induction of IRF7 (through a positive feedback loop), was found to underlie these effects in 4EBP1/2 null MEFs (Colina et al , 2008 ). Thus, mTORC1 promotes IFN‐β production through parallel effector pathways involving S6Ks and 4EBPs. As cap‐dependent translation represents a major cellular function controlled by mTORC1 (Ma & Blenis, 2009 ), it will be interesting to investigate whether mTORC1 plays a more global role in innate immunity via translational control. More recently, the cytosolic DNA sensing cGAS‐STING‐TBK1 pathway was shown to activate IRF3 in a manner that required the mTORC1 substrate S6K1 (but not its kinase activity; Wang et al , 2016 ). Other work reveals roles for mTORC1 in control of interferon production downstream of TLR7 and TLR9 (Cao et al , 2008 ; Schmitz et al , 2008 ; Boor et al , 2013 ). Beyond its role in innate immunity, TBK1 promotes tumorigenic processes and modulates metabolism. TBK1 is required for anchorage‐independent proliferation and survival of non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells and cultured cells transformed with oncogenic KRAS (Chien et al , 2006 ; Barbie et al , 2009 ; Ou et al , 2011 ; Xie et al , 2011 ). With regard to metabolic control, tissue from obese mice experiencing chronic low‐grade inflammation (i.e., liver; adipocytes; adipose tissue macrophages) exhibits elevated expression of TBK1 and IKKε downstream of NF‐κB; in addition, TBK1/IKKε have been linked to increased glucose uptake in adipocytes, increased whole‐body energy storage during obesity, and suppression of catecholamine‐induced lipolysis (Chiang et al , 2009 ; Mowers et al , 2013 ; Reilly et al , 2013 ; Uhm et al , 2017 ). Curiously, certain phenotypes resulting from tissue‐specific knockout of raptor (mTORC1) or rictor (mTORC2) from metabolic tissues (i.e., adipose; liver; skeletal muscle) in mice align with these metabolic functions of TBK1 (Kumar et al , 2008 , 2010 ; Polak et al , 2008 ; Hagiwara et al , 2012 ; Lee et al , 2016 ; Kleinert et al , 2017 ).

Our identification of TBK1 as a direct upstream activator of mTORC1‐ and possibly mTORC2‐ suggests new roles for mTORCs as downstream TBK1 effectors that control innate immunity and contribute to disorders such as tumorigenesis, metabolic diseases, and autoimmune diseases (Shen & Hahn, 2011 ; Yu et al , 2012 ; Reilly et al , 2013 ). Our mTOR A/A mouse model represents an important tool for future investigation into roles for the TBK1‐mTOR axis in vivo in control of normal physiology and pathophysiology. Additional important questions remain. The upstream signaling intermediates controlling the activation state of the TBK1‐mTORC1 axis during growth factor and innate immune signaling remain incompletely defined as does the relative contribution of IKKε to mTORC regulation. Moreover, the molecular mechanisms by which TBK1 promotes mTORC2 signaling and by which mTORC1 promotes IRF3 nuclear translocation remain unresolved. Collectively our work reveals new crosstalk between two important signaling systems that coordinate cellular responses to growth factors and innate immune agonists.
