---
pmid: '17243170'
title: Computational design and crystal structure of an enhanced affinity mutant human
  CD8 alphaalpha coreceptor.
authors:
- Cole DK
- Rizkallah PJ
- Boulter JM
- Sami M
- Vuidepot AL
- Glick M
- Gao F
- Bell JI
- Jakobsen BK
- Gao GF
journal: Proteins
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.21176
---

# Computational design and crystal structure of an enhanced affinity mutant human CD8 alphaalpha coreceptor.
**Authors:** Cole DK, Rizkallah PJ, Boulter JM, Sami M, Vuidepot AL, Glick M, Gao F, Bell JI, Jakobsen BK, Gao GF
**Journal:** Proteins (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.21176](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.21176)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2007 Apr 1;67(1):65-74. doi: 10.1002/prot.21176.

Computational design and crystal structure of an enhanced affinity mutant human 
CD8 alphaalpha coreceptor.

Cole DK(1), Rizkallah PJ, Boulter JM, Sami M, Vuidepot AL, Glick M, Gao F, Bell 
JI, Jakobsen BK, Gao GF.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford 
University, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Human CD8 is a T cell coreceptor, which binds to pHLA I and plays a pivotal role 
in the activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Soluble recombinant CD8 alphaalpha 
has been shown to antagonize T cell activation, both in vitro and in vivo. 
However, because of a very low affinity for pHLA I, high concentrations of 
soluble CD8 alphaalpha are required for efficient inhibition. Based upon our 
knowledge of the wild-type CD8/pHLA I structure, we have designed and produced a 
mutated form of soluble CD8 alphaalpha that binds to pHLA I with approximately 
fourfold higher affinity. We have characterized the binding of the high affinity 
CD8 mutant using surface plasmon resonance and determined its structure at 2.1 A 
resolution using X-ray crystallography. The analysis of this structure suggests 
that the higher affinity is achieved by providing a larger side chain that 
allows for an optimal contact to be made between the HLA alpha3 loop and the 
mutated CDR-like loops of CD8.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21176
PMID: 17243170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
