---
pmid: '24373479'
title: Long noncoding RNA in prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer.
authors:
- Martens-Uzunova ES
- Böttcher R
- Croce CM
- Jenster G
- Visakorpi T
- Calin GA
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.12.003
---

# Long noncoding RNA in prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer.
**Authors:** Martens-Uzunova ES, Böttcher R, Croce CM, Jenster G, Visakorpi T, Calin GA
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2013.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2013.12.003)

## Abstract

1. Eur Urol. 2014 Jun;65(6):1140-51. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.12.003. Epub 2013
 Dec 14.

Long noncoding RNA in prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer.

Martens-Uzunova ES(1), Böttcher R(2), Croce CM(3), Jenster G(4), Visakorpi T(5), 
Calin GA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: e.martens@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Urology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Bioinformatics, Technical University of Applied Sciences Wildau, 
Wildau, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Department of Experimental Therapeutics and Leukemia, University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Center for RNA Interference and 
Non-Coding RNAs, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
USA.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2014 Jun;65(6):1152-3. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.01.032.

CONTEXT: Genomic regions without protein-coding potential give rise to millions 
of protein-noncoding RNA transcripts (noncoding RNA) that participate in 
virtually all cellular processes. Research over the last 10 yr has accumulated 
evidence that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are often altered in human urologic 
cancers.
OBJECTIVE: To review current progress in the biology and implication of lncRNAs 
associated with prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: The PubMed database was searched for articles in the 
English language with combinations of the Medical Subject Headings terms long 
non coding RNA, long noncoding RNA, long untranslated RNA, cancer, neoplasms, 
prostate, bladder, and kidney.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: We summarise existing knowledge on the systematics, biology, 
and function of lncRNAs, particularly these involved in prostate, kidney, and 
bladder cancer. We also discuss the possible utilisation of lncRNAs as novel 
biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets in urologic malignancies and 
portray the major challenges and future perspectives of ongoing lncRNA research.
CONCLUSIONS: LncRNAs are important regulators of gene expression interacting 
with the major pathways of cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, and 
survival. Alterations in the function of lncRNAs promote tumour formation, 
progression, and metastasis of prostate, bladder, and kidney cancer. LncRNAs can 
be used as noninvasive tumour markers in urologic malignancies. Increased 
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms by which lncRNAs perform their function in 
the normal and malignant cell will lead to a better understanding of tumour 
biology and could provide novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of 
urologic cancers.
PATIENT SUMMARY: In this paper we reviewed current knowledge of long noncoding 
RNAs (lncRNAs) for the detection and treatment of urologic cancers. We conclude 
that lncRNAs can be used as novel biomarkers in prostate, kidney, or bladder 
cancer. LncRNAs hold promise as future therapeutic targets, but more research is 
needed to gain a better understanding of their biologic function.

Copyright © 2013 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.12.003
PMID: 24373479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
