---
pmid: '9064659'
title: Cloning and characterization of HUPF1, a human homolog of the Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae nonsense mRNA-reducing UPF1 protein.
authors:
- Applequist SE
- Selg M
- Raman C
- Jäck HM
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC146496
doi: 10.1093/nar/25.4.814
---

# Cloning and characterization of HUPF1, a human homolog of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae nonsense mRNA-reducing UPF1 protein.
**Authors:** Applequist SE, Selg M, Raman C, Jäck HM
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/25.4.814](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/25.4.814)
**PMC:** [PMC146496](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC146496/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Feb 15;25(4):814-21. doi: 10.1093/nar/25.4.814.

Cloning and characterization of HUPF1, a human homolog of the Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae nonsense mRNA-reducing UPF1 protein.

Applequist SE(1), Selg M, Raman C, Jäck HM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola 
University of Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Levels of most nonsense mRNAs are normally reduced in prokaryotes and eukaryotes 
when compared with that of corresponding functional mRNAs. Genes encoding 
polypeptides that selectively reduce levels of nonsense mRNA have so far only 
been identified in simple eukaryotes. We have now cloned a human cDNA whose 
deduced amino acid sequence shows the highest degree of homology to that of 
UPF1, a bona fide Saccharomyces cerevisiae group I RNA helicase required for 
accelerated degradation of nonsense mRNA. Based on the total sequence of the 
shorter yeast UPF1 protein, the overall identity between the human protein and 
UPF1 is 51%. Besides NTPase and other RNA helicase consensus motifs, UPF1 and 
its human homolog also share similar putative zinc finger motifs that are absent 
in other group I RNA helicases. Northern blot analysis with the human cDNA probe 
revealed two transcripts in several human cell lines. Further, antibodies raised 
against a synthetic peptide of the human polypeptide detected a single 130 kDa 
polypeptide on Western blots from human and mouse cells. Finally, 
immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses revealed that the human and mouse 
polypeptides, like yeast UPF1, are expressed in the cytoplasm, but not in the 
nucleus. We have thus identified the first mammalian homolog of yeast UPF1, a 
protein that regulates levels of nonsense mRNA, and we tentatively name this 
protein human HUPF1 (for human homolog of UPF1).

DOI: 10.1093/nar/25.4.814
PMCID: PMC146496
PMID: 9064659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Levels of most nonsense mRNAs are normally reduced in prokaryotes and eukaryotes when compared with that of corresponding functional mRNAs. Genes encoding polypeptides that selectively reduce levels of nonsense mRNA have so far only been identified in simple eukaryotes. We have now cloned a human cDNA whose deduced amino acid sequence shows the highest degree of homology to that of UPF1, a bona fide Saccharomyces cerevisiae group I RNA helicase required for accelerated degradation of nonsense mRNA. Based on the total sequence of the shorter yeast UPF1 protein, the overall identity between the human protein and UPF1 is 51%. Besides NTPase and other RNA helicase consensus motifs, UPF1 and its human homolog also share similar putative zinc finger motifs that are absent in other group I RNA helicases. Northern blot analysis with the human cDNA probe revealed two transcripts in several human cell lines. Further, antibodies raised against a synthetic peptide of the human polypeptide detected a single 130 kDa polypeptide on Western blots from human and mouse cells. Finally, immunofluorescence and Western blot analyses revealed that the human and mouse polypeptides, like yeast UPF1, are expressed in the cytoplasm, but not in the nucleus. We have thus identified the first mammalian homolog of yeast UPF1, a protein that regulates levels of nonsense mRNA, and we tentatively name this protein human HUPF1 (for human homolog of UPF1).
