---
pmid: '7782067'
title: The human archain gene, ARCN1, has highly conserved homologs in rice and Drosophila.
authors:
- Radice P
- Pensotti V
- Jones C
- Perry H
- Pierotti MA
- Tunnacliffe A
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(95)80087-3
---

# The human archain gene, ARCN1, has highly conserved homologs in rice and Drosophila.
**Authors:** Radice P, Pensotti V, Jones C, Perry H, Pierotti MA, Tunnacliffe A
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0888-7543(95)80087-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0888-7543(95)80087-3)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Mar 1;26(1):101-6. doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(95)80087-3.

The human archain gene, ARCN1, has highly conserved homologs in rice and 
Drosophila.

Radice P(1), Pensotti V, Jones C, Perry H, Pierotti MA, Tunnacliffe A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

A novel human gene, ARCN1, has been identified in chromosome band 11q23.3. It 
maps approximately 50 kb telomeric to MLL, a gene that is disrupted in a number 
of leukemia-associated translocation chromosomes. cDNA clones representing ARCN1 
hybridize to 4-kb mRNA species present in all tissues tested. Sequencing of 
cDNAs suggests that at least two forms of mRNA with alternative 5' ends are 
present within the cell. The mRNA with the longest open reading frame gives rise 
to a protein of 57 kDa. Although the sequence reported is novel, remarkable 
similarity is observed with two predicted protein sequences from partial DNA 
sequences generated by rice (Oryza sativa) and fruit fly (Drosophila 
melanogaster) genome projects. The degree of sequence conservation is comparable 
to that observed for highly conserved structural proteins, such as heat shock 
protein HSP70, and is greater than that of gamma-tubulin and heat shock protein 
HSP60. A more distant relationship to the group of clathrin-associated proteins 
suggests a possible role in vesicle structure or trafficking. In view of its 
ancient pedigree and a potential involvement in cellular architecture, we 
propose that the ARCN1 protein be named archain.

DOI: 10.1016/0888-7543(95)80087-3
PMID: 7782067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
