---
pmid: '11940670'
title: Notch signaling induces rapid degradation of achaete-scute homolog 1.
authors:
- Sriuranpong V
- Borges MW
- Strock CL
- Nakakura EK
- Watkins DN
- Blaumueller CM
- Nelkin BD
- Ball DW
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC133746
doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.9.3129-3139.2002
---

# Notch signaling induces rapid degradation of achaete-scute homolog 1.
**Authors:** Sriuranpong V, Borges MW, Strock CL, Nakakura EK, Watkins DN, Blaumueller CM, Nelkin BD, Ball DW
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.22.9.3129-3139.2002](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.22.9.3129-3139.2002)
**PMC:** [PMC133746](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133746/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):3129-39. doi: 10.1128/MCB.22.9.3129-3139.2002.

Notch signaling induces rapid degradation of achaete-scute homolog 1.

Sriuranpong V(1), Borges MW, Strock CL, Nakakura EK, Watkins DN, Blaumueller CM, 
Nelkin BD, Ball DW.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

In neural development, Notch signaling plays a key role in restricting neuronal 
differentiation, promoting the maintenance of progenitor cells. Classically, 
Notch signaling causes transactivation of Hairy-enhancer of Split (HES) genes 
which leads to transcriptional repression of neural determination and 
differentiation genes. We now report that in addition to its known 
transcriptional mechanism, Notch signaling also leads to rapid degradation of 
the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor human achaete-scute 
homolog 1 (hASH1). Using recombinant adenoviruses expressing active Notch1 in 
small-cell lung cancer cells, we showed that the initial appearance of Notch1 
coincided with the loss of hASH1 protein, preceding the full decay of hASH1 
mRNA. Overexpression of HES1 alone was capable of down-regulating hASH1 mRNA but 
could not replicate the acute reduction of hASH1 protein induced by Notch1. When 
adenoviral hASH1 was coinfected with Notch1, we still observed a dramatic and 
abrupt loss of the exogenous hASH1 protein, despite high levels of ongoing hASH1 
RNA expression. Notch1 treatment decreased the apparent half-life of the 
adenoviral hASH1 protein and increased the fraction of hASH1 which was 
polyubiquitinylated. The proteasome inhibitor MG132 reversed the Notch1-induced 
degradation. The Notch RAM domain was dispensable but a lack of the OPA and PEST 
domains inactivated this Notch1 action. Overexpression of the hASH1-dimerizing 
partner E12 could protect hASH1 from degradation. This novel function of 
activated Notch to rapidly degrade a class II bHLH protein may prove to be 
important in many contexts in development and in cancer.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.22.9.3129-3139.2002
PMCID: PMC133746
PMID: 11940670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
