---
pmid: '7737974'
title: The dissociation of ATP from hsp70 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is stimulated
  by both Ydj1p and peptide substrates.
authors:
- Ziegelhoffer T
- Lopez-Buesa P
- Craig EA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.18.10412
---

# The dissociation of ATP from hsp70 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is stimulated by both Ydj1p and peptide substrates.
**Authors:** Ziegelhoffer T, Lopez-Buesa P, Craig EA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.18.10412](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.18.10412)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 5;270(18):10412-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.18.10412.

The dissociation of ATP from hsp70 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is stimulated by 
both Ydj1p and peptide substrates.

Ziegelhoffer T(1), Lopez-Buesa P, Craig EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706, 
USA.

hsp70 proteins of both eukaryotes and prokaryotes possess both ATPase and 
peptide binding activities. These two activities are crucial for the chaperone 
activity of hsp70 proteins. The activity of DnaK, the primary hsp70 of 
Escherichia coli, is modulated by the GrpE and DnaJ proteins. In the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the predominant cytosolic hsp70, Ssa1p, interacts with 
a DnaJ homologue, Ydj1p. In order to better understand the function of the 
Ssa1p/Ydj1p chaperone, the effects of polypeptide substrates and Ydj1p on Ssa1p 
ATPase activity were assessed using a combination of steady-state kinetic 
analysis and single turnover substrate hydrolysis experiments. Polypeptide 
substrates and Ydj1p both serve to stimulate ATPase activity of Ssa1p. The two 
types of effector are biochemically distinct, each conferring a characteristic 
K+ dependence on Ssa1p ATPase activity. However, in single turnover ATP 
hydrolysis experiments, both polypeptide substrates and Ydj1p destabilized the 
ATP.Ssa1p complex through a combination of accelerated hydrolysis of bound ATP 
and accelerated release of ATP from Ssa1p. The acceleration of ATP release by 
Ydj1p is a previously unidentified function of a DnaJ homologue. In the case of 
Ydj1p-stimulated Ssa1p, steady-state ATPase activity is increased less than 
2-fold at physiological K+ concentrations, despite a 15-fold increase in the 
hydrolysis of bound ATP. The primary effect of Ydj1p appears to be to disfavor 
an ATP form of Ssa1p. On the other hand, peptide stimulation of Ssa1p ATPase 
activity was enhanced at physiological K+ concentrations, supporting the idea 
that cycles of ATP hydrolysis play an important role in the interaction of hsp70 
with polypeptide substrates. The enhanced ATP dissociation caused by both 
polypeptide substrates and Ydj1p may play a role in the regulation of Ssa1p 
chaperone activity by altering the relative abundance of ATP-and ADP-bound 
forms.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.18.10412
PMID: 7737974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
