---
pmid: '3243031'
title: Electron microscopic localization of myosin II and ABP-120 in the cortical
  actin matrix of Dictyostelium amoebae using IgG-gold conjugates.
authors:
- Ogihara S
- Carboni J
- Condeelis J
journal: Dev Genet
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/dvg.1020090427
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Electron microscopic localization of myosin II and ABP-120 in the cortical actin matrix of Dictyostelium amoebae using IgG-gold conjugates.
**Authors:** Ogihara S, Carboni J, Condeelis J
**Journal:** Dev Genet (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dvg.1020090427](https://doi.org/10.1002/dvg.1020090427)

## Abstract

1. Dev Genet. 1988;9(4-5):505-20. doi: 10.1002/dvg.1020090427.

Electron microscopic localization of myosin II and ABP-120 in the cortical actin 
matrix of Dictyostelium amoebae using IgG-gold conjugates.

Ogihara S(1), Carboni J, Condeelis J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461.

To narrow the field of possible functions of an actin-binding protein (ABP-120) 
and myosin II, we have used high resolution immunocytochemistry with 
IgG-colloidal gold conjugates to identify the types of actin containing 
structures with which these proteins are associated in the isolated cell cortex. 
Staining for myosin II and ABP-120 is associated with distinct regions of the 
actin cytoskeleton in isolated cortices. Myosin II is localized to lateral 
arrays of filaments, where it is clustered and has a density that is unrelated 
to distance from the plasma membrane. Staining for myosin II is associated also 
with unidentified cytoplasmic vesicles. However, staining for ABP-120 is 
concentrated in dense networks of branched microfilaments that are adjacent to 
the plasma membrane or in surface projections (residual pseudopods and 
lamellopods). These results are consistent with a role for ABP-120 in the 
formation of filament networks in vivo and further suggest that networks of 
branched microfilaments are unlikely to participate in motility that is mediated 
by myosin II.

DOI: 10.1002/dvg.1020090427
PMID: 3243031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
