---
pmid: '1985966'
title: Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone that codes for human spermidine/spermine
  N1-acetyltransferase.
authors:
- Casero RA Jr
- Celano P
- Ervin SJ
- Applegren NB
- Wiest L
- Pegg AE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone that codes for human spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase.
**Authors:** Casero RA Jr, Celano P, Ervin SJ, Applegren NB, Wiest L, Pegg AE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 15;266(2):810-4.

Isolation and characterization of a cDNA clone that codes for human 
spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase.

Casero RA Jr(1), Celano P, Ervin SJ, Applegren NB, Wiest L, Pegg AE.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center Laboratories, The Johns Hopkins School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231.

Spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase (Spd/Spm acetyltransferase) is the 
rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of polyamines. This enzyme is highly 
inducible by several stimuli, including the natural polyamines and their 
structural analogues. To investigate the underlying mechanism responsible for 
the control of this enzyme a cDNA which codes for an active human Spd/Spm 
acetyltransferase has been isolated from a random primed cDNA library 
constructed from mRNA of a polyamine analogue treated large cell lung carcinoma 
line, NCI H157. The 972-base pair cDNA was identified using a 32-fold 
degenerate, 20-base oligomer probe to a 7-amino acid polypeptide sequence 
derived from the purified protein. The cDNA has a 513-base open reading frame 
that codes for a protein of 171 amino acids with a predicted molecular weight of 
20,023. In vitro translation studies demonstrated the protein product of this 
cDNA to be a biologically active enzyme. The cDNA recognizes a 1.5-kilobase 
transcript in human cells which is highly induced in the human large cell lung 
carcinoma NCI H157 line following treatment with the polyamine analogue. The 
unusually high expression of Spd/Spm acetyltransferase mRNA by the NCI H157 
cells in response to treatment does not appear to be a result of an 
amplification of the Spd/Spm acetyltransferase gene.

PMID: 1985966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
