---
pmid: '16025111'
title: Regulation of NMDA receptor trafficking by amyloid-beta.
authors:
- Snyder EM
- Nong Y
- Almeida CG
- Paul S
- Moran T
- Choi EY
- Nairn AC
- Salter MW
- Lombroso PJ
- Gouras GK
- Greengard P
journal: Nat Neurosci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nn1503
---

# Regulation of NMDA receptor trafficking by amyloid-beta.
**Authors:** Snyder EM, Nong Y, Almeida CG, Paul S, Moran T, Choi EY, Nairn AC, Salter MW, Lombroso PJ, Gouras GK, Greengard P
**Journal:** Nat Neurosci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nn1503](https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1503)

## Abstract

1. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):1051-8. doi: 10.1038/nn1503. Epub 2005 Jul 17.

Regulation of NMDA receptor trafficking by amyloid-beta.

Snyder EM(1), Nong Y, Almeida CG, Paul S, Moran T, Choi EY, Nairn AC, Salter MW, 
Lombroso PJ, Gouras GK, Greengard P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA. ericmaltesnyder@gmail.com

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2005 Aug;8(8):977-9. doi: 10.1038/nn0805-977.

Amyloid-beta peptide is elevated in the brains of patients with Alzheimer 
disease and is believed to be causative in the disease process. Amyloid-beta 
reduces glutamatergic transmission and inhibits synaptic plasticity, although 
the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We found that application of amyloid-beta 
promoted endocytosis of NMDA receptors in cortical neurons. In addition, neurons 
from a genetic mouse model of Alzheimer disease expressed reduced amounts of 
surface NMDA receptors. Reducing amyloid-beta by treating neurons with a 
gamma-secretase inhibitor restored surface expression of NMDA receptors. 
Consistent with these data, amyloid-beta application produced a rapid and 
persistent depression of NMDA-evoked currents in cortical neurons. 
Amyloid-beta-dependent endocytosis of NMDA receptors required the alpha-7 
nicotinic receptor, protein phosphatase 2B (PP2B) and the tyrosine phosphatase 
STEP. Dephosphorylation of the NMDA receptor subunit NR2B at Tyr1472 correlated 
with receptor endocytosis. These data indicate a new mechanism by which 
amyloid-beta can cause synaptic dysfunction and contribute to Alzheimer disease 
pathology.

DOI: 10.1038/nn1503
PMID: 16025111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
