---
pmid: '18577655'
title: The effects of growth factors on the proliferation and in vitro angiogenesis
  of human macular inner choroidal endothelial cells.
authors:
- Browning AC
- Dua HS
- Amoaku WM
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1136/bjo.2007.127670
---

# The effects of growth factors on the proliferation and in vitro angiogenesis of human macular inner choroidal endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Browning AC, Dua HS, Amoaku WM
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjo.2007.127670](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjo.2007.127670)

## Abstract

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2008 Jul;92(7):1003-8. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2007.127670.

The effects of growth factors on the proliferation and in vitro angiogenesis of 
human macular inner choroidal endothelial cells.

Browning AC(1), Dua HS, Amoaku WM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Eye, Ear, Nose and Throat 
Centre, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham NG7 2UH, 
UK.

AIM: To investigate the effect of VEGF(165), FGF2, IGF-1, PDGF-AA, PDGF-BB and 
IL-1 beta on the proliferation and angiogenic tube formation of human macular 
inner choroidal endothelial cells (ICEC).
METHODS: The proliferation of human macular ICECs after exposure to the 
aforementioned growth factors was determined by using both a WST-1 colorimetric 
assay and a cell-counting technique. The effect of growth factors on ICEC 
angiogenesis was assessed by sprout formation using a three-dimensional in vitro 
Matrigel duplex assay.
RESULTS: Using both the WST-1 assay and a cell-counting technique, VEGF(165) and 
FGF2 both significantly increased human macular ICEC proliferation. The effect 
of equimolar concentrations of VEGF(165) and FGF2 was additive. There was no 
significant effect for IGF-1, PDGF-AA, PDGF-BB or IL-1 beta on proliferation up 
to a growth factor concentration of 1000 pmol/l. The angiogenesis assay found a 
significant effect on sprout formation for VEGF(165) and FGF-2. Again, the 
effect of equimolar concentrations of VEGF(165) and FGF2 was additive. There was 
no significant effect for IGF-1, PDGF-AA, PDGF-BB or IL-1 beta on sprout 
formation at 1000 pmol/l.
CONCLUSIONS: Both VEGF(165) and FGF2 significantly increase human macular ICEC 
proliferation and sprout formation in an angiogenesis assay. When present 
together, their effect was additive. IGF-1, PDGF-AA, PDGF-BB and IL-1 beta did 
not have any significant effect on proliferation or sprout formation in vitro. 
These results suggest that targeting other growth factors such as FGF2, in 
addition to VEGF, may be beneficial in the treatment of neovascular age-related 
macular degeneration.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo.2007.127670
PMID: 18577655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
