---
pmid: '15572682'
title: 'Functional genetic screen for genes involved in senescence: role of Tid1,
  a homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid, in senescence and cell survival.'
authors:
- Tarunina M
- Alger L
- Chu G
- Munger K
- Gudkov A
- Jat PS
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC533960
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.24.10792-10801.2004
---

# Functional genetic screen for genes involved in senescence: role of Tid1, a homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid, in senescence and cell survival.
**Authors:** Tarunina M, Alger L, Chu G, Munger K, Gudkov A, Jat PS
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.24.10792-10801.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.24.10792-10801.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC533960](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC533960/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(24):10792-801. doi: 
10.1128/MCB.24.24.10792-10801.2004.

Functional genetic screen for genes involved in senescence: role of Tid1, a 
homologue of the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid, in senescence and cell 
survival.

Tarunina M(1), Alger L, Chu G, Munger K, Gudkov A, Jat PS.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 91 Riding House St., London W1W 7BS, 
United Kingdom.

We performed a genetic suppressor element screen to identify genes whose 
inhibition bypasses cellular senescence. A normalized library of fragmented 
cDNAs was used to select for elements that promote immortalization of rat embryo 
fibroblasts. Fragments isolated by the screen include those with homology to 
genes that function in intracellular signaling, cellular adhesion and contact, 
protein degradation, and apoptosis. They include mouse Tid1, a homologue of the 
Drosophila tumor suppressor gene l(2)tid, recently implicated in modulation of 
apoptosis as well as gamma interferon and NF-kappaB signaling. We show that 
GSE-Tid1 enhances immortalization by human papillomavirus E7 and simian virus 40 
T antigen and cooperates with activated ras for transformation. Expression of 
Tid1 is upregulated upon cellular senescence in rat and mouse embryo fibroblasts 
and premature senescence of REF52 cells triggered by activated ras. In 
accordance with this, spontaneous immortalization of rat embryo fibroblasts is 
suppressed upon ectopic expression of Tid1. Modulation of endogenous Tid1 
activity by GSE-Tid1 or Tid1-specific RNA interference alleviates the 
suppression of tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced NF-kappaB activity by Tid1. 
We also show that NF-kappaB sequence-specific binding is strongly downregulated 
upon senescence in rat embryo fibroblasts. We therefore propose that Tid1 
contributes to senescence by acting as a repressor of NF-kappaB signaling.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.24.10792-10801.2004
PMCID: PMC533960
PMID: 15572682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
