---
pmid: '23263864'
title: Methylation-controlled J-protein MCJ acts in the import of proteins into human
  mitochondria.
authors:
- Schusdziarra C
- Blamowska M
- Azem A
- Hell K
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds541
---

# Methylation-controlled J-protein MCJ acts in the import of proteins into human mitochondria.
**Authors:** Schusdziarra C, Blamowska M, Azem A, Hell K
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds541](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds541)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Apr 1;22(7):1348-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds541. Epub 2012
Dec  20.

Methylation-controlled J-protein MCJ acts in the import of proteins into human 
mitochondria.

Schusdziarra C(1), Blamowska M, Azem A, Hell K.

Author information:
(1)Adolf-Butenandt-Institut, Lehrstuhl für Physiologische Chemie, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse 5, Munich, Germany

Loss of expression of the methylation-controlled J gene, MCJ (DNAJC15), is 
observed in cases of several tumors and plays a crucial role in the 
chemoresistance of ovarian cancer cells. Aside from the pathophysiological 
effects, almost nothing is known about the cellular function of MCJ. Here, we 
provide the first evidence that MCJ acts in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Our 
results demonstrate that MCJ is located in mitochondria. It is anchored in the 
mitochondrial inner membrane with the C-terminal J domain facing the matrix 
space. We show that MCJ forms a stable subcomplex with a component of the 
mitochondrial import motor, MAGMAS, a protein overexpressed in cells treated 
with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and in prostate 
carcinomas. In addition, MCJ and MAGMAS interact with the core components of the 
TIM23 pre-protein translocase. We demonstrate that the recombinant soluble MCJ 
domain stimulates the ATPase activity of the human mtHsp70 chaperone, mortalin, 
the central component of the import motor of the TIM23 translocase. This 
stimulation is counteracted by MAGMAS. Moreover, pre-protein import into 
mitochondria is impaired in the absence of MCJ. Interestingly, MCJ is able to 
take over the function of Tim14, the essential J co-chaperone of the 
mitochondrial protein import motor in yeast. In summary, our results show that 
MCJ functions as J co-chaperone of the human TIM23 pre-protein translocase, 
suggesting a link between mitochondrial pre-protein import and tumorigenesis.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds541
PMID: 23263864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
