---
pmid: '11731220'
title: SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transporter ThTr2.
authors:
- Rajgopal A
- Edmondnson A
- Goldman ID
- Zhao R
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4439(01)00073-4
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transporter ThTr2.
**Authors:** Rajgopal A, Edmondnson A, Goldman ID, Zhao R
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4439(01)00073-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4439(01)00073-4)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Nov 29;1537(3):175-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(01)00073-4.

SLC19A3 encodes a second thiamine transporter ThTr2.

Rajgopal A(1), Edmondnson A, Goldman ID, Zhao R.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine Cancer Center, Chanin 628, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, 
USA.

Recently, a new family of facilitative carriers has been cloned consisting of 
the reduced folate (SLC19A1) and the thiamine (SLC19A2) transporters. Despite a 
high level of sequence identity and similarity there is essentially no 
functional overlap between these carriers. The former transports folates and the 
latter thiamine. In this paper we describe the function of SLC19A3, another 
member of this transporter family most recently cloned, after transient 
transfection of the cDNA into HeLa cells. Uptake of [3H]thiamine, but not of 
methotrexate nor folic acid, was enhanced in SLC19A3 transfectants relative to 
vector control. Similarly, in the transfectants thiamine transport increased 
with an increase in pH with peak activity at pH approximately 7.5. While 
[3H]thiamine uptake was markedly inhibited by nonlabeled thiamine it was not 
inhibited by several organic cations in 100-fold excess. Hence this carrier has 
a high degree of specificity for vitamin B1. The data indicate that SLC19A3 has 
the characteristics of SLC19A2 (ThTr1) and represents a second thiamine 
transporter (ThTr2) in this family of facilitative carriers.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(01)00073-4
PMID: 11731220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
