---
pmid: '10618715'
title: Interaction between the HPV-16 E2 transcriptional activator and p53.
authors:
- Massimi P
- Pim D
- Bertoli C
- Bouvard V
- Banks L
journal: Oncogene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203208
---

# Interaction between the HPV-16 E2 transcriptional activator and p53.
**Authors:** Massimi P, Pim D, Bertoli C, Bouvard V, Banks L
**Journal:** Oncogene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203208](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203208)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 16;18(54):7748-54. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203208.

Interaction between the HPV-16 E2 transcriptional activator and p53.

Massimi P(1), Pim D, Bertoli C, Bouvard V, Banks L.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano
99, I-34012 Trieste, Italy.

The HPV-16 E2 protein is a major regulator of viral DNA replication and gene
expression. Through interactions with the viral origin binding protein, E1, it
localizes E1 to the origin of replication and stimulates the initiation of viral
DNA replication. However, several recent reports have described a number of
diverse activities of E2 relating to the induction of apoptosis through both p53
dependent and independent mechanisms, and to induction of growth arrest in both
the G1 and G2M phases of the cell cycle. Recent studies have also shown that p53
can specifically inhibit HPV DNA replication, albeit through an unknown
mechanism. Since p53 has been described in the replication centres of Herpes
Viruses, Adenovirus and SV40 we decided to investigate whether any of the above
activities of E2 may be related to an association with p53. We show, in a series
of in vitro assays, specific interaction between p53 and HPV-16 E2 via residues
in the carboxy terminal half of the E2 protein. Mutational analysis of p53
indicates that sequences in both the DNA binding and oligomerization domains are
essential for the interaction, and a mutant of p53 which is unable to bind E2 is
also unable to inhibit HPV DNA replication. Finally, using an inducible system
of p53 expression we also show that E2 will complex with p53 in vivo. These
results raise the intriguing possibility that p53 may also be involved in HPV
DNA replication centres, and also provides explanations for some of the diverse
activities reported for the HPV E2 proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203208
PMID: 10618715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
