---
pmid: '7918683'
title: Primary amino acid sequence and structure of human pyruvate carboxylase.
authors:
- Wexler ID
- Du Y
- Lisgaris MV
- Mandal SK
- Freytag SO
- Yang BS
- Liu TC
- Kwon M
- Patel MS
- Kerr DS
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0925-4439(94)90105-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Primary amino acid sequence and structure of human pyruvate carboxylase.
**Authors:** Wexler ID, Du Y, Lisgaris MV, Mandal SK, Freytag SO, Yang BS, Liu TC, Kwon M, Patel MS, Kerr DS
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0925-4439(94)90105-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0925-4439(94)90105-8)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Oct 21;1227(1-2):46-52. doi: 
10.1016/0925-4439(94)90105-8.

Primary amino acid sequence and structure of human pyruvate carboxylase.

Wexler ID(1), Du Y, Lisgaris MV, Mandal SK, Freytag SO, Yang BS, Liu TC, Kwon M, 
Patel MS, Kerr DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Rainbow Babies and Childrens Hospital, Cleveland, OH 44106.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) (pyruvate:carbon dioxide ligase (ADP-forming), EC 
6.4.1.1.), a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial enzyme, catalyzes the conversion of 
pyruvate to oxaloacetate. We have isolated and characterized cDNAs spanning the 
entire coding region of human PC. The sequence of human PC has an open reading 
frame of 3537 nucleotides which encodes for a polypeptide with a length of 1178 
amino acids. The identity of the cDNA as PC is confirmed by comparison to PC 
cDNAs of other species and sequenced peptide fragments of mammalian PC. The M(r) 
of the full length precursor protein is 129,576 and that of the mature 
apoprotein is 127,370. RNA blot analysis from a variety of human tissues 
demonstrates that the highest level of PC mRNA is found in liver corresponding 
to this tissue's high level of PC activity. Based on homology with other 
biotin-containing proteins, the ATP, pyruvate, and biotin-binding sites can be 
identified. One of two patients with documented PC deficiency was found to be 
missing PC mRNA, further confirming the identity of this cDNA.

DOI: 10.1016/0925-4439(94)90105-8
PMID: 7918683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
