---
pmid: '3528153'
title: Purification and characterization of a mitochondrial isozyme of C1-tetrahydrofolate
  synthase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Shannon KW
- Rabinowitz JC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1986'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification and characterization of a mitochondrial isozyme of C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Shannon KW, Rabinowitz JC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1986)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1986 Sep 15;261(26):12266-71.

Purification and characterization of a mitochondrial isozyme of 
C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Shannon KW, Rabinowitz JC.

C1-Tetrahydrofolate synthase is a trifunctional polypeptide found in eukaryotic 
organisms that catalyzes 10-formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.3), 
5,10-methenyltetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase (EC 3.5.4.9), and 
5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.1.5) activities. In 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase is encoded by the ADE3 
locus, yet ade3 mutants have low but detectable levels of these enzyme 
activities. Synthetase, cyclohydrolase, and dehydrogenase activities in an ade3 
deletion strain co-purify 4,000-fold to yield a single protein species as seen 
on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The native molecular weight of 
the isozyme (Mr = 200,000 by gel exclusion chromatography) and the size of its 
subunits (Mr = 100,000 by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis) are similar to those of C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase. Cell 
fractionation experiments show that the isozyme, but not C1-tetrahydrofolate 
synthase, is localized in the mitochondria. Genetic studies indicate that the 
isozyme is encoded in the nuclear genome. Peptide mapping experiments show that 
C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase and the isozyme are not structurally identical. 
However, immunotitration experiments and amino acid sequence analysis suggest 
that C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase and the isozyme are structurally related. We 
propose to call the isozyme "mitochondrial C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase."

PMID: 3528153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
