---
pmid: '21531765'
title: High-throughput RNAi screening reveals novel regulators of telomerase.
authors:
- Cerone MA
- Burgess DJ
- Naceur-Lombardelli C
- Lord CJ
- Ashworth A
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2734
---

# High-throughput RNAi screening reveals novel regulators of telomerase.
**Authors:** Cerone MA, Burgess DJ, Naceur-Lombardelli C, Lord CJ, Ashworth A
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2734](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2734)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;71(9):3328-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2734.

High-throughput RNAi screening reveals novel regulators of telomerase.

Cerone MA(1), Burgess DJ, Naceur-Lombardelli C, Lord CJ, Ashworth A.

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.

Telomerase is considered an attractive anticancer target on the basis of its 
common and specific activation in most human cancers. While direct telomerase 
inhibition is being explored as a therapeutic strategy, alternative strategies 
to target regulators of telomerase that could disrupt telomere maintenance and 
cancer cell proliferation are not yet available. Here, we report the findings of 
a high-throughput functional RNA interference screen to globally profile the 
contribution of kinases to telomerase activity (TA). This analysis identified a 
number of novel telomerase modulators, including ERK8 kinase, whose inhibition 
reduces TA and elicited characteristics of telomere dysfunction. Given that 
kinases represent attractive drug targets, we addressed the therapeutic 
implications of our findings, such as demonstrating how limiting TA via kinase 
blockade could sensitize cells to inhibition of the telomere-associated protein 
tankyrase. Taken together, our findings suggest novel combinatorial approaches 
to targeting telomere maintenance as a strategy for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2734
PMID: 21531765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
