---
pmid: '35857590'
title: ZAKα-driven ribotoxic stress response activates the human NLRP1 inflammasome.
authors:
- Robinson KS
- Toh GA
- Rozario P
- Chua R
- Bauernfried S
- Sun Z
- Firdaus MJ
- Bayat S
- Nadkarni R
- Poh ZS
- Tham KC
- Harapas CR
- Lim CK
- Chu W
- Tay CWS
- Tan KY
- Zhao T
- Bonnard C
- Sobota R
- Connolly JE
- Common J
- Masters SL
- Chen KW
- Ho L
- Wu B
- Hornung V
- Zhong FL
journal: Science
year: '2022'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC7614315
doi: 10.1126/science.abl6324
---

# ZAKα-driven ribotoxic stress response activates the human NLRP1 inflammasome.
**Authors:** Robinson KS, Toh GA, Rozario P, Chua R, Bauernfried S, Sun Z, Firdaus MJ, Bayat S, Nadkarni R, Poh ZS, Tham KC, Harapas CR, Lim CK, Chu W, Tay CWS, Tan KY, Zhao T, Bonnard C, Sobota R, Connolly JE, Common J, Masters SL, Chen KW, Ho L, Wu B, Hornung V, Zhong FL
**Journal:** Science (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.abl6324](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abl6324)
**PMC:** [PMC7614315](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7614315/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2022 Jul 15;377(6603):328-335. doi: 10.1126/science.abl6324. Epub
2022  Jul 14.

ZAKα-driven ribotoxic stress response activates the human NLRP1 inflammasome.

Robinson KS(1)(2), Toh GA(3), Rozario P(3), Chua R(3), Bauernfried S(4)(5), Sun 
Z(3), Firdaus MJ(3), Bayat S(3), Nadkarni R(6), Poh ZS(3), Tham KC(2), Harapas 
CR(7), Lim CK(8)(9), Chu W(6), Tay CWS(3), Tan KY(2), Zhao T(8), Bonnard 
C(1)(2), Sobota R(8), Connolly JE(8), Common J(2), Masters SL(7)(10), Chen 
KW(11), Ho L(6)(8), Wu B(12), Hornung V(4)(5), Zhong FL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Skin Research Institute of Singapore (SRIS), 308232 Singapore.
(2)Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) Skin Research 
Laboratories (ASRL), 138648 Singapore.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 308232 
Singapore.
(4)Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, 81377 Munich, Germany.
(5)Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(6)Cardiovascular Metabolic Disorders Program, Duke-NUS Medical School, 169857 
Singapore.
(7)Inflammation Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(8)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR, 138673 Singapore.
(9)Present address: MiroBio Limited, Oxford OX4 4GE, UK.
(10)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 
3010, Australia.
(11)Immunology Translational Research Programme and Department of Microbiology & 
Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 
117545 Singapore.
(12)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), 
639798 Singapore.

Human NLRP1 (NACHT, LRR, and PYD domain-containing protein 1) is an innate 
immune sensor predominantly expressed in the skin and airway epithelium. Here, 
we report that human NLRP1 senses the ultraviolet B (UVB)- and toxin-induced 
ribotoxic stress response (RSR). Biochemically, RSR leads to the direct 
hyperphosphorylation of a human-specific disordered linker region of NLRP1 
(NLRP1DR) by MAP3K20/ZAKα kinase and its downstream effector, p38. Mutating a 
single ZAKα phosphorylation site in NLRP1DR abrogates UVB- and ribotoxin-driven 
pyroptosis in human keratinocytes. Moreover, fusing NLRP1DR to CARD8, which is 
insensitive to RSR by itself, creates a minimal inflammasome sensor for UVB and 
ribotoxins. These results provide insight into UVB sensing by human skin 
keratinocytes, identify several ribotoxins as NLRP1 agonists, and establish 
inflammasome-driven pyroptosis as an integral component of the RSR.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abl6324
PMCID: PMC7614315
PMID: 35857590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: S.L.M. is a scientific 
advisor for Odyssey therapeutics and NRG therapeutics. J.E.C. is a member of the 
Board of Directors, 3T Biosciences and Chief Scientific Officer of Parker 
Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy. F.L.Z., K.S.R., T.G.A., S.Z. are 
co-inventors of a patent (PCT/SG2022/050086) based on this work.

## Full Text

The innate immune system uses germline-encoded sensor proteins to recognize conserved pathogen-associated and damage-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs and DAMPs). NACHT, LRR, and PYD domain-containing proteins (NLRPs) assemble the inflammasome complex in response to intracellular pathogens or stress signals, resulting in pyroptotic cell death characterized by caspase-1 activation, GSDMD pore formation, and IL-1 secretion (1–3). Human NLRP1 is notable among inflammasome sensors due to its unusual domain arrangement and significant divergence from rodent counterparts (4–6). Inhibitors of proteases DPP8 and DPP9, such as Val-boro-Pro (VbP) (7, 8) are the only known molecules that can activate both rodent and human NLRP1, and a related human inflammasome sensor caspase activation and recruitment domain-containing protein 8 (CARD8) (9–11). Recent work has shown that human NLRP1 senses double-stranded viral RNA, viral proteases (12–14), and ultraviolet B (UVB) irradiation (15). None of these triggers activate rodent NLRP1s, which in turn sense bacterial and protozoan toxins (16–18). All known NLRP1 triggers require the proteasomal degradation of the auto-inhibitory N-terminal fragment and the oligomerization of the liberated C-terminal fragment to drive inflammasome activation (12, 19–21).

Human NLRP1 is predominantly expressed in the skin and airway epithelia (12, 22, 23). Both rare germline mutations in NLRP1 and common NLRP1 SNPs are associated with human skin disorders (22, 24–26). Thus, human NLRP1 plays a unique role in skin immunity. UVB radiation with wavelengths of 280-315 nm, which is responsible for acute sunburn, is the most relevant to the skin of all NLRP1 triggers identified thus far (15). However, the molecular mechanisms by which NLRP1 senses UVB are unclear.

Using the N/TERT-1 immortalized human keratinocyte cell line (hereby referred to as N/TERTs), we confirmed published findings (15, 27) that UVB irradiation causes NLRP1- dependent pyroptosis in a dose-dependent manner as measured by IL-1β secretion, GSDMD cleavage, ASC oligomerization, and rapid propidium iodide uptake (within 4-6 hours) (fig. S1, A to C and E). UVB-induced IL-1β secretion required caspase-1 activity but not NLRP3 (fig. S1, B and D). Similar to other NLRP1 activators, UVB-dependent NLRP1 activation was accompanied by a decrease in NLRP1 N-terminal fragment (NT) and was blocked by the NEDD8/cullin inhibitor MLN4924 (figs. S1D and S2), which has been reported to regulate NLRP1-NT and CARD8-NT turnover (12, 28). Treating N/TERT cells with toxic doses of DNA-damaging chemicals, camptothecin (CPT), etoposide, and cisplatin or hydrogen peroxide failed to induce NLRP1-dependent IL-1β secretion or propidium iodide (PI) uptake at early time points (fig. S3, A and B). Thus, neither DNA damage nor oxidative damage by free radicals alone is the primary driver of UVB-induced NLRP1 inflammasome activation (Fig. 1A).

We hypothesized that UVB-driven RNA damage activates the NLRP1 inflammasome. To test this, we pretreated cells with the nucleoside analog 4-thiouridine (4-SU), which selectively sensitizes RNA to ultraviolet A (UVA) radiation. Otherwise, UVA does not cause acute damage to unmodified nucleic acids due to its lower energy (29). Only in N/TERT cells pretreated with 4-SU did UVA cause the accumulation of thymine photoadducts in the cytoplasm, which was consistent with RNA damage (fig. S3D). 4-SU+UVA induced the secretion of IL-1β (Fig. 1B and fig. S3C) and phosphorylation of stress-activated kinases (SAPKs) p38 and JNK, similar to the effects of UVB (Fig. 1B and fig. S3C). By contrast, UVA irradiation of N/TERT cells pretreated with a DNA sensitizer 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) did not induce IL-1β secretion and only effected weak SAPK phosphorylation (Fig. 1B and fig. S3C). Thus, RNA photodamage is more likely to be the upstream signal for UV-induced NLRP1 activation in keratinocytes.

Recently, the proximal sensor for UVB-triggered SAPK activation was found to be the long- splice isoform of the MAP3K20, also known as ZAKα kinase (30, 31). ZAKα senses ribosomes that have stalled and/or collided after encountering a translocation-blocking mRNA lesion, such as those induced by UVB. Activated ZAKα undergoes extensive self-phosphorylation and phosphorylates downstream SAPKs. Collectively, this pathway is termed the ribotoxic stress response (RSR) (Fig. 1A). UVB induced bona fide RSR activation in N/TERT keratinocytes marked by ZAKα, p38 and JNK phosphorylation at earlier time points and ZAKα degradation at later time points (Fig. 1B and fig. S4A). P38 and JNK phosphorylation was completely abrogated in CRISPR/Cas9 ZAK knockout (KO) N/TERT cells (Fig. 1B and fig. S4, B and C) after UVB or 4SU+UVA. ZAK KO or inhibition of ZAKα kinase activity by nilotinib blocked UVB-induced pyroptosis in N/TERT cells as measured by IL-1β secretion (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S4, D and E), GSDMD p30 cleavage (Fig. 1D), and rapid PI uptake (Fig. 1, E and F). Moreover, a specific ZAKα inhibitor, M443 (32) blocked UVB induced IL-1β secretion in human skin explants (fig. S4, F and G). ZAK KO or ZAKα inhibition did not affect VbP-driven pyroptosis in N/TERT cells (figs. S4E and S5F). Thus, ZAKα is selectively required for the NLRP1 inflammasome activation downstream of UVB. In a 293T-ASC-GFP inflammasome reporter cell line (fig. S5, A and B), full-length ZAKα induced a marked increase in ASC-GFP specks when coexpressed with NLRP1. By contrast, neither ZAKβ nor any of the ZAKα mutants defective in kinase function or sensing of ribosome stalling/collisions exhibited this function (fig. S5, C and D). Thus, the ribosome binding and RSR sensing domains of ZAKα are required for both RSR and NLRP1 inflammasome activation.

We next tested the effects of established ZAKα-activating toxins anisomycin (ANS) and doxyvinenol (DON) (Table S1) (33). Additionally, we predicted that hygromycin (HYGRO), whose effect on ZAKα was unknown at the time of our study, would also function as a ZAKα- RSR activator. To control for protein synthesis inhibition, we tested several translational inhibitors blasticidin (BLAST), puromycin (PURO), emetine, and G418, which target different sites of the ribosome and do not activate ZAKα. A nonspecific cytotoxic drug, staurosporine (STS), was used to exclude the possibility that NLRP1 was inadvertently activated by apoptosis. ANS, DON, and HYGRO strongly induced ZAKα phosphorylation in N/TERT cells (Fig. 2A). Among the other cytotoxic drugs, only BLAST induced moderate ZAKα phosphorylation. By contrast, the level of antiapoptotic protein MCL-1, which is a sensor for translational inhibition (34), was reduced by all drugs tested (Fig. 2A). There was a correlation between the level of ZAKα phosphorylation and inflammasome activation, with ANS, HYGRO, and DON acting as strong inducers of IL-1β secretion and GSDMD p30 cleavage in N/TERT cells, and BLAST a weak inducer (Fig. 2, A and B, and fig. S5, E and F). None of the non-ZAKα activating drugs induced detectable IL-1β p17 secretion or GSDMD p30 cleavage despite significant cell death (Fig. 2, A and B). ANS also induced IL-1β and IL-18 secretion and GSDMD p30+ cells with condensed nuclei and strong eosin staining in organotypic human skin cultures (Fig. 2, C and D). Thus, ZAKα-activating compounds, such as ANS, DON, and HYGRO are NLRP1 inflammasome activators. Moreover, this property is not caused by a general inhibition of translation.

Additionally, knocking out ZAKα, NLRP1, or components of the canonical inflammasome, but not NLRP3 or ribosome-associated protein quality control sensor, ZNF598, abrogated ANS- dependent pyroptosis in N/TERT cells (Fig. 2E and figs. S5G and S6A). ANS-dependent NLRP1 activation was also sensitive to the NEDD8/cullin inhibitor MLN4924 (fig. 6B). ANS also induced NLRP1 C-terminal fragment (CT) oligomerization and the formation of ASC-GFP specks in 293T-ASC-GFP-NLRP1 reporter cells—two established readouts for inflammasome activation—without affecting DPP9 protease activity (fig. S7, A to D). ANS could also induce inflammasome-driven pyroptosis in foreskin keratinocytes, bronchial epithelial cells, and aortic endothelial cells (fig. S8, A to E), but not in MV-4-11 cells, which employ CARD8 as the primary inflammasome sensor (fig. S8F). Thus, ZAKα activating ribotoxins, exemplified by ANS, DON, and HYGRO, function as bona fide NLRP1 activators.

We next reconstituted NLRP1 KO N/TERT cells with human NLRP1, NLRP1ΔPYD, murine NLRP1B (muNLRP1B), or human CARD8 (Fig. 3A and fig. S9, A and B). When overexpressed, all of these heterologous sensors restored VbP-induced IL-1β secretion (Fig. 3A), as reported previously (13). By contrast, ANS only induced IL-1β in cells rescued with human NLRP1 or NLRP1ΔPYD (Fig. 3A), but not murine NLRP1 or human CARD8. Thus, ZAKα-activating molecules such as ANS are specific triggers for human NLRP1. In further support for its species specificity, ANS did not induce IL-1β release in murine bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) in an muNLRP1-dependent manner (fig. S9, C and D) (35, 36))

Human NLRP1 harbors a unique N-terminal extension encompassing the non-signaling PYD and an extended linker, which is absent in rodent NLRP1 orthologs and CARD8. This linker region is predicted to be intrinsically disordered (Fig. 3B) (37). Recent work documented a critical role of a similarly disordered linker region in CARD8 inflammasome activation (28). We therefore tested the role of the NLRP1 linker region (a.a. 86-254, hereby termed NLRP1DR). The deletion of the NLRP1DR, but not NLRP1 PYD, abrogated UVB- and ANS-triggered pyroptosis (Fig. 3, A and C, and fig. S10, A and B). By contrast, VbP-dependent NLRP1 inflammasome activation was unaffected. Similar results were obtained in 293T-ASC-GFP cells (fig. S10, C and D). In addition, NLRP1DR deletion attenuated NT degradation after UVB or ANS treatment (fig. S10B). Although the deletion of NLRP1DR also affected VbP-induced NT degradation, NLRP1DR deletion did not affect VbP-triggered pyroptosis (Fig. 3C and fig. S10B), suggesting that VbP- induced NLRP1 activation involves other domains than NLRP1DR. Thus, NLRP1DR is selectively required for ZAKα-dependent NLRP1 inflammasome activation.

To further dissect the function of NLRP1DR, we constructed a hybrid human inflammasome sensor (termed “NLRP1DR-CARD8ZC” with a C-terminal FLAG tag) by fusing NLRP1DR to the signaling domains of CARD8 (ZU5-UPA-CARD) (Fig. 3D). Since CARD8 itself is insensitive to UVB and ANS (Fig. 3A), any neomorphic gain in inflammasome response to ANS and UVB could be attributed to NLRP1DR. When NLRP1DR-CARD8Zc was expressed in NLRP1 KO N/TERTs, inflammasome activation in response to UVB (Fig. 3, E and F, and fig. S11, A and B), ANS (figs. S11C and S12, A and B), and HYGRO (fig. S11C) was restored. Thus, the disordered linker region is a necessary and sufficient determinant for NLRP1 to sense ZAKα-activating agents. NLRP1DR as a GFP fusion protein (NLRP1DR-GFP) showed increased fluorescence 24 hours after ANS treatment for unknown reasons (fig. S13A), suggesting that NLRP1DR does not undergo proteasomal degradation and that other unknown structural elements on NLRP1 must be necessary for NT degradation.

We observed a marked band shift for NLRP1DR-GFP by immunoblot whenever the cells were treated with UVB or ANS (Fig. 4A). This band shift was sensitive to post-lysis treatment with lambda phosphatase (LPP) (fig. S14A) and could be eliminated by mutating all the serine and threonine residues to alanine (a mutant hereby referred to as “Stless”) (fig. S13B), which confirmed that it was caused by phosphorylated NLRP1DR. PhosTag SDS-PAGE further revealed that NLRP1DR was significantly phosphorylated in unstimulated cells and became further phosphorylated by ANS and UVB (Fig. 4A). We hereby refer to ANS- or UVB-dependent NLRP1DR phosphorylation as hyperphosphorylation. Among all the drugs tested, only ZAKα- activating compounds could induce NLRP1DR hyperphosphorylation (fig. S13C). In ZAK-KO N/TERT cells, ANS- and UVB-induced NLRP1DR hyperphosphorylation was abrogated (Fig. 4A). ZAKα-driven NLRP1 hyperphosphorylation was specific, as ASC was not phosphorylated by ANS or VbP treatment (fig. S13D). In orthogonal experiments, coexpression of wild-type ZAKα induced a large band shift of full-length NLRP1 in 293T cells on PhosTag gel, which was diminished by the deletion of NLRP1DR or the ZAKα kinase–dead mutation (p.K45A) (fig. S14, B and C). Thus, ZAKα, when activated either by overexpression or ribotoxic stress, hyperphosphorylates NLRP1 within the NLRP1DR.

Mutating the serine/threonine residues to alanine within a short stretch of NLRP1DR (a.a. 121-196) abrogated NLRP1 activation by UVB but did not affect VbP-driven IL-1β secretion (fig. S16). This suggested that this region harbors critical ZAKα-dependent phosphorylation sites. Recombinant ZAKα was sufficient to phosphorylate SNAP-tagged NLRP1DR purified from bacteria (Fig. 4B), indicating that NLRP1 is a direct substrate of ZAKα. Mass spectrometry of excised p-NLRP1DR bands after coincubation with ZAKα identified seven distinct ZAKα phosphorylation sites. These sites are clustered in two identical motifs of the sequence PTSTAVL (Fig. 4B, and data S1), which does not exist in any other protein in the human proteome annotated in Swiss-Prot. Therefore, we propose naming this sequence the ZAKα motif. Notably, the second ZAKα motif (motif #2) falls within the crucial region (a.a. 121-196) identified by alanine scanning (fig. S16) and can be phosphorylated by ZAKα in vitro in the absence of any other phosphorylation sites (fig. S18A). Mutating the three serine/threonine residues in this motif (a.a. T178A, S179A, T180A, resulting in the NLRP1 3A mutant) eliminated UVB- and ANS-induced pyroptosis in reconstituted NLRP1-KO N/TERT cells, but had no effect on VbP-dependent pyroptosis (Fig. 4, D to F and fig. S17, A and B). Thus, a single phosphorylation site in the ZAKα motif within NLRP1DR controls ZAKα-driven NLRP1 activation.

Given that ZAKα activates multiple SAPKs, we tested whether other kinases also contributed to ZAKα-induced NLRP1 activation. In agreement with previous results (38), multiple p38 inhibitors blocked ANS- and UVB-induced IL-1β secretion (fig. S17C) without altering VbP- dependent NLRP1 activation. By contrast, inhibitors of JNK, TAK1, SYK, and MK2 did not affect ANS-driven NLRP1 activation (fig. S17, C and D). Both p38α and p38β could phosphorylate recombinant NLRP1DR, including residues within the ZAKα motifs (Fig. 4B; figs. S17F and S18, A and B; and data S1). However, p38 inhibitors showed only a modest effect on ANS-induced NLRP1DR hyperphosphorylation (fig. S17E), which was completely abrogated by ZAKα inhibitors (fig. S17E). A double KO of p38α and p38β (p38α+β dKO) in N/TERTs produced a significant, but incomplete reduction of IL-1β secretion after UVB and ANS treatment (Fig. 4C and fig. S18, C and D). Thus, p38 kinases contribute to NLRP1 inflammasome activation induced by RSR inducing agents, but their roles are less critical than that of ZAKα. Since p38α and p38β are strictly downstream of ZAKα in RSR signaling, we hypothesize that ZAKα is the initiating kinase that phosphorylates NLRP1, whereas p38 kinases subsequently reinforce or amplify this response.

UVB irradiation leads to caspase-1-dependent pyroptotic cell death and IL-1β secretion in human skin keratinocytes (15, 27, 39). Initially thought to be an NLRP3-associated phenomenon, recent work has provided convincing evidence that NLRP1, instead of NLRP3, is the primary inflammasome sensor for UVB. In this work, we identify the key events controlling UVB- triggered NLRP1 inflammasome activation. By inducing cellular RNA photolesions that stall ribosomes, UVB activates the ribotoxic response (RSR) kinase ZAKα, which, together with its downstream effectors p38, phosphorylates the human-specific disordered linker region of NLRP1. A single phosphorylation site within the ZAKα motif identified here is sufficient to control NLRP1 activation in an DPP8/9-independent manner. Thus, human NLRP1 is a remarkably versatile sensor protein that can integrate multiple signals through its discrete domains. We also expand the repertoire of known human NLRP1 agonists to include multiple microbial ribotoxins, such as ANS and DON. The same results have been independently reported by a concurrent study (40). Our work also raises several questions to be addressed by future studies. For instance, it is currently unclear how ZAKα-driven hyperphosphorylation activates NLRP1 by accelerating the functional degradation of NLRP1 NT. Our findings also suggest that RSR signaling may play a role in antimicrobial defense and IL-1-driven inflammation in vivo. If proven, pharmacologically targeting the ZAKα-NLRP1 axis may prove beneficial in treating human inflammatory disorders.

Supplementary MaterialSupplementary Materials

Supplementary Material
