---
pmid: '24191726'
title: The distal helix in the regulatory domain of calcineurin is important for domain
  stability and enzyme function.
authors:
- Dunlap TB
- Cook EC
- Rumi-Masante J
- Arvin HG
- Lester TE
- Creamer TP
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi400483a
---

# The distal helix in the regulatory domain of calcineurin is important for domain stability and enzyme function.
**Authors:** Dunlap TB, Cook EC, Rumi-Masante J, Arvin HG, Lester TE, Creamer TP
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi400483a](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi400483a)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 3;52(48):8643-51. doi: 10.1021/bi400483a. Epub 2013 Nov
 15.

The distal helix in the regulatory domain of calcineurin is important for domain 
stability and enzyme function.

Dunlap TB(1), Cook EC, Rumi-Masante J, Arvin HG, Lester TE, Creamer TP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Structural Biology, Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biochemistry, University of Kentucky , 741 South Limestone Street, Lexington, 
Kentucky 40536-0509, United States.

Calcineurin (CaN) is a calmodulin-activated, serine/threonine phosphatase that 
is necessary for cardiac, vasculature, and nervous system development, as well 
as learning and memory, skeletal muscle growth, and immune system activation. 
CaN is activated in a manner similar to that of the calmodulin (CaM)-activated 
kinases. CaM binds CaN's regulatory domain (RD) and causes a conformational 
change that removes CaN's autoinhibitory domain (AID) from its catalytic site, 
activating CaN. In the CaM-activated kinases, the CaM binding region (CaMBR) is 
located just C-terminal to the AID, whereas in CaN, the AID is 52 residues 
C-terminal to the CaMBR. Previously published data have shown that these 52 
residues in CaN's RD are disordered but approximately half of them gain 
structure, likely α-helical, upon CaM binding. In this work, we confirm that 
this increase in the level of structure is α-helical. We posit that this region 
forms an amphipathic helix upon CaM binding and folds onto the remainder of the 
RD:CaM complex, removing the AID. Förster resonance energy transfer data suggest 
the C-terminal end of this distal helix is relatively close to the N-terminal 
end of the CaMBR when the RD is bound by CaM. We show by circular dichroism 
spectroscopy and thermal melts that mutations on the hydrophobic face of the 
distal helix disrupt the structure gained upon CaM binding. Additionally, 
kinetic analysis of CaN activity suggests that these mutations affect CaN's 
ability to bind substrate, likely a result of the AID being able to bind to the 
active site even when CaM is bound. Our data demonstrate the presence of this 
distal helix and suggest it folds onto the remainder of the RD:CaM complex, 
creating a hairpinlike chain reversal that removes the AID from the active site.

DOI: 10.1021/bi400483a
PMID: 24191726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
