---
pmid: '40532695'
title: Environmental microbiomes drive chemotactile sensation in octopus.
authors:
- Sepela RJ
- Jiang H
- Shin YH
- Hautala TL
- Clardy J
- Hibbs RE
- Bellono NW
journal: Cell
year: '2025'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC12354320
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.033
---

# Environmental microbiomes drive chemotactile sensation in octopus.
**Authors:** Sepela RJ, Jiang H, Shin YH, Hautala TL, Clardy J, Hibbs RE, Bellono NW
**Journal:** Cell (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.033)
**PMC:** [PMC12354320](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC12354320/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2025 Sep 4;188(18):4849-4860.e21. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.033. Epub 
2025 Jun 17.

Environmental microbiomes drive chemotactile sensation in octopus.

Sepela RJ(1), Jiang H(2), Shin YH(3), Hautala TL(1), Clardy J(4), Hibbs RE(5), 
Bellono NW(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: jon_clardy@hms.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Neurobiology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
San Diego, CA, USA. Electronic address: rehibbs@ucsd.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA. Electronic address: nbellono@harvard.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Mar 04:2025.03.03.641191. doi: 10.1101/2025.03.03.641191.

Microbial communities coat nearly every surface in the environment and have 
co-existed with animals throughout evolution. Whether animals exploit 
omnipresent microbial cues to navigate their surroundings is not well 
understood. Octopuses use "taste-by-touch" chemotactile receptors (CRs) to 
explore the seafloor, but how they distinguish meaningful surfaces from the 
rocks and crevices they encounter is unknown. Here, we report that secreted 
signals from microbiomes of ecologically relevant surfaces activate CRs to guide 
octopus behavior. Distinct molecules isolated from individual bacterial strains 
located on prey or eggs bind single CRs in subtly different structural 
conformations to elicit specific mechanisms of receptor activation, ion 
permeation and signal transduction, and maternal care and predation behavior. 
Thus, microbiomes on ecological surfaces act at the level of primary sensory 
receptors to inform behavior. Our study demonstrates that uncovering 
interkingdom interactions is essential to understanding how animal sensory 
systems evolved in a microbe-rich world.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2025.05.033
PMCID: PMC12354320
PMID: 40532695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
