---
pmid: '16292676'
title: Increased phosphoglucomutase activity suppresses the galactose growth defect
  associated with elevated levels of Ras signaling in S. cerevisiae.
authors:
- Howard SC
- Deminoff SJ
- Herman PK
journal: Curr Genet
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00294-005-0036-z
---

# Increased phosphoglucomutase activity suppresses the galactose growth defect associated with elevated levels of Ras signaling in S. cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Howard SC, Deminoff SJ, Herman PK
**Journal:** Curr Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00294-005-0036-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-005-0036-z)

## Abstract

1. Curr Genet. 2006 Jan;49(1):1-6. doi: 10.1007/s00294-005-0036-z. Epub 2005 Nov 
16.

Increased phosphoglucomutase activity suppresses the galactose growth defect 
associated with elevated levels of Ras signaling in S. cerevisiae.

Howard SC(1), Deminoff SJ, Herman PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, 484 West Twelfth 
Avenue, Room 984, Columbus, 43210, USA.

The Ras proteins regulate many aspects of cell growth in the budding yeast, 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, via the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Here, we 
show that a RAS2(val19) mutant that exhibits elevated levels of Ras/PKA 
signaling activity is unable to grow on media with galactose as the sole source 
of carbon. This growth defect was due, at least in part, to a defect in the 
expression of genes, like GAL1, that encode enzymes needed for the metabolism of 
galactose. This growth defect was used as the basis for a genetic screen for 
dosage suppressors of the RAS2(val19) mutant. This screen identified two genes, 
PGM1 and PCM1, that encode proteins with phosphoglucomutase activity. This 
activity is responsible for converting the glucose-1-phosphate produced during 
the metabolism of galactose to glucose-6-phosphate, a precursor that can be 
metabolized via the glycolytic pathway. The over-expression of PGM1 was not able 
to suppress any other RAS2(val19) phenotype or the galactose growth defect 
associated with a gal1Delta mutant. Overall, these data suggest that the 
elevated levels of phosphoglucomutase activity allow for the more efficient 
utilization of the limiting levels of glucose-1-phosphate that are present in 
the RAS2(val19) mutant.

DOI: 10.1007/s00294-005-0036-z
PMID: 16292676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
