---
pmid: '2123878'
title: Purification, characterization, and western blot analysis of human GTPase-activating
  protein from native and recombinant sources.
authors:
- Halenbeck R
- Crosier WJ
- Clark R
- McCormick F
- Koths K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
---

# Purification, characterization, and western blot analysis of human GTPase-activating protein from native and recombinant sources.
**Authors:** Halenbeck R, Crosier WJ, Clark R, McCormick F, Koths K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1990)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Dec 15;265(35):21922-8.

Purification, characterization, and western blot analysis of human 
GTPase-activating protein from native and recombinant sources.

Halenbeck R(1), Crosier WJ, Clark R, McCormick F, Koths K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Protein Chemistry, Cetus Corporation, Emeryville, California 
94608.

Human ras GTPase-activating protein (GAP) is a cytoplasmic factor that 
stimulates the GTPase activity of normal N-ras p21 while having no stimulatory 
effect on the GTPase activity of oncogenic variants of N-ras p21. We have 
purified two forms of native ras GAP from human placental tissue. In addition to 
the Mr = 120,000 type I GAP reported previously (1), an equivalent amount of an 
Mr = 95,000 molecule with GAP activity was recovered and shown to have the 
N-terminal sequence expected for type II GAP. The two GAP forms in placental 
extracts were resolved by molecular sieve chromatography and appeared to have a 
monomeric native structure. Human recombinant type I GAP was produced 
intracellularly in Sf9 insect cells using a baculovirus expression vector, and 
10-mg quantities were purified to homogeneity in three steps. Comparison of the 
purified native and recombinant GAP molecules revealed that all three displayed 
similar biological specific activities in an in vitro GAP assay. A polyclonal 
antibody to purified recombinant GAP was prepared and shown to neutralize the 
activity of both native and recombinant GAPs. The antibody was also highly 
specific for the detection of native GAP by Western blot. Type I and II GAP 
species were detected in approximately equal amounts in cytoplasmic extracts of 
human placenta, but only type I GAP was observed when other human tissues were 
examined.

PMID: 2123878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
