---
pmid: '8253832'
title: Eukaryotic initiation factor 5A is a cellular target of the human immunodeficiency
  virus type 1 Rev activation domain mediating trans-activation.
authors:
- Ruhl M
- Himmelspach M
- Bahr GM
- Hammerschmid F
- Jaksche H
- Wolff B
- Aschauer H
- Farrington GK
- Probst H
- Bevec D
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2290910
doi: 10.1083/jcb.123.6.1309
---

# Eukaryotic initiation factor 5A is a cellular target of the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Rev activation domain mediating trans-activation.
**Authors:** Ruhl M, Himmelspach M, Bahr GM, Hammerschmid F, Jaksche H, Wolff B, Aschauer H, Farrington GK, Probst H, Bevec D
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.123.6.1309](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.123.6.1309)
**PMC:** [PMC2290910](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2290910/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;123(6 Pt 1):1309-20. doi: 10.1083/jcb.123.6.1309.

Eukaryotic initiation factor 5A is a cellular target of the human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1 Rev activation domain mediating trans-activation.

Ruhl M(1), Himmelspach M, Bahr GM, Hammerschmid F, Jaksche H, Wolff B, Aschauer 
H, Farrington GK, Probst H, Bevec D, et al.

Author information:
(1)SANDOZ Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.

Expression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) structural proteins 
requires the presence of the viral trans-activator protein Rev. Rev is localized 
in the nucleus and binds specifically to the Rev response element (RRE) sequence 
in viral RNA. Furthermore, the interaction of the Rev activation domain with a 
cellular cofactor is essential for Rev function in vivo. Using cross-linking 
experiments and Biospecific Interaction Analysis (BIA) we identify eukaryotic 
initiation factor 5A (eIF-5A) as a cellular factor binding specifically to the 
HIV-1 Rev activation domain. Indirect immunofluorescence studies demonstrate 
that a significant fraction of eIF-5A localizes to the nucleus. We also provide 
evidence that Rev transactivation is functionally mediated by eIF-5A in Xenopus 
oocytes. Furthermore, we are able to block Rev function in mammalian cells by 
antisense inhibition of eIF-5A gene expression. Thus, regulation of HIV-1 gene 
expression by Rev involves the targeting of RRE-containing RNA to components of 
the cellular translation initiation complex.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.123.6.1309
PMCID: PMC2290910
PMID: 8253832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Expression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) structural proteins requires the presence of the viral trans-activator protein Rev. Rev is localized in the nucleus and binds specifically to the Rev response element (RRE) sequence in viral RNA. Furthermore, the interaction of the Rev activation domain with a cellular cofactor is essential for Rev function in vivo. Using cross-linking experiments and Biospecific Interaction Analysis (BIA) we identify eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (eIF-5A) as a cellular factor binding specifically to the HIV-1 Rev activation domain. Indirect immunofluorescence studies demonstrate that a significant fraction of eIF-5A localizes to the nucleus. We also provide evidence that Rev transactivation is functionally mediated by eIF-5A in Xenopus oocytes. Furthermore, we are able to block Rev function in mammalian cells by antisense inhibition of eIF-5A gene expression. Thus, regulation of HIV-1 gene expression by Rev involves the targeting of RRE-containing RNA to components of the cellular translation initiation complex.
