---
pmid: '15107403'
title: The Notch target genes Hey1 and Hey2 are required for embryonic vascular development.
authors:
- Fischer A
- Schumacher N
- Maier M
- Sendtner M
- Gessler M
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC395849
doi: 10.1101/gad.291004
---

# The Notch target genes Hey1 and Hey2 are required for embryonic vascular development.
**Authors:** Fischer A, Schumacher N, Maier M, Sendtner M, Gessler M
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.291004](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.291004)
**PMC:** [PMC395849](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC395849/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Apr 15;18(8):901-11. doi: 10.1101/gad.291004.

The Notch target genes Hey1 and Hey2 are required for embryonic vascular 
development.

Fischer A(1), Schumacher N, Maier M, Sendtner M, Gessler M.

Author information:
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institut für Biowissenschaften (Biozentrum), Physiologische 
Chemie I, Universität Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

The Delta-Notch signaling pathway plays a central role in the development of 
most vertebrate organs. The Hey family of bHLH transcription factors are direct 
targets of Notch signaling. Loss of Hey2 in the mouse leads to cardiac defects 
with high postnatal lethality. We have now generated a mouse Hey1 knockout that 
has no apparent phenotypic defect. The combined loss of Hey1 and Hey2, however, 
results in embryonic death after embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) with a global lack of 
vascular remodeling and massive hemorrhage. Initial vasculogenesis appears 
unaffected, but all subsequently developing major vessels in the embryo and yolk 
sac are either small or absent. Furthermore, the placental labyrinth completely 
lacks embryonic blood vessels. Similar vascular defects are observed in Jagged1 
and Notch1 knockout mice. In the latter we found Hey1 and Hey2 expression in 
yolk sacs to be strongly reduced. Remaining large arteries in both Notch1 and 
Hey1/Hey2 knockout mice fail to express the arterial endothelial markers CD44, 
neuropilin1, and ephrin-B2. This indicates that Hey1/Hey2 are essential 
transducers of Notch signals in cardiovascular development that may mediate 
arterial cell fate decision.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.291004
PMCID: PMC395849
PMID: 15107403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
