---
pmid: '24108124'
title: FBH1 helicase disrupts RAD51 filaments in vitro and modulates homologous recombination
  in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Simandlova J
- Zagelbaum J
- Payne MJ
- Chu WK
- Shevelev I
- Hanada K
- Chatterjee S
- Reid DA
- Liu Y
- Janscak P
- Rothenberg E
- Hickson ID
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3837158
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.484493
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# FBH1 helicase disrupts RAD51 filaments in vitro and modulates homologous recombination in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Simandlova J, Zagelbaum J, Payne MJ, Chu WK, Shevelev I, Hanada K, Chatterjee S, Reid DA, Liu Y, Janscak P, Rothenberg E, Hickson ID
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.484493](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.484493)
**PMC:** [PMC3837158](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3837158/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):34168-34180. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.484493.
Epub  2013 Oct 9.

FBH1 helicase disrupts RAD51 filaments in vitro and modulates homologous 
recombination in mammalian cells.

Simandlova J(1), Zagelbaum J(2), Payne MJ(3), Chu WK(4), Shevelev I(1), Hanada 
K(3), Chatterjee S(2), Reid DA(2), Liu Y(5), Janscak P(6), Rothenberg E(7), 
Hickson ID(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
14300 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(3)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Oncology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.
(4)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Oncology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom; Nordea Center for Healthy 
Aging, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, 
2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(5)Nordea Center for Healthy Aging, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(6)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
14300 Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University 
of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
pjanscak@imcr.uzh.ch.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, New York. Electronic address: 
eli.rothenberg@nyumc.org.
(8)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of Oncology, 
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, United Kingdom; Nordea Center for Healthy 
Aging, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, 
2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Electronic address: iandh@sund.ku.dk.

Efficient repair of DNA double strand breaks and interstrand cross-links 
requires the homologous recombination (HR) pathway, a potentially error-free 
process that utilizes a homologous sequence as a repair template. A key player 
in HR is RAD51, the eukaryotic ortholog of bacterial RecA protein. RAD51 can 
polymerize on DNA to form a nucleoprotein filament that facilitates both the 
search for the homologous DNA sequences and the subsequent DNA strand invasion 
required to initiate HR. Because of its pivotal role in HR, RAD51 is subject to 
numerous positive and negative regulatory influences. Using a combination of 
molecular genetic, biochemical, and single-molecule biophysical techniques, we 
provide mechanistic insight into the mode of action of the FBH1 helicase as a 
regulator of RAD51-dependent HR in mammalian cells. We show that FBH1 binds 
directly to RAD51 and is able to disrupt RAD51 filaments on DNA through its 
ssDNA translocase function. Consistent with this, a mutant mouse embryonic stem 
cell line with a deletion in the FBH1 helicase domain fails to limit RAD51 
chromatin association and shows hyper-recombination. Our data are consistent 
with FBH1 restraining RAD51 DNA binding under unperturbed growth conditions to 
prevent unwanted or unscheduled DNA recombination.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.484493
PMCID: PMC3837158
PMID: 24108124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
