---
pmid: '22441691'
title: Neurl4, a novel daughter centriole protein, prevents formation of ectopic microtubule
  organizing centres.
authors:
- Li J
- Kim S
- Kobayashi T
- Liang FX
- Korzeniewski N
- Duensing S
- Dynlacht BD
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3367236
doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.40
---

# Neurl4, a novel daughter centriole protein, prevents formation of ectopic microtubule organizing centres.
**Authors:** Li J, Kim S, Kobayashi T, Liang FX, Korzeniewski N, Duensing S, Dynlacht BD
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2012.40](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.40)
**PMC:** [PMC3367236](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3367236/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2012 Jun 1;13(6):547-53. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.40.

Neurl4, a novel daughter centriole protein, prevents formation of ectopic 
microtubule organizing centres.

Li J(1), Kim S, Kobayashi T, Liang FX, Korzeniewski N, Duensing S, Dynlacht BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, OCS Microscopy Core, New York University School of 
Medicine and Cancer Institute, 522 First Avenue, Smilow 1106, New York, New York 
10016, USA.

Here we identify Neuralized homologue 4 (Neurl4) as a protein that interacts 
with CP110, a centrosomal protein that regulates centrosome duplication. Neurl4 
uses a Neuralized homology repeat to preferentially localize to procentrioles 
and daughter centrioles. Neurl4 depletion results in ectopic microtubular 
organizing centres (MTOCs), leading to accumulation of CP110 and recruitment of 
a cohort of centrosomal proteins. We show that these ectopic MTOCs persist 
through mitosis and assemble aberrant mitotic spindles. Interestingly, Neurl4 
promotes ubiquitylation of CP110, thereby destabilizing this protein. Our 
results indicate that Neurl4 counteracts accumulation of CP110, thereby 
maintaining normal centriolar homeostasis and preventing formation of ectopic 
MTOCs.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2012.40
PMCID: PMC3367236
PMID: 22441691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
