---
pmid: '23817958'
title: Proinflammatory stimuli induce galectin-9 in human mesenchymal stromal cells
  to suppress T-cell proliferation.
authors:
- Gieseke F
- Kruchen A
- Tzaribachev N
- Bentzien F
- Dominici M
- Müller I
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/eji.201343335
---

# Proinflammatory stimuli induce galectin-9 in human mesenchymal stromal cells to suppress T-cell proliferation.
**Authors:** Gieseke F, Kruchen A, Tzaribachev N, Bentzien F, Dominici M, Müller I
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eji.201343335](https://doi.org/10.1002/eji.201343335)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Oct;43(10):2741-9. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343335. Epub 2013
Jul  23.

Proinflammatory stimuli induce galectin-9 in human mesenchymal stromal cells to 
suppress T-cell proliferation.

Gieseke F(1), Kruchen A, Tzaribachev N, Bentzien F, Dominici M, Müller I.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute Children's Cancer Center, Hamburg, Germany.

Human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are clinically applied to 
treat autoimmune diseases and graft-versus-host disease due to their 
immunomodulatory properties. Several molecules have been identified to mediate 
these effects, including constitutively expressed galectin-1. However, there are 
indications in the literature that MSCs exert enhanced immunosuppressive 
functions after interaction with an inflammatory environment. Therefore, we 
analyzed how inflammatory stimuli influence the expression of the galectin 
network in MSCs and functionally tested the relevance for the immunomodulatory 
effects of MSCs. We found that galectin-9 was strongly induced in MSCs upon 
interaction with activated PBMCs. Proinflammatory cytokines, such as 
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and also 
ligands of the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) TLR2, TLR3, and TLR4 elicited similar 
induction of galectin-9 in activated PBMCs. Galectin-9 was not only upregulated 
intracellularly, but also released by MSCs in significant amounts into the 
supernatant after exposure to proinflammatory stimuli. In proliferation assays, 
MSCs with a galectin-9 knockdown lost a significant portion of their 
antiproliferative effects on T cells. In conclusion, we found that unlike 
constitutively expressed galectin-1, galectin-9 is induced by several 
proinflammatory stimuli and released by MSCs. Thus, galectin-9 contributes to 
the inducible immunomodulatory functions of MSCs.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201343335
PMID: 23817958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
