---
pmid: '15047060'
title: 'Analysis of proteins copurifying with the CD4/lck complex using one-dimensional
  polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry: comparison with affinity-tag
  based protein detection and evaluation of different solubilization methods.'
authors:
- Bernhard OK
- Cunningham AL
- Sheil MM
journal: J Am Soc Mass Spectrom
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jasms.2003.12.006
---

# Analysis of proteins copurifying with the CD4/lck complex using one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry: comparison with affinity-tag based protein detection and evaluation of different solubilization methods.
**Authors:** Bernhard OK, Cunningham AL, Sheil MM
**Journal:** J Am Soc Mass Spectrom (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jasms.2003.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasms.2003.12.006)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2004 Apr;15(4):558-67. doi:
10.1016/j.jasms.2003.12.006.

Analysis of proteins copurifying with the CD4/lck complex using one-dimensional 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry: comparison with 
affinity-tag based protein detection and evaluation of different solubilization 
methods.

Bernhard OK(1), Cunningham AL, Sheil MM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Virus Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, National Center for 
HIV Virology Research, Westmead Hospital and the University of Sydney, Westmead, 
New South Wales, Australia.

Mass spectrometry-based identification of the components of affinity purified 
protein complexes after polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and in-gel 
digest has become very popular for the detection of novel protein interactions. 
As an alternative, the entire protein complex can be subjected to proteolytic 
cleavage followed by chromatographic separation of the peptides. Based on our 
earlier report of a method using affinity tag-mediated purification of 
cysteine-containing peptides to analyse proteins present in an affinity 
purification of the CD4/lck receptor complex, we here evaluated the use of 
one-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis for analysis of the same 
receptor complex purification. Using electrospray and tandem mass spectrometry 
analyses of tryptic peptides from in-gel digested proteins we identified the 
components of the CD4 receptor complex along with 23 other proteins that were 
all likely to be non-specifically binding proteins and mainly different from the 
proteins detected in our previous study. We compare the alternative strategy 
with the affinity tag-based method that we described earlier and show that the 
PAGE-based method enables more proteins to be identified. We also evaluated the 
use of a more stringent lysis buffer for the CD4 purification to minimise 
non-specific binding and identified 52 proteins along with CD4 in three 
independent experiments suggesting that the choice of lysis buffer had no 
significant effect on the extent of non-specific binding. Non-specific binding 
was inconsistent and involved various types of proteins underlining the 
importance of reproducibility and control experiments in proteomic studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jasms.2003.12.006
PMID: 15047060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
