---
pmid: '8812853'
title: 'Recombinant human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase: overproduction in
  Escherichia coli, purification, and characterization.'
authors:
- Caine JM
- Macreadie IG
- Grunewald GL
- McLeish MJ
journal: Protein Expr Purif
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/prep.1996.0088
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Recombinant human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase: overproduction in Escherichia coli, purification, and characterization.
**Authors:** Caine JM, Macreadie IG, Grunewald GL, McLeish MJ
**Journal:** Protein Expr Purif (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1006/prep.1996.0088](https://doi.org/10.1006/prep.1996.0088)

## Abstract

1. Protein Expr Purif. 1996 Sep;8(2):160-6. doi: 10.1006/prep.1996.0088.

Recombinant human phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase: overproduction in 
Escherichia coli, purification, and characterization.

Caine JM(1), Macreadie IG, Grunewald GL, McLeish MJ.

Author information:
(1)Victorian College of Pharmacy, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, 
Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia.

The gene encoding phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) has been 
amplified from a human adrenal medulla cDNA library. Following ligation of the 
gene into a pET3a-derived expression vector and transformation into Escherichia 
coli BL21(DE3)pLysS, PNMT was expressed, yielding about 10% of the soluble 
protein. The enzyme was purified to homogeneity by ammonium sulfate 
fractionation followed by ion-exchange chromatography and gel filtration. The Km 
for phenylethanolamine and S-adenosyl-L-methionine were determined to be 130 and 
16 microM, respectively. The enzyme could be inhibited by reagents expected to 
modify cysteine, arginine, tyrosine, and histidine residues, but not by methyl 
acetimidate, a reagent expected to modify lysine residues.

DOI: 10.1006/prep.1996.0088
PMID: 8812853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
