---
pmid: '15314168'
title: Cyclin D1 genetic heterozygosity regulates colonic epithelial cell differentiation
  and tumor number in ApcMin mice.
authors:
- Hulit J
- Wang C
- Li Z
- Albanese C
- Rao M
- Di Vizio D
- Shah S
- Byers SW
- Mahmood R
- Augenlicht LH
- Russell R
- Pestell RG
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC507010
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7598-7611.2004
---

# Cyclin D1 genetic heterozygosity regulates colonic epithelial cell differentiation and tumor number in ApcMin mice.
**Authors:** Hulit J, Wang C, Li Z, Albanese C, Rao M, Di Vizio D, Shah S, Byers SW, Mahmood R, Augenlicht LH, Russell R, Pestell RG
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.17.7598-7611.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.17.7598-7611.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC507010](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC507010/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Sep;24(17):7598-611. doi:
10.1128/MCB.24.17.7598-7611.2004.

Cyclin D1 genetic heterozygosity regulates colonic epithelial cell 
differentiation and tumor number in ApcMin mice.

Hulit J(1), Wang C, Li Z, Albanese C, Rao M, Di Vizio D, Shah S, Byers SW, 
Mahmood R, Augenlicht LH, Russell R, Pestell RG.

Author information:
(1)The Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Georgetown 
University, Research Building Room E501, 3970 Reservoir Rd., N.W., Box 571468, 
Washington, DC 20057-1468, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jan;25(1):523.

Constitutive beta-catenin/Tcf activity, the primary transforming events in 
colorectal carcinoma, occurs through induction of the Wnt pathway or APC gene 
mutations that cause familial adenomatous polyposis. Mice carrying Apc mutations 
in their germ line (ApcMin) develop intestinal adenomas. Here, the crossing of 
ApcMin with cyclin D1-/- mice reduced the intestinal tumor number in animals 
genetically heterozygous or nullizygous for cyclin D1. Decreased tumor number in 
the duodenum, intestines, and colons of ApcMin/cyclin D1+/- mice correlated with 
reduced cellular proliferation and increased differentiation. Cyclin D1 
deficiency reduced DNA synthesis and induced differentiation of colonic 
epithelial cells harboring mutant APC but not wild-type APC cells in vivo. In 
previous studies, the complete loss of cyclin D1 through homozygous genetic 
deletion conveyed breast tumor resistance. The protection of mice, genetically 
predisposed to intestinal tumorigenesis, through cyclin D1 heterozygosity 
suggests that modalities that reduce cyclin D1 abundance could provide 
chemoprotection.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Microbiology

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.17.7598-7611.2004
PMCID: PMC507010
PMID: 15314168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Constitutive β-catenin/Tcf activity, the primary transforming events in colorectal carcinoma, occurs through induction of the Wnt pathway or APC gene mutations that cause familial adenomatous polyposis. Mice carrying Apc mutations in their germ line ( Apc Min ) develop intestinal adenomas. Here, the crossing of Apc Min with cyclin D1 −/− mice reduced the intestinal tumor number in animals genetically heterozygous or nullizygous for cyclin D1 . Decreased tumor number in the duodenum, intestines, and colons of Apc Min / cyclin D1 +/− mice correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and increased differentiation. Cyclin D1 deficiency reduced DNA synthesis and induced differentiation of colonic epithelial cells harboring mutant APC but not wild-type APC cells in vivo. In previous studies, the complete loss of cyclin D1 through homozygous genetic deletion conveyed breast tumor resistance. The protection of mice, genetically predisposed to intestinal tumorigenesis, through cyclin D1 heterozygosity suggests that modalities that reduce cyclin D1 abundance could provide chemoprotection.

DISCUSSION

The present studies are novel, first in showing that cyclin D1 heterozygosity is a tumor-resistant genotype. In the present studies, cyclin D1 loss reduced the rate of gastrointestinal tumor formation induced by inactivation of the Apc gene. Cyclin D1 abundance in adenoma induced by Apc Min was increased approximately 50%. The absence of a single cyclin D1 allele reduced the number of polyps formed in the jejunum, ileum, and colon. A reduction in polyp formation was observed as early as 13 weeks. Second, through analyzing DNA synthesis and markers of differentiation in vivo, the present studies demonstrate the requirement for cyclin D1 as a regulator of both intestinal epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation in the presence of a specific activated oncogenic signaling pathway. Thus, cyclin D1 inhibited epithelial cell differentiation only in the presence of an activated Apc/β-catenin signaling pathway. Apc Min colonic epithelium displayed reduced goblet cell numbers, consistent with a role for Wnt signaling as an inhibitor of cellular differentiation. Cyclin D1 deficiency increased colonic epithelial cell differentiation in the presence of a mutant Apc gene. Together these studies suggest that cyclin D1 functions to inhibit differentiation and promote DNA synthesis in the presence of an activated Apc/β-catenin signaling pathway (Fig. 8 ). Activated Apc/β-catenin signaling induces cyclin D1, and here cyclin D1 did not affect β-catenin abundance, placing cyclin D1 downstream of β-catenin.

Activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling inhibits differentiation of adipocytes ( 43 ) and here enteric cell differentiation, as evidenced by the reduction in goblet cell number in the enteric crypts of the Apc Min mice. Cyclin D1 deficiency enhanced goblet cell formation, correlating with a reduction in tumor formation. Reduced representation of goblet cells is characteristic of many aberrant crypt foci of both humans and rodents ( 38 , 40 ) and is considered to constitute early preneoplastic lesions ( 11 , 40 , 57 ). Furthermore, several CRC chemopreventive agents promote a differentiated cellular phenotype. Together these studies suggest that cyclin D1 deficiency may contribute to tumor resistance by promoting colonic epithelial cell differentiation.

As several million patients are prescribed the PPARγ agonist thiazolidinedione (TZD) for treatment of diabetes, it is important to understand the molecular genetic mechanisms by which PPARγ regulates cellular proliferation and differentiation. The present studies provide further insight into these signaling pathways in vivo. During a molecular survey of candidate genes previously implicated in the progression of CRC growth, we observed increased abundance of PPARγ1 in the Apc Min / cyclin D1 −/− intestinal and colonic epithelia. These findings for gastrointestinal epithelium are consistent with recent studies showing that cyclin D1 antagonized PPARγ function and repressed PPARγ expression in fibroblasts ( 67 ). As PPARγ expression is induced during CRC differentiation, the induction of PPARγ in the Apc Min / cyclin D1 −/− columnar epithelium compared with the Apc Min /cyclin D1 +/+ mice is consistent with features of a more differentiated phenotype upon loss of cyclin D1. In previous studies, PPARγ1 was the predominant PPAR expressed in colonic epithelium ( 26 ). PPARγ agonists (TZD or 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2 [15d-PGJ2]) inhibited colonic tumor growth in some but not all studies ( 50 ). In recent studies, induction of transgenic antisense cyclin D1 induced PPARγ expression in the livers of transgenic mice ( 67 ). Furthermore, cyclin D1 deficiency was shown to promote adipocyte differentiation in response to PPARγ ligands, consistent with a physiological role for cyclin D1 as an inhibitor of PPARγ function ( 67 ).

Recent studies have suggested that β-catenin-dependent proliferation is regulated by PPARγ ( 14 ). Members of the PPAR family, which also includes PPARα and PPARδ, are classified as ligand-activated nuclear receptors ( 42 ). Ligands for PPARγ are members of two classes of molecules termed eicosanoids. These include 15d-PGJ2 or the TZD class. PPARγ agonists (TZD or 15d-PGJ2) inhibited the growth of implanted colonic tumors which contain mutations in the APC protein ( 33 , 42 , 50 , 65 , 67 ), and mutations in the nuclear receptor PPARγ were reported in human colon cancer ( 51 ). PPARγ is an inhibitor of cyclin D1 expression and cellular proliferation ( 65 ). Chemical carcinogen-induced intestinal tumorigenesis is increased in mice that are heterozygous for PPARγ, consistent with evidence that PPARγ may function as a cell type-specific tumor suppressor ( 42 ).

The present studies underscore the importance of cyclin D1 as an inhibitor of PPARγ abundance in vivo. Furthermore, cyclin D1 expression in cyclin D1 −/− cells through viral transduction inhibited endogenous PPARγ expression. Cyclin D1 repressed PPARγ activity and promoter activity in the presence of an activating β-catenin in reporter gene studies with CaCo2 cells. Cyclin D1 inhibited β-catenin S33-induced PPARγ promoter activity and repressed (AOX) 3 LUC reporter activity induced by PPARγ ligands. Together these studies are consistent with a model in which cyclin D1 functions both as a key upstream inhibitor of PPARγ function and as a key downstream effector of Apc/β-catenin-induced proliferation and differentiation (Fig. 8 ). Induction of PPARγ transactivation by β-catenin adds to the growing list of non-Tcf sites that are regulated by activated β-catenin. These sequences include those binding CREB, retinoic acid receptor α, the androgen receptor, and unknown sites within the promyelocytic leukemia promoter ( 52 , 54 , 61 ). As cyclin D1 expression is induced by activated β-catenin/Tcf signaling, these studies suggest that the abundance of cyclin D1 may in turn repress a subset of genes that promote cellular differentiation. ChIP assays suggest that cyclin D1 abundance regulates local chromatin structure at an endogenous PPRE. Previous studies demonstrated a connection between acetylation at histone H3, lysine 9, an open chromatin structure, and active gene transcription ( 36 ). The present studies showed that cyclin D1 deficiency correlates with increased acetylation at these residues of histone H3 at an endogenous PPRE. Although the mechanism by which cyclin D1 regulates local chromatin structure at a PPRE to mediate associated gene repression remains to be determined, these studies extend previous observations in which increased PPARγ-responsive gene expression was seen in cyclin D1 −/− cells ( 67 ).

The present studies demonstrate that intestinal and colonic tumor formation induced by Apc Min was reduced upon the loss of a single cyclin D1 allele. The cyclin D1 abundance was reduced by approximately 50% in the Apc Min / cyclin D1 +/− colonic epithelium, suggesting that the relative abundance of cyclin D1 is a key determinant of tumor onset. The loss of a single allele of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 CIP1 also promoted Apc -initiated intestinal tumor formation ( 69 ), and the loss of a single p27 KIP1 allele ( 13 ), or p53 , which is a regulator of p21 CIP1 expression, also promotes tumor formation ( 64 ). The length of the gastrointestinal tract was not significantly altered in the cyclin D1 −/− mice, and previous reports suggest that the intestine is unaffected in p21 CIP1 −/− mice. It is likely that the Apc mutation functions collaboratively with quantitative changes in the relative abundance of cyclin D1 or the cdk inhibitor p21 CIP1 in the induction of tumor formation. Recent studies with cultured CRC cell lines suggest that the induction of c-Myc by β-catenin/Tcf represses p21 CIP1 and may thereby regulate intestinal epithelial proliferation ( 62 ). The allele-dependent function of cyclin D1 in the present studies may reflect the clinical observations of a graded correlation between the abundance of either p21 CIP1 or cyclin D1 and CRC clinical prognosis ( 72 ). The increase in PPARγ abundance upon loss of a single cyclin D1 allele is of interest, as PPARγ is a suppressor of colon carcinogenesis and haploinsufficiency at the PPARγ locus can increase sensitivity to chemical carcinogenesis ( 14 ).

The present studies underscore distinct roles for cyclin D1 in colonic versus mammary epithelium in the presence of an activating β-catenin signaling pathway. Cyclin D1 −/− mice are relatively resistant to mammary tumor formation induced by the oncogenes ErbB2 and Ras ( 71 ). Surprisingly, cyclin D1 −/− mice were not resistant to Wnt-induced mammary tumor formation ( 71 ). Mammary gland-targeted stabilized ΔN89-β-catenin induced precocious alveolar development and mammary tumors ( 18 ), consistent with a role for β-catenin in mammary epithelial cellular proliferation. Furthermore, cyclin D1 deficiency enhanced the tumorigenic phenotype of mammary gland-targeted ΔN89-β-catenin mice ( 44 ). Cyclin D1 is required for normal cellular differentiation in the murine mammary gland. As β-catenin plays a role in expanding progenitor cell compartments ( 21 , 62 ), we had hypothesized that early division in the alveolar lineage may involve cyclin D1-independent stimulation οf β-catenin targets, whereas later differentiation by β-catenin may be inhibited by cyclin D1 ( 44 ). In the present studies, in the colonic epithelium, cyclin D1 inhibited differentiation and promoted proliferation only in the presence of Apc mut and not in the presence of Apc wt . Cyclin D1 has been considered a logical target for cancer therapy. The distinct role for cyclin D1 in colonic versus epithelial tumor progression induced by activated β-catenin signaling underscores the importance of delineating the tissue-specific function of a candidate therapeutic target.
