---
pmid: '2790960'
title: Functional independence of the epidermal growth factor receptor from a domain
  required for ligand-induced internalization and calcium regulation.
authors:
- Chen WS
- Lazar CS
- Lund KA
- Welsh JB
- Chang CP
- Walton GM
- Der CJ
- Wiley HS
- Gill GN
- Rosenfeld MG
journal: Cell
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90867-2
---

# Functional independence of the epidermal growth factor receptor from a domain required for ligand-induced internalization and calcium regulation.
**Authors:** Chen WS, Lazar CS, Lund KA, Welsh JB, Chang CP, Walton GM, Der CJ, Wiley HS, Gill GN, Rosenfeld MG
**Journal:** Cell (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(89)90867-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(89)90867-2)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1989 Oct 6;59(1):33-43. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90867-2.

Functional independence of the epidermal growth factor receptor from a domain 
required for ligand-induced internalization and calcium regulation.

Chen WS(1), Lazar CS, Lund KA, Welsh JB, Chang CP, Walton GM, Der CJ, Wiley HS, 
Gill GN, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

We have located the distal boundary of the tyrosine kinase domain of the EGF 
receptor and have identified a distinct sequence in the C' terminus required for 
EGF-dependent receptor internalization, leading to receptor down-regulation and 
degradation. Within this receptor domain, an 18 amino acid highly negatively 
charged region of predicted helical structure is required both for endocytosis 
via a high-affinity, saturable pathway and for ligand-stimulated increases in 
cytosolic calcium. In contrast to kinase-inactive, internalization-competent 
receptors, kinase-active, internalization-defective receptors effectively 
signaled gene transcription, morphological transformation, and growth. These 
observations support the hypothesis that mitogenic responses to EGF are mediated 
by activation of the intrinsic protein tyrosine kinase activity of the 
membrane-bound receptor, with ligand-induced internalization serving to 
terminate the signal.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90867-2
PMID: 2790960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
