---
pmid: '9501215'
title: Cloning and mapping of a cDNA for methionine synthase reductase, a flavoprotein
  defective in patients with homocystinuria.
authors:
- Leclerc D
- Wilson A
- Dumas R
- Gafuik C
- Song D
- Watkins D
- Heng HH
- Rommens JM
- Scherer SW
- Rosenblatt DS
- Gravel RA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC19694
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.6.3059
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and mapping of a cDNA for methionine synthase reductase, a flavoprotein defective in patients with homocystinuria.
**Authors:** Leclerc D, Wilson A, Dumas R, Gafuik C, Song D, Watkins D, Heng HH, Rommens JM, Scherer SW, Rosenblatt DS, Gravel RA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.6.3059](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.6.3059)
**PMC:** [PMC19694](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC19694/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 17;95(6):3059-64. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.6.3059.

Cloning and mapping of a cDNA for methionine synthase reductase, a flavoprotein 
defective in patients with homocystinuria.

Leclerc D(1), Wilson A, Dumas R, Gafuik C, Song D, Watkins D, Heng HH, Rommens 
JM, Scherer SW, Rosenblatt DS, Gravel RA.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Medical Genetics, the Montreal Children's 
Hospital, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada H3Z 2Z3.

Methionine synthase catalyzes the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine 
via a reaction in which methylcobalamin serves as an intermediate methyl 
carrier. Over time, the cob(I)alamin cofactor of methionine synthase becomes 
oxidized to cob(II)alamin rendering the enzyme inactive. Regeneration of 
functional enzyme requires reductive methylation via a reaction in which 
S-adenosylmethionine is utilized as a methyl donor. Patients of the cblE 
complementation group of disorders of folate/cobalamin metabolism who are 
defective in reductive activation of methionine synthase exhibit megaloblastic 
anemia, developmental delay, hyperhomocysteinemia, and hypomethioninemia. Using 
consensus sequences to predicted binding sites for FMN, FAD, and NADPH, we have 
cloned a cDNA corresponding to the "methionine synthase reductase" reducing 
system required for maintenance of the methionine synthase in a functional 
state. The gene MTRR has been localized to chromosome 5p15.2-15.3. A predominant 
mRNA of 3.6 kb is detected by Northern blot analysis. The deduced protein is a 
novel member of the FNR family of electron transferases, containing 698 amino 
acids with a predicted molecular mass of 77,700. It shares 38% identity with 
human cytochrome P450 reductase and 43% with the C. elegans putative methionine 
synthase reductase. The authenticity of the cDNA sequence was confirmed by 
identification of mutations in cblE patients, including a 4-bp frameshift in two 
affected siblings and a 3-bp deletion in a third patient. The cloning of the 
cDNA will permit the diagnostic characterization of cblE patients and 
investigation of the potential role of polymorphisms of this enzyme as a risk 
factor in hyperhomocysteinemia-linked vascular disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.6.3059
PMCID: PMC19694
PMID: 9501215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Methionine synthase catalyzes the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine via a reaction in which methylcobalamin serves as an intermediate methyl carrier. Over time, the cob(I)alamin cofactor of methionine synthase becomes oxidized to cob(II)alamin rendering the enzyme inactive. Regeneration of functional enzyme requires reductive methylation via a reaction in which S -adenosylmethionine is utilized as a methyl donor. Patients of the cblE complementation group of disorders of folate/cobalamin metabolism who are defective in reductive activation of methionine synthase exhibit megaloblastic anemia, developmental delay, hyperhomocysteinemia, and hypomethioninemia. Using consensus sequences to predicted binding sites for FMN, FAD, and NADPH, we have cloned a cDNA corresponding to the “methionine synthase reductase” reducing system required for maintenance of the methionine synthase in a functional state. The gene MTRR has been localized to chromosome 5p15.2–15.3. A predominant mRNA of 3.6 kb is detected by Northern blot analysis. The deduced protein is a novel member of the FNR family of electron transferases, containing 698 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 77,700. It shares 38% identity with human cytochrome P450 reductase and 43% with the C. elegans putative methionine synthase reductase. The authenticity of the cDNA sequence was confirmed by identification of mutations in cblE patients, including a 4-bp frameshift in two affected siblings and a 3-bp deletion in a third patient. The cloning of the cDNA will permit the diagnostic characterization of cblE patients and investigation of the potential role of polymorphisms of this enzyme as a risk factor in hyperhomocysteinemia-linked vascular disease.

DISCUSSION

We conclude that the cDNA that we have identified corresponds to human methionine synthase reductase. It is homologous to reductases of the FNR family, consistent with its role in the reductive activation of methionine synthase. In addition, the corresponding gene contains mutations in cblE patients with a functional deficiency of methionine synthase. Our key finding confirming the identification of the cDNA was the 4-bp frameshift mutation in the two affected siblings. The occurrence of a functionally null mutation in a candidate gene forms compelling evidence that the mutation is causative of disease in the affected patients. Similarly, the 3-bp deletion in a third patient is also highly likely to cause an enzyme defect.

The survey of the NCBI databases for homology to the human methionine synthase reductase by using blastp or tblastn yielded the putative methionine synthase reductase of C. elegans ( P = 9 × 10 −92 ). Such a reductase in C. elegans was expected, because its putative cobalamin-dependent methionine synthase is highly homologous to the human enzyme ( 8 ). Proteins of the FNR family were also found by blast programs. The strongest homology was found with cytochrome P-450 reductase ( P > 3 × 10 −68 ), followed by NO synthase (three isoforms, P > 4 × 10 −52 ), and sulfite reductase ( P > 6 × 10 −39 ). Lower, but still significant homology was found with flavodoxin reductase ( P > 2 × 10 −9 ) and flavodoxin ( P > 3 × 10 −2 ), the two E. coli proteins that gave impetus to our analysis.

Our finding suggests a convergent evolution of the two genes specifying flavodoxin/flavodoxin reductase to a single gene encoding a fused version of the two proteins in humans, as proposed previously in relation to the structure of cytochrome P-450 reductase ( 30 ). Nevertheless, a two component system has been proposed for human cells based on fractionation of the reducing system by DEAE chromatography ( 7 ). It remains to be determined if another intermediate electron carrier might be involved.

The N terminus of cytochrome P-450 reductase is hydrophobic and compatible with an anchor to the endoplasmic reticulum. Interestingly, the C. elegans genome encodes an enzyme (accession no. U21322 ) similar to human cytochrome P-450 reductase that also contains a hydrophobic N terminus as expected. In contrast, the N terminus of methionine synthase reductase would be expected to yield a cytosolic protein because its target, methionine synthase, is a cytosolic enzyme. The sequence of the proposed N terminus of human methionine synthase reductase is consistent with cytosolic targeting. Similarly, the sequence of the putative N terminus of methionine synthase reductase from C. elegans (accession no. Z35595 ) is also consistent with cytosolic targeting.

The two mutations we have shown to be associated with cblE disease are located in the vicinity of the NADPH binding domain by comparison with proteins of the FNR family. The 4-bp deletion yields a truncated protein that is expected to be deficient in NADPH binding and possibly in FAD binding, because the C terminus of the enzyme may be involved in both ( 31 ). Leu-576, which is removed by the 3-bp deletion, is located between two nearby sequences proposed to be involved in NADPH binding. Leu-576 is well conserved among many reductases that are similar to the methionine synthase reductase (Fig. 7 C ). This supports the idea that 1726delTTG results in an enzymatic defect, although confirmation will require expression of the mutant protein. This residue is also conserved in the flavodoxin reductase enzymes of several organisms, although the homology with this portion of the protein is low in some cases. It is possible that the deletion alters the relationship of the two local NADPH-binding motif components.

With the cloning of the cDNA for human methionine synthase reductase, it will now be possible to characterize the human enzyme involved in the reductive activation of methionine synthase, to identify other mutations in patients with severe deficiency of the enzyme activity and to judge if this reductase can act on other substrates than methionine synthase. It will also be possible to determine if common amino acid polymorphisms exist that lead to mildly elevated homocysteine and that may contribute as a risk factor in cardiovascular disease or neural tube defects, as discovered for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase ( 32 ).
