---
pmid: '21362567'
title: LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived DA neurons demonstrate increased susceptibility to
  oxidative stress.
authors:
- Nguyen HN
- Byers B
- Cord B
- Shcheglovitov A
- Byrne J
- Gujar P
- Kee K
- Schüle B
- Dolmetsch RE
- Langston W
- Palmer TD
- Pera RR
journal: Cell Stem Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3578553
doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013
---

# LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived DA neurons demonstrate increased susceptibility to oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Nguyen HN, Byers B, Cord B, Shcheglovitov A, Byrne J, Gujar P, Kee K, Schüle B, Dolmetsch RE, Langston W, Palmer TD, Pera RR
**Journal:** Cell Stem Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013)
**PMC:** [PMC3578553](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3578553/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Mar 4;8(3):267-80. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013.

LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived DA neurons demonstrate increased susceptibility to 
oxidative stress.

Nguyen HN(1), Byers B, Cord B, Shcheglovitov A, Byrne J, Gujar P, Kee K, Schüle 
B, Dolmetsch RE, Langston W, Palmer TD, Pera RR.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Studies of Parkinson's disease (PD) have been hindered by lack of access to 
affected human dopaminergic (DA) neurons. Here, we report generation of induced 
pluripotent stem cells that carry the p.G2019S mutation (G2019S-iPSCs) in the 
Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene, the most common PD-related mutation, 
and their differentiation into DA neurons. The high penetrance of the LRRK2 
mutation and its clinical resemblance to sporadic PD suggest that these cells 
could provide a valuable platform for disease analysis and drug development. We 
found that DA neurons derived from G2019S-iPSCs showed increased expression of 
key oxidative stress-response genes and α-synuclein protein. The mutant neurons 
were also more sensitive to caspase-3 activation and cell death caused by 
exposure to stress agents, such as hydrogen peroxide, MG-132, and 
6-hydroxydopamine, than control DA neurons. This enhanced stress sensitivity is 
consistent with existing understanding of early PD phenotypes and represents a 
potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013
PMCID: PMC3578553
PMID: 21362567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
