---
pmid: '19452453'
title: Proteomic profiling of tandem affinity purified 14-3-3 protein complexes in
  Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Chang IF
- Curran A
- Woolsey R
- Quilici D
- Cushman JC
- Mittler R
- Harmon A
- Harper JF
journal: Proteomics
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4077669
doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800445
---

# Proteomic profiling of tandem affinity purified 14-3-3 protein complexes in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Chang IF, Curran A, Woolsey R, Quilici D, Cushman JC, Mittler R, Harmon A, Harper JF
**Journal:** Proteomics (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pmic.200800445](https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200800445)
**PMC:** [PMC4077669](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4077669/)

## Abstract

1. Proteomics. 2009 Jun;9(11):2967-85. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800445.

Proteomic profiling of tandem affinity purified 14-3-3 protein complexes in 
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Chang IF(1), Curran A, Woolsey R, Quilici D, Cushman JC, Mittler R, Harmon A, 
Harper JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, USA.

In eukaryotes, 14-3-3 dimers regulate hundreds of functionally diverse proteins 
(clients), typically in phosphorylation-dependent interactions. To uncover new 
clients, 14-3-3 omega (At1g78300) from Arabidopsis was engineered with a "tandem 
affinity purification" tag and expressed in transgenic plants. Purified 
complexes were analyzed by tandem MS. Results indicate that 14-3-3 omega can 
dimerize with at least 10 of the 12 14-3-3 isoforms expressed in Arabidopsis. 
The identification here of 121 putative clients provides support for in vivo 
14-3-3 interactions with a diverse array of proteins, including those involved 
in: (i) Ion transport, such as a K(+) channel (GORK), a Cl(-) channel (CLCg), 
Ca(2+) channels belonging to the glutamate receptor family (1.2, 2.1, 2.9, 3.4, 
3.7); (ii) hormone signaling, such as ACC synthase (isoforms ACS-6, -7 and -8 
involved in ethylene synthesis) and the brassinolide receptors BRI1 and BAK1; 
(iii) transcription, such as 7 WRKY family transcription factors; (iv) 
metabolism, such as phosphoenol pyruvate carboxylase; and (v) lipid signaling, 
such as phospholipase D (beta and gamma). More than 80% (101) of these putative 
clients represent previously unidentified 14-3-3 interactors. These results 
raise the number of putative 14-3-3 clients identified in plants to over 300.

DOI: 10.1002/pmic.200800445
PMCID: PMC4077669
PMID: 19452453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In eukaryotes, 14-3-3 dimers regulate hundreds of functionally diverse proteins (clients), typically in phosphorylation-dependent interactions. To uncover new clients, a 14-3-3 omega (At1g78300) from Arabidopsis was engineered with a “tandem affinity purification” (TAP) tag and expressed in transgenic plants. Purified complexes were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry. Results indicate that 14-3-3 omega can dimerize with at least 10 of the 12 14-3-3 isoforms expressed in Arabidopsis. The identification here of 121 putative clients provides support for in vivo 14-3-3 interactions with a diverse array of proteins, including those involved in: (1) Ion transport, such as a K + channel (GORK), a Cl − channel (CLCg), Ca 2+ channels belonging to the glutamate receptor family (GLRs 1.2, 2.1, 2.9, 3.4, 3.7); (2) hormone signaling, such as ACC synthase (isoforms ACS-6, 7 and 8 involved in ethylene synthesis) and the brassinolide receptors BRI1 and BAK1; (3) transcription, such as 7 WRKY family transcription factors; (4) metabolism, such as phosphoenol pyruvate (PEP) carboxylase; and (5) lipid signaling, such as phospholipase D (β, and γ). More than 80% (101) of these putative clients represent previously unidentified 14-3-3 interactors. These results raise the number of putative 14-3-3 clients identified in plants to over 300.

Introduction

In eukaryotes, 14-3-3 proteins regulate diverse cellular functions through hundreds of different protein-protein interactions (clients). In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , a double knockout of its 14-3-3 genes ( BMH1 and BMH2 ) is lethal, indicating that some 14-3-3 interactions are essential. 14-3-3s are encoded by multi-gene families in animals (e.g. 7 isoforms in mammals) and plants. In Arabidopsis, mRNA expression has been detected for 12 of the 15 14-3-3 genes (GF14/phi, GF14/chi, GF14/omega, GF14/psi, GF14/upsilon, GF14/lamda, GF14/nu, GF14/kappa, GF14/mu, GF14/epsilon, GF14/omicron, GF14/iota) [ 1 ]. 11 of these 12 isoforms have been detected in a proteomic analysis [ 2 ]. Unique structural features associated with each isoform are expected to provide differences in subcellular localization, client specific interactions, and differences in regulation by phosphorylation or cation binding [ 3 ]. Since 14-3-3s can heterodimerize, the 12 expressed Arabidopsis isoforms can potentially form 78 different dimers, each with a unique combination of potential regulatory features.

Most 14-3-3 client interactions are thought to be promoted by phosphorylation of a target binding site on the client. The target binding sites include Mode-1 (K/R xx S p /T p x P) and Mode-2 (K/R xxx S p /T p x P) (where x represents any amino acid and the S p /T p is phosphorylated) ([ 4 ], [ 5 ]). A third motif, Mode-3 (YT p V), was found in H + -ATPase [ 6 ]. Other non-consensus sites have also been discovered, some of which do not require phosphorylation [ 7 ].

The two major challenges to understanding the biological functions of 14-3-3s are (i) the need to first identify the plethora of potential clients, and (ii) on an individual basis, determine how the client’s structural or enzymatic functions are altered. Many 14-3-3 interactions have been shown to regulate the client protein directly. For example, in plants, one of the best studied examples is the 14-3-3 activation of the plasma membrane H + -ATPase [ 6 ]. However, 14-3-3s can also regulate cellular functions by bringing together two different clients [ 8 ]. This mode of action is possible since 14-3-3s dimerize, and each 14-3-3 subunit has its own binding cleft. As the list of 14-3-3 clients grows, so does the number of unique combinations of clients potentially brought into the same complex as a result of a 14-3-3 scaffold.

Hundreds of potential 14-3-3 clients have now been identified in fungal, plant, and animals systems. Several proteome wide survey approaches have been used, including classic yeast two-hybrid searches, in vitro binding of cell extracts to a 14-3-3 affinity column, and copurification of in vivo complexes formed with epitope tagged 14-3-3s. For example, in animal systems the purification of in vivo complexes formed with epitope tagged 14-3-3 has contributed to the identification of more than 300 potential 14-3-3 clients ([ 9 ]–[ 11 ]). While each experimental strategy has its pros and cons, one advantage of purifying epitope tagged 14-3-3 complexes is that the identification of a potential client is accompanied by evidence supporting an in vivo interaction. One of the disadvantages of the yeast two-hybrid approach is that some 14-3-3 complexes will never be recovered; for example, in cases where the yeast is missing a kinase activity required for phosphorylation of a particular plant client. While S. cerevisiae has around 119 kinases, it does not have representatives for the more than 600 receptor kinases present in plants [ 12 ].

To date, most of the potential 14-3-3 clients from plants have been obtained by yeast two-hybrid and in vitro binding studies [ 13 ]. To complement these approaches, we performed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analysis of tandem affinity purification (TAP)-tag affinity purified 14-3-3 complexes. For this purpose, we engineered a stable transgenic Arabidopsis plant expressing a tandem affinity tagged 14-3-3 omega. Our TAP-tag contained a standard protein A motif, but was modified to replace the calmodulin binding site with a 6 x His motif to avoid the co-purification of complexes associated with calmodulin binding proteins. After purifying TAP-tagged 14-3-3 complexes, in parallel with a control TAP-tagged green fluorescence protein (GFP), the co-purifying proteins were subjected to in-solution protease digestion followed by matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight (MALDI)-based multiple dimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) analysis. We identified 131 proteins that specifically co-purified with the TAP-tagged 14-3-3, including 10 14-3-3 isoforms and 121 putative clients. Of these, 101 represent new potential 14-3-3 clients that have not previously been identified. For example, our results support a role of 14-3-3 in regulating new clients involved in the transport of Ca 2+ , K + and Cl − , enzymes involved in ethylene biosynthesis, brassinolide signal transduction, and WRKY transcription factors to name a few. This analysis brings the total number of potential 14-3-3 clients in plants to more than 300. This makes 14-3-3s one of the most connected nodes of interaction on the emerging protein-protein interaction map of the plant proteome.

Discussion

The TAP-tag purification strategy used here provides evidence for more than 131 different protein interactions with 14-3-3 omega, 10 of which were 14-3-3 isoforms (including itself) and 121 of which are putative 14-3-3 clients. Of these putative clients, 20 were previously reported in the literature. These include such proteins as nitrate reductase, neutral invertase, serpin, calcium-dependent protein kinase -1 (CDPK1/CPK1), and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) synthase. An additional 101 interactors have not been previously identified, raising the number of putative 14-3-3 clients identified in plants to more than 300 (see Supplemental Table 4 ). A current estimate for the number of 14-3-3 interactions in animal systems is also over 300 [ 8 ]. While plants and animals show some 14-3-3 clients in common (such as MAPKs and Glutamate Receptors, discussed below) the vast majority appear unique to either plants or animals. This suggests that 14-3-3 interactions have adapted to provide new regulatory interactions as eukaryotic organisms evolve.

Two lines of evidence suggest that many more interactors are yet to be identified. First, we only detected a 25% overlap with other studies, while still identifying 101 new interactions. Second, preliminary results based on single peptide identifications in this study provide an expectation for more than 100 additional 14-3-3 interactors (data not shown). Identifying all of the 14-3-3 interactions is a formidable challenge, especially since many of the interactions are phospho-dependent, transient, and include many low abundance proteins that are hard to detect.

Conclusion

The size of the 14-3-3 interactome has now exceeded 300 putative clients each in yeast, mammals, and plants. Each organism’s client list reveals similar regulatory themes. For example, all three groups show evidence for an ancient 14-3-3/MAPK signaling module. However many clients appear to be phylogenetically unique. For example, several clients identified here belong to kinase families not found in animals or yeast, such as the LRR-Ser/Thr receptor kinases and CDPKs. This phylogentic diversity of clients supports a perspective that 14-3-3 interactions are continuing to evolve into new functional partnerships.

Since the 12 different 14-3-3s expressed in Arabidopsis can potentially dimerize into 78 different complexes, and each 14-3-3 dimer can bind two different clients, the potential number of different 14-3-3/client complexes that can be formed with more than 300 different clients could theoretically exceed a million. Adding to this potential complexity is the fact that some of the putative clients have multiple binding interactions of their own. For example, a 14-3-3 interaction with one of the chaperones may indirectly link 14-3-3 with a very large percentage of the proteome. Thus, 14-3-3s may represent one of the busiest and most dynamic interaction nodes in the emerging global map of eukaryotic protein-protein interactions.
