---
pmid: '14718168'
title: Sus1, a functional component of the SAGA histone acetylase complex and the
  nuclear pore-associated mRNA export machinery.
authors:
- Rodríguez-Navarro S
- Fischer T
- Luo MJ
- Antúnez O
- Brettschneider S
- Lechner J
- Pérez-Ortín JE
- Reed R
- Hurt E
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)01025-0
---

# Sus1, a functional component of the SAGA histone acetylase complex and the nuclear pore-associated mRNA export machinery.
**Authors:** Rodríguez-Navarro S, Fischer T, Luo MJ, Antúnez O, Brettschneider S, Lechner J, Pérez-Ortín JE, Reed R, Hurt E
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(03)01025-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(03)01025-0)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2004 Jan 9;116(1):75-86. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)01025-0.

Sus1, a functional component of the SAGA histone acetylase complex and the 
nuclear pore-associated mRNA export machinery.

Rodríguez-Navarro S(1), Fischer T, Luo MJ, Antúnez O, Brettschneider S, Lechner 
J, Pérez-Ortín JE, Reed R, Hurt E.

Author information:
(1)Biochemie-Zentrum der Universität Heidelberg (BZH), Im Neuenheimer Feld 328, 
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Gene expression is a coordinated multistep process that begins with 
transcription and RNA processing in the nucleus followed by mRNA export to the 
cytoplasm for translation. Here we report the identification of a protein, Sus1, 
which functions in both transcription and mRNA export. Sus1 is a nuclear protein 
with a concentration at the nuclear pores. Biochemical analyses show that Sus1 
interacts with SAGA, a large intranuclear histone acetylase complex involved in 
transcription initiation, and with the Sac3-Thp1 complex, which functions in 
mRNA export with specific nuclear pore proteins at the nuclear basket. DNA 
macroarray analysis revealed that Sus1 is required for transcription regulation. 
Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that Sus1 is associated with the 
promoter of a SAGA-dependent gene during transcription activation. Finally, mRNA 
export is impaired in sus1 mutants. These data provide an unexpected connection 
between the SAGA histone acetylase complex and the mRNA export machinery.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(03)01025-0
PMID: 14718168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
