---
pmid: '20876300'
title: 'Progesterone receptor induces ErbB-2 nuclear translocation to promote breast
  cancer growth via a novel transcriptional effect: ErbB-2 function as a coactivator
  of Stat3.'
authors:
- Béguelin W
- Díaz Flaqué MC
- Proietti CJ
- Cayrol F
- Rivas MA
- Tkach M
- Rosemblit C
- Tocci JM
- Charreau EH
- Schillaci R
- Elizalde PV
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2976427
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00012-10
---

# Progesterone receptor induces ErbB-2 nuclear translocation to promote breast cancer growth via a novel transcriptional effect: ErbB-2 function as a coactivator of Stat3.
**Authors:** Béguelin W, Díaz Flaqué MC, Proietti CJ, Cayrol F, Rivas MA, Tkach M, Rosemblit C, Tocci JM, Charreau EH, Schillaci R, Elizalde PV
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00012-10](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00012-10)
**PMC:** [PMC2976427](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2976427/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Dec;30(23):5456-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00012-10. Epub 2010
Sep  27.

Progesterone receptor induces ErbB-2 nuclear translocation to promote breast 
cancer growth via a novel transcriptional effect: ErbB-2 function as a 
coactivator of Stat3.

Béguelin W(1), Díaz Flaqué MC, Proietti CJ, Cayrol F, Rivas MA, Tkach M, 
Rosemblit C, Tocci JM, Charreau EH, Schillaci R, Elizalde PV.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 
2490, Buenos Aires C1428ADN, Argentina.

Progesterone receptor (PR) and ErbB-2 bidirectional cross talk participates in 
breast cancer development. Here, we identified a new mechanism of the PR and 
ErbB-2 interaction involving the PR induction of ErbB-2 nuclear translocation 
and the assembly of a transcriptional complex in which ErbB-2 acts as a 
coactivator of Stat3. We also highlighted that the function of ErbB-2 as a Stat3 
coactivator drives progestin-induced cyclin D1 promoter activation. Notably, PR 
is also recruited together with Stat3 and ErbB-2 to the cyclin D1 promoter, 
unraveling a new and unexpected nonclassical PR genomic mechanism. The assembly 
of the nuclear Stat3/ErbB-2 transcriptional complex plays a key role in the 
proliferation of breast tumors with functional PR and ErbB-2. Our findings 
reveal a novel therapeutic intervention for PR- and ErbB-2-positive breast 
tumors via the specific blockage of ErbB-2 nuclear translocation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00012-10
PMCID: PMC2976427
PMID: 20876300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
