---
pmid: '29167353'
title: Coordinated Regulation of Hypocotyl Cell Elongation by Light and Ethylene through
  a Microtubule Destabilizing Protein.
authors:
- Ma Q
- Wang X
- Sun J
- Mao T
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5761786
doi: 10.1104/pp.17.01109
---

# Coordinated Regulation of Hypocotyl Cell Elongation by Light and Ethylene through a Microtubule Destabilizing Protein.
**Authors:** Ma Q, Wang X, Sun J, Mao T
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.17.01109](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.17.01109)
**PMC:** [PMC5761786](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5761786/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2018 Jan;176(1):678-690. doi: 10.1104/pp.17.01109. Epub 2017
Nov  22.

Coordinated Regulation of Hypocotyl Cell Elongation by Light and Ethylene 
through a Microtubule Destabilizing Protein.

Ma Q(1), Wang X(1), Sun J(1), Mao T(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, Department of 
Plant Sciences, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing 100193, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, Department of 
Plant Sciences, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing 100193, China maotonglin@cau.edu.cn.

Precise regulation of hypocotyl cell elongation is essential for plant growth 
and survival. Light suppresses hypocotyl elongation by degrading transcription 
factor phytochrome-interacting factor 3 (PIF3), whereas the phytohormone 
ethylene promotes hypocotyl elongation by activating PIF3. However, the 
underlying mechanisms regarding how these two pathways coordinate downstream 
effectors to mediate hypocotyl elongation are largely unclear. In this study, we 
identified the novel Microtubule-Destabilizing Protein 60 (MDP60), which plays a 
positive role in hypocotyl cell elongation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis 
thaliana); this effect is mediated through PIF3. Ethylene signaling up-regulates 
MDP60 expression via PIF3 binding to the MDP60 promoter. MDP60 loss-of-function 
mutants exhibit much shorter hypocotyls, whereas MDP60 overexpression 
significantly promotes hypocotyl cell elongation when grown in light compared to 
the control. MDP60 protein binds to microtubules in vitro and in vivo. The 
organization of cortical microtubules was significantly disrupted in mdp60 
mutant cells and MDP60-overexpressing seedlings. These findings indicate that 
MDP60 is an important mediator of hypocotyl cell elongation. This study reveals 
a mechanism in which light and ethylene signaling coordinate MDP60 expression to 
modulate hypocotyl cell elongation by altering cortical microtubules in 
Arabidopsis.

© 2018 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.17.01109
PMCID: PMC5761786
PMID: 29167353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
