---
pmid: '20624979'
title: Role of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 in Staphylococcus aureus alpha-hemolysin-mediated
  cellular injury.
authors:
- Wilke GA
- Bubeck Wardenburg J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2922128
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1001815107
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Role of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 in Staphylococcus aureus alpha-hemolysin-mediated cellular injury.
**Authors:** Wilke GA, Bubeck Wardenburg J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1001815107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1001815107)
**PMC:** [PMC2922128](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2922128/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 27;107(30):13473-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1001815107. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Role of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 in Staphylococcus aureus 
alpha-hemolysin-mediated cellular injury.

Wilke GA(1), Bubeck Wardenburg J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Staphylococcus aureus alpha-hemolysin (Hla), a potent cytotoxin, plays an 
important role in the pathogenesis of staphylococcal diseases, including those 
caused by methicillin-resistant epidemic strains. Hla is secreted as a 
water-soluble monomer that undergoes a series of conformational changes to 
generate a heptameric, beta-barrel structure in host membranes. Structural 
maturation of Hla depends on its interaction with a previously unknown 
proteinaceous receptor in the context of the cell membrane. It is reported here 
that a disintegrin and metalloprotease 10 (ADAM10) interacts with Hla and is 
required to initiate the sequence of events whereby the toxin is transformed 
into a cytolytic pore. Hla binding to the eukaryotic cell requires ADAM10 
expression. Further, ADAM10 is required for Hla-mediated cytotoxicity, most 
notably when the toxin is present at low concentrations. These data thus 
implicate ADAM10 as the probable high-affinity toxin receptor. Upon Hla binding, 
ADAM10 relocalizes to caveolin 1-enriched lipid rafts that serve as a platform 
for the clustering of signaling molecules. It is demonstrated that the 
Hla-ADAM10 complex initiates intracellular signaling events that culminate in 
the disruption of focal adhesions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1001815107
PMCID: PMC2922128
PMID: 20624979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
