---
pmid: '23100250'
title: Constitutive turnover of phosphorylation at Thr-412 of human p57/coronin-1
  regulates the interaction with actin.
authors:
- Oku T
- Nakano M
- Kaneko Y
- Ando Y
- Kenmotsu H
- Itoh S
- Tsuiji M
- Seyama Y
- Toyoshima S
- Tsuji T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3522287
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349829
---

# Constitutive turnover of phosphorylation at Thr-412 of human p57/coronin-1 regulates the interaction with actin.
**Authors:** Oku T, Nakano M, Kaneko Y, Ando Y, Kenmotsu H, Itoh S, Tsuiji M, Seyama Y, Toyoshima S, Tsuji T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.349829](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.349829)
**PMC:** [PMC3522287](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3522287/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 14;287(51):42910-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349829. Epub 
2012 Oct 24.

Constitutive turnover of phosphorylation at Thr-412 of human p57/coronin-1 
regulates the interaction with actin.

Oku T(1), Nakano M, Kaneko Y, Ando Y, Kenmotsu H, Itoh S, Tsuiji M, Seyama Y, 
Toyoshima S, Tsuji T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hoshi University School of Pharmacy and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo 142-8501, Japan.

The actin-binding protein p57/coronin-1, a member of the coronin protein family, 
is selectively expressed in hematopoietic cells and plays crucial roles in the 
immune response through reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. We previously 
reported that p57/coronin-1 is phosphorylated by protein kinase C, and the 
phosphorylation down-regulates the association of this protein with actin. In 
this study we analyzed the phosphorylation sites of p57/coronin-1 derived from 
HL60 human leukemic cells by MALDI-TOF-MS, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, 
and Phos-tag® acrylamide gel electrophoresis in combination with site-directed 
mutagenesis and identified Ser-2 and Thr-412 as major phosphorylation sites. A 
major part of p57/coronin-1 was found as an unphosphorylated form in HL60 cells, 
but phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 was detected after the cells 
were treated with calyculin A, a Ser/Thr phosphatase inhibitor, suggesting that 
p57/coronin-1 undergoes constitutive turnover of 
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation at Thr-412. A diphosphorylated form of 
p57/coronin-1 was detected after the cells were treated with phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate plus calyculin A. We then assessed the effects of 
phosphorylation at Thr-412 on the association of p57/coronin-1 with actin. A 
co-immunoprecipitation experiment with anti-p57/coronin-1 antibodies and HL60 
cell lysates revealed that β-actin was co-precipitated with the unphosphorylated 
form but not with the phosphorylated form at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1. 
Furthermore, the phosphorylation mimic (T412D) of p57/coronin-1 expressed in 
HEK293T cells exhibited lower affinity for actin than the wild-type or the 
unphosphorylation mimic (T412A) did. These results indicate that the 
constitutive turnover of phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 regulates 
its interaction with actin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.349829
PMCID: PMC3522287
PMID: 23100250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The actin-binding protein p57/coronin-1, a member of the coronin protein family, is selectively expressed in hematopoietic cells and plays crucial roles in the immune response through reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. We previously reported that p57/coronin-1 is phosphorylated by protein kinase C, and the phosphorylation down-regulates the association of this protein with actin. In this study we analyzed the phosphorylation sites of p57/coronin-1 derived from HL60 human leukemic cells by MALDI-TOF-MS, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and Phos-tag® acrylamide gel electrophoresis in combination with site-directed mutagenesis and identified Ser-2 and Thr-412 as major phosphorylation sites. A major part of p57/coronin-1 was found as an unphosphorylated form in HL60 cells, but phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 was detected after the cells were treated with calyculin A, a Ser/Thr phosphatase inhibitor, suggesting that p57/coronin-1 undergoes constitutive turnover of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation at Thr-412. A diphosphorylated form of p57/coronin-1 was detected after the cells were treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate plus calyculin A. We then assessed the effects of phosphorylation at Thr-412 on the association of p57/coronin-1 with actin. A co-immunoprecipitation experiment with anti-p57/coronin-1 antibodies and HL60 cell lysates revealed that β-actin was co-precipitated with the unphosphorylated form but not with the phosphorylated form at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1. Furthermore, the phosphorylation mimic (T412D) of p57/coronin-1 expressed in HEK293T cells exhibited lower affinity for actin than the wild-type or the unphosphorylation mimic (T412A) did. These results indicate that the constitutive turnover of phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 regulates its interaction with actin.

Introduction

Coronin, an actin-binding protein, was first purified from the actin-myosin complex in the amoeboid protozoan Dictyostelium discoideum and was so named because it was found to form a crown-like structure on the dorsal surface of the cell ( 1 ). This actin-binding protein is thought to play important roles in cytokinesis, cell motility, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and macropinocytosis through the regulation of assembly/disassembly of actin filaments ( 2 – 6 ). Many proteins homologous to coronin have been successively identified in various eukaryotes from yeasts to mammals ( 7 ). In humans, the coronin family consists of seven proteins that can be categorized into three subtypes ( 8 ). All seven proteins are characterized by the presence of evolutionally conserved structural domains that include tryptophan/aspartic acid repeats that are implicated in the association with actin filaments. We previously identified p57/coronin-1 as the first mammalian coronin and found that this protein was selectively expressed in immune cells ( 9 ). We have also reported that p57/coronin-1 possesses at least two actin binding regions ( 10 ) and forms a homodimer via a leucine zipper motif present in the C-terminal coiled-coil region ( 11 ).

Several studies, including ours, have indicated that p57/coronin-1 plays crucial roles in phagocytosis and chemotaxis of leukocytes ( 12 – 15 ). During the phagocytic process of bacterial infection, p57/coronin-1 was shown to transiently accumulate on the surface of phagosomes and control the subsequent phagosome-lysosome fusion. Recent studies have also demonstrated that p57/coronin-1 was enriched in immunological synapses and involved in various immune regulatory functions such as signal transduction via T cell receptors ( 16 – 18 ), survival of T cells ( 19 , 20 ), and intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization in T and B cells ( 19 , 21 ). More recently, it was reported that the p57/coronin-1 gene was responsible for human and mouse severe combined immunodeficiency ( 22 , 23 ). In mice deficient in the p57/coronin-1 gene, differentiation and chemokine-mediated trafficking of T cells were severely impaired ( 22 , 24 , 25 ). It was further demonstrated that the developments of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis ( 26 , 27 ) and lupus-like autoimmune disease ( 28 ) were suppressed in mice with genetic defects of p57/coronin-1. These studies suggested the potential relevance of p57/coronin-1 to allergic and autoimmune diseases.

Our previous reports indicated that p57/coronin-1 was phosphorylated by protein kinase C (PKC) during phagocytosis in neutrophil-like differentiated HL60 cells ( 14 ). The treatment of the cells with a PKC inhibitor, chelerythrine, prevented the phagosome-lysosome fusion in parallel with the inhibition of the dissociation of p57/coronin-1 from phagosomes. Thus, the phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 seems to be an important process in the regulation of phagosome maturation. We also reported that the activation of PKC in p57/coronin-1-transfected HEK293 cells by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) 2 treatment reduced the association of p57/coronin-1 with the actin-rich cytoskeleton and that p57/coronin-1 molecules associated with the actin cytoskeleton were phosphorylated at lower levels than those recovered in the cytosolic fraction ( 29 ).

Although we previously found that p57/coronin-1 molecules possess at least two phosphorylation sites, no biochemical information on the phosphorylation sites is thus far available. In this study, therefore, we attempted to identify the phosphorylation sites of p57/coronin-1 by MALDI-TOF-MS, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Phos-tag® acrylamide gel electrophoresis, and site-directed mutagenesis and found two major phosphorylation sites, Ser-2 and Thr-412. In addition, we also examined the relevance between phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 and its interaction with actin and found that the phosphorylation at Thr-412 down-regulated the binding of p57/coronin-1 to actin.

DISCUSSION

In this study we identified Ser-2 and Thr-412 as major phosphorylation sites of p57/coronin-1 in HL60 cells. Because the phosphorylation at Thr-412 was found in calyculin A-treated HL60 cells, Thr-412 seems to be constitutively phosphorylated in these cells. The enhanced phosphorylation was likely caused by inhibition of a phosphatase involved in the dephosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 and/or continuous activation of a Ser/Thr kinase involved in the phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1. On the other hand, Ser-2 phosphorylation was observed when the cells were treated with a PKC activator (PMA). However, the phosphorylation at either Ser-2 or Thr-412 was only found in the presence of calyculin A, suggesting that phosphatase activity is dominant in the cells. The phosphorylation of both sites is probably catalyzed by PKC, because phosphorylation was completely inhibited by the treatment with the PKC inhibitor chelerythrine. Although it is not concluded that the inhibitory effects of chelerythrine were due to the direct action toward PKC responsible for the phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 in the cell, we previously observed that p57/coronin-1 was phosphorylated by purified PKC in vitro ( 14 ). The amino acid sequences flanking Ser-2 ( 2 SRQV) and Thr-412 ( 412 TGRR) are in good agreement with the consensus sequence for PKC substrates (S/T) X 0–2 (K/R)) ( 33 ). In the case of another family member, coronin-2, Cai et al. ( 32 ) reported that Ser-2 was the single major phosphorylation site for PKC. Because both coronins share homologous N-terminal amino acid sequences ( Fig. 3 A ), PKC is likely to catalyze phosphorylation of Ser-2 of p57/coronin-1. It would be of considerable interest to determine which subtype of PKC is responsible for the phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 and whether or not phosphorylation at Ser-2 and Thr-412 is catalyzed by a distinct subtype of PKC.

We also analyzed phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 from other cell types and found that human neutrophils and platelets and three human leukemic cell lines yielded two-dimensional gel electrophoresis profiles quite similar to that of HL60 cells ( Supplement 1 ). It is, therefore, likely that the major phosphorylation sites are common to various cell types. Recently, Pareek et al. ( 36 ) reported that Thr-418 of mouse p57/coronin-1 was phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase 5 in lymphocytes. However, human p57/coronin-1 has no Ser or Thr residues corresponding to Thr-418 of mouse p57/coronin-1 ( Supplement 3 A ). We also found that the mutation of Thr-418 of mouse p57/coronin-1 caused no substantial changes in the Phos-tag-PAGE profile, although the mutation of Ser-412 suppressed the phosphorylation ( Supplement 3B ). We have so far no evidence showing that Thr-418 is a major phosphorylation site of mouse p57/coronin-1 under the conditions employed in this study. One possibility is that phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 is differentially regulated by various protein kinases depending on cell types.

In two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, we observed minor spots in addition to the three major spots ( Figs. 3 B , 4 B , and 5 B ). We originally assumed that these minor spots were attributable to a particular level of phosphorylation but eventually concluded that the appearance of the minor spots is independent on phosphorylation, based on the results of combined analyses with Phos-tag-PAGE and isoelectric focusing as well as staining with a phosphoprotein-specific dye ( Fig. 7 ). Possible reasons for the appearance of the minor spots include 1) posttranslational modification other than phosphorylation, 2) incomplete denaturation of proteins by urea before isoelectric focusing, and/or 3) complex formation with other proteins.

This study indicates that the phosphorylation at Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 modulates the interaction between p57/coronin-1 and actin ( Figs. 1 and 8 ). Specifically, the results indicated that phosphorylation at Thr-412 reduced the affinity of p57/coronin-1 for actin. We assume that the molecular interaction is a direct rather than an indirect association mediated by other proteins such as the Arp 2/3 complex, because we did not detect any subunits of the Arp 2/3 complex in the SDS-PAGE of immunoprecipitate with anti-p57/coronin-1 antibody after protein staining with Flamingo TM ( Fig. 8 A ). Indeed, it has been suggested that p57/coronin-1 physically interacts with the Arp 2/3 complex and that the interaction is weakened by the mutation at Ser-2 of p57/coronin-1 in lymphocytes ( 24 , 32 ); i.e. the wild-type and S2A mutant (in which Ser-2 was replaced with Ala) of p57/coronin-1 bound to the Arp 2/3 complex, whereas the phosphorylation mimic S2D (in which Ser-2 was replaced with Asp) exhibited decreased binding activity, suggesting the possible involvement of Ser-2 phosphorylation in the interaction between p57/coronin-1 and the Arp 2/3 complex. On the other hand, the present study suggests that Thr-412 phosphorylation preferentially affects the interaction with G-actin. Co-sedimentation of the wild-type p57/coronin-1 and T412A and T412D mutants with F-actin revealed that both mutants possessed binding activity comparable to that of the wild type ( Fig. 9 A ). By contrast, a similar experiment using the C-terminal-truncated form of p57/coronin-1 (p57LZ, amino acid residues 372–461), which lacks binding capacity to F-actin ( 10 ), indicated that p57LZ/T412A had higher binding affinity for G-actin than p57LZ/T412D ( Fig. 9 B ). The previous studies, including ours, suggested that p57/coronin-1 possessed at least two binding sites for actin, i.e. the 34 N-terminal amino acid residues ( 10 ) and 17 amino acid residues in the C-terminal region (amino acid residues 400–416) ( 35 ). Considering the recent findings by Föger et al. ( 37 ) that Ser-2 phosphorylation regulated the interaction of p57/coronin-1 with an actin cytoskeleton, phosphorylation at Ser-2 and Thr-412 may independently regulate the affinity of the adjacent actin-binding regions.

Due to the selective distribution of p57/coronin-1 within hematopoietic cells, much attention has been focused on the immunoregulatory functions of p57/coronin-1, especially with respect to its roles in the phagocytosis of leukocytes. p57/coronin-1 was transiently associated with phagosomes in the early phase of phagocytosis and then dissociated before the phagosome-lysosome fusion ( 14 ). Therefore, the dissociation of p57/coronin-1 from phagosomes is thought to be an essential step for the phagosome-lysosome fusion. During mycobacterial infection to macrophages, however, the dissociation of p57/coronin-1 from phagosomes and subsequent phagosome-lysosome fusion were impaired ( 38 ). The relationship between these phenomena and intracellular parasitism of mycobacteria has been discussed. Recent studies using p57/coronin-1-deficient macrophages showed that lysosomes were efficiently fused with phagosomes containing Mycobacterium bovis BCG ( 39 , 40 ). Thus, p57/coronin-1 is regarded as a molecule blocking lysosomal delivery. Our previous studies also indicated that a PKC inhibitor suppressed the dissociation of p57/coronin-1 from phagosomes and the subsequent phagosome-lysosome fusion ( 14 ) and that phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 was increased in phagocytosing cells ( 14 , 29 ). In the present study, we used a newly developed anti-phospho-p57/coronin-1 antibody for immunoblotting and found that Thr-412 of p57/coronin-1 was transiently phosphorylated during phagocytosis of opsonized zymosan by neutrophils ( Fig. 10 ). These results strongly suggest that the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation turnover of p57/coronin-1 regulates the phagocytotic process, including phagosome maturation, through reorganization of the actin-containing cytoskeleton. The regulatory mechanism underlying the phosphorylation of p57/coronin-1 is expected to provide insight into the phagocytosis of immunocytes and also a variety of immunological processes that involve p57/coronin-1, such as leukocyte chemotaxis, cytokine production, and immunological synapse formation.
