---
pmid: '19542224'
title: The first draft of the endostatin interaction network.
authors:
- Faye C
- Chautard E
- Olsen BR
- Ricard-Blum S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2755928
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.002964
---

# The first draft of the endostatin interaction network.
**Authors:** Faye C, Chautard E, Olsen BR, Ricard-Blum S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.002964](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.002964)
**PMC:** [PMC2755928](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2755928/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 14;284(33):22041-22047. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.002964.
Epub  2009 Jun 19.

The first draft of the endostatin interaction network.

Faye C(1), Chautard E(1), Olsen BR(2), Ricard-Blum S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, UMR 5086 CNRS, University Lyon 
1, IFR 128 Biosciences Gerland Lyon Sud, 7 passage du Vercors, 69367 Lyon Cedex 
07, France.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine and 
Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Endostatin is a C-terminal proteolytic fragment of collagen XVIII that is 
localized in vascular basement membrane zones in various organs. It binds to 
heparin/heparan sulfate and to a number of proteins, but its molecular 
mechanisms of action are not fully elucidated. We have used surface plasmon 
resonance (SPR) arrays to identify new partners of endostatin, and to give 
further insights on its molecular mechanism of action. New partners of 
endostatin include glycosaminoglycans (chondroitin and dermatan sulfate), 
matricellular proteins (thrombospondin-1 and SPARC), collagens (I, IV, and VI), 
the amyloid peptide Abeta-(1-42), and transglutaminase-2. The biological 
functions of the endostatin network involve a number of extracellular proteins 
containing epidermal growth factor and epidermal growth factor-like domains, and 
able to bind calcium. Depending on the trigger event, and on the availability of 
its members in a given tissue at a given time, the endostatin network might be 
involved either in the control of angiogenesis, and tumor growth, or in 
neurogenesis and neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.002964
PMCID: PMC2755928
PMID: 19542224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Endostatin is a C-terminal proteolytic fragment of collagen XVIII that is localized in vascular basement membrane zones in various organs. It binds to heparin/heparan sulfate and to a number of proteins, but its molecular mechanisms of action are not fully elucidated. We have used surface plasmon resonance (SPR) arrays to identify new partners of endostatin, and to give further insights on its molecular mechanism of action. New partners of endostatin include glycosaminoglycans (chondroitin and dermatan sulfate), matricellular proteins (thrombospondin-1 and SPARC), collagens (I, IV, and VI), the amyloid peptide Aβ-(1–42), and transglutaminase-2. The biological functions of the endostatin network involve a number of extracellular proteins containing epidermal growth factor and epidermal growth factor-like domains, and able to bind calcium. Depending on the trigger event, and on the availability of its members in a given tissue at a given time, the endostatin network might be involved either in the control of angiogenesis, and tumor growth, or in neurogenesis and neurodegenerative diseases.

RESULTS

We looked for additional partners of endostatin using SPR arrays. This approach was selected because the yeast two-hybrid assay, which is widely used for high throughput discovery of protein interactions, is not the method of choice for studying extracellular interactions. Extracellular proteins are not optimally expressed in the nucleus, they are sticky and this may lead to false positive results. Furthermore, two-hybrid assays are not adapted to identify protein-polysaccharide interactions, which are of major importance for cell-matrix interactions and for the organization of the extracellular matrix. Known interactions were analyzed to validate SPR arrays and the Biacore Flexchip as reliable tools for the investigation of interactions established by endostatin. We confirmed by this technique previously described interactions between heparin/heparan sulfate and several extracellular proteins including endostatin ( 8 , 9 , 26 ), collagens I and V ( 27 , 28 ), fibronectin, and transglutaminase-2. Protein-protein interactions between endostatin and laminin ( 29 ), endostatin and α5β1 integrin ( 10 , 11 ), or between tissue transglutaminase and α5β1 integrin ( 30 ) were also confirmed, as were interactions between proteins and proteoglycans such as the collagen VI-biglycan interaction ( 31 ) ( Table 1 ).

DISCUSSION

A number of new endostatin partners have been identified by SPR arrays. Of course we cannot rule out the existence of further partners of endostatin as discussed below, but the coverage of interactomes (interaction networks) remains difficult to assess, and is a general concern for existing data sets ( 34 ).

Endostatin is a component of basement membrane, and it interacts with collagen IV, a major component of basement membrane, and with collagen VI. Endostatin may link elastic fibers to collagen VI microfibrils in elastic tissues such as the aortic wall where endostatin is present ( 35 ). The binding of endostatin to collagen VI is in agreement with the fact that collagen VI is in contact with endothelial basement membranes. Collagen VI might anchor endothelial basement membranes not only by interacting with collagen IV ( 36 ), but also by interacting with endostatin.

Endostatin binds to several molecules participating in the control of angiogenesis. Besides integrins and heparan sulfate, it binds to an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis, endorepellin, a C-terminal domain of perlecan ( 37 ). Heparan sulfate proteoglycan-2 or perlecan, which plays a dual role in angiogenesis ( 38 ), also interacts with endostatin. Transglutaminase-2 is a new interacting partner of endostatin that is also involved in angiogenesis. The formation of a complex between this enzyme and VEGFR-2 has been proposed as a mechanism for modulation of endothelial cell response to VEGF ( 39 ). We have identified another endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis, thrombospondin-1, as an interacting partner of endostatin. Thrombospondin-1 and endostatin share several properties. Both are found in platelets, bind to heparin, and are endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis. Furthermore, the expression of thrombospondin-1 is up-regulated by endostatin ( 15 ), and thrombospondin-1 may act as a mediator of anti-angiogenic therapy ( 40 ). Endostatin also binds to SPARC, which blocks angiogenesis ( 41 , 42 ) and is found as well as endostatin in platelets and basement membranes.

Interestingly, SPARC and thrombospondin-1 belong to the matricellular protein family. The term “matricellular” refers to a group of modular, extracellular proteins whose functions are achieved by binding to matrix proteins as well as to cell surface receptors, or to other molecules such as cytokines and proteases that interact, in turn, with the cell surface ( 43 ). Members of this protein class serve as biological mediators of cell function by interacting directly with cells or by modulating the activity of growth factors, proteases, and other extracellular matrix proteins ( 44 ). Endostatin might regulate cell adhesion not only via integrin signaling, but also in association with thrombospondin-1 and SPARC. Other matricellular proteins, such as members of the tenascin protein family and osteopontin, might also be able to interact with endostatin to control cell adhesion. The participation of the endostatin network to the control of cell adhesion is further supported by the fact that 46% of the protein partners of endostatin are annotated with a Gene Ontology term ( 45 ) referring to cell adhesion (data not shown).

We demonstrated that endostatin binds to the amyloid Aβ peptide, which has been previously shown to be co-localized with endostatin in amyloid plaques of patients with Alzheimer disease ( 18 ). Several other partners of endostatin are involved in neurodegenerative diseases. They include transglutaminase-2, which catalyzes the cross-linking of the amyloid peptide β ( 46 ), fibulin-1 ( 47 ), laminin-1 ( 48 ), thrombospondin-1 ( 49 ), heparan sulfate and heparan sulfate proteoglycans ( 50 ), perlecan ( 51 ), α5β1 integrin ( 52 ), collagen IV ( 53 ), and collagen VI, an important component of the neuronal injury response ( 54 ). The binding of endostatin to the amyloid peptide could have a protective effect, as suggested for transthyretin ( 55 ), and for other extracellular components such as collagens VI ( 54 ) and XXV ( 56 ). Depending on the trigger event ( e.g. increase in VEGF expression), and on the availability of its members in a given tissue at a given time, the endostatin network might be involved either in the control of angiogenesis, and tumor growth, or in neurogenesis and neurodegenerative diseases.

At the molecular level, the major features of the endostatin interaction network are the presence of EGF modules ( e.g. in fibulins, nidogens, laminin-1, perlecan, thrombospondin-1, and integrins), and the ability of several partners to bind calcium ( e.g. transglutaminase-2). This finding is supported by the fact that 50% of the protein partners of endostatin are annotated with the Gene Ontology term “calcium ion binding” (data not shown). Other extracellular proteins containing EGF modules might be potential partners of endostatin. We are currently studying the structure of EGF domains found in endostatin partners to identify possible common features, which will be helpful to select EGF domains of multidomain proteins for further interaction studies.

The interaction network will be useful for mimicking gene silencing studies and suppression in silico of glycosaminoglycans. This will be of special interest for glycosaminoglycans, which can be “suppressed” in vivo only by silencing several genes involved in their biosynthesis. It will also be of interest for the set-up of combination therapies, in which drugs targeting different pathways are simultaneously administered. The multifaceted nature of the angiogenic process suggests that the combination of antiangiogenic drugs might be more effective than single-agent therapies ( 57 ).

We combined extracellular protein-protein and protein-glycosaminoglycan interactions involving endostatin without discriminating their spatio-temporal expression. The next step will be to switch from a static to a dynamic extracellular interaction network by (i) putting weight on the interactions using kinetic and affinity constants to define the hierarchy of interactions according to their rate of formation and their stability, (ii) determining mutually exclusive interactions from three-dimensional structures and/or docking experiments, and (iii) integrating expression data. The building of a dynamic extracellular interaction network will be of interest to understand how information/signaling is conveyed through the network and to predict the consequences of perturbations due to changes in the expression of pro- and anti-angiogenic factors. The integrated network will be used as a framework to build a mathematical model of endostatin mechanism of action in various physio-pathological processes such as basement membrane assembly, angiogenesis, neurogenesis, and neurodegenerative diseases.
