---
pmid: '26340092'
title: Negative Regulation of p21Waf1/Cip1 by Human INO80 Chromatin Remodeling Complex
  Is Implicated in Cell Cycle Phase G2/M Arrest and Abnormal Chromosome Stability.
authors:
- Cao L
- Ding J
- Dong L
- Zhao J
- Su J
- Wang L
- Sui Y
- Zhao T
- Wang F
- Jin J
- Cai Y
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4560432
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137411
---

# Negative Regulation of p21Waf1/Cip1 by Human INO80 Chromatin Remodeling Complex Is Implicated in Cell Cycle Phase G2/M Arrest and Abnormal Chromosome Stability.
**Authors:** Cao L, Ding J, Dong L, Zhao J, Su J, Wang L, Sui Y, Zhao T, Wang F, Jin J, Cai Y
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0137411](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0137411)
**PMC:** [PMC4560432](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4560432/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 4;10(9):e0137411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137411. 
eCollection 2015.

Negative Regulation of p21Waf1/Cip1 by Human INO80 Chromatin Remodeling Complex 
Is Implicated in Cell Cycle Phase G2/M Arrest and Abnormal Chromosome Stability.

Cao L(1), Ding J(1), Dong L(1), Zhao J(1), Su J(1), Wang L(1), Sui Y(1), Zhao 
T(1), Wang F(1), Jin J(2), Cai Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China; National 
Engineering Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine, Jilin University, Changchun City, 
Jilin, China; Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering, the 
Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun City, Jilin, China.

We previously identified an ATP-dependent human Ino80 (INO80) chromatin 
remodeling complex which shares a set of core subunits with yeast Ino80 complex. 
Although research evidence has suggested that INO80 complex functions in gene 
transcription and genome stability, the precise mechanism remains unclear. 
Herein, based on gene expression profiles from the INO80 complex-knockdown in 
HeLa cells, we first demonstrate that INO80 complex negatively regulates the 
p21Waf1/Cip1 (p21) expression in a p53-mediated mechanism. In chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and a sequential ChIP (Re-ChIP) assays, we determined 
that the INO80 complex and p53 can bind to the same promoter region of p21 gene 
(-2.2 kb and -1.0 kb upstream of the p21 promoter region), and p53 is required 
for the recruitment of the INO80 complex to the p21 promoter. RNAi knockdown 
strategies of INO80 not only led to prolonged progression of cell cycle phase 
G2/M to G1, but it also resulted in abnormal chromosome stability. 
Interestingly, high expression of p21 was observed in most 
morphologically-changed cells, suggesting that negative regulation of p21 by 
INO80 complex might be implicated in maintaining the cell cycle process and 
chromosome stability. Together, our findings will provide a theoretical basis to 
further elucidate the cellular mechanisms of the INO80 complex.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137411
PMCID: PMC4560432
PMID: 26340092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
