---
pmid: '8131751'
title: Stch encodes the 'ATPase core' of a microsomal stress 70 protein.
authors:
- Otterson GA
- Flynn GC
- Kratzke RA
- Coxon A
- Johnston PG
- Kaye FJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC394931
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06371.x
---

# Stch encodes the 'ATPase core' of a microsomal stress 70 protein.
**Authors:** Otterson GA, Flynn GC, Kratzke RA, Coxon A, Johnston PG, Kaye FJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06371.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06371.x)
**PMC:** [PMC394931](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC394931/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1994 Mar 1;13(5):1216-25. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06371.x.

Stch encodes the 'ATPase core' of a microsomal stress 70 protein.

Otterson GA(1), Flynn GC, Kratzke RA, Coxon A, Johnston PG, Kaye FJ.

Author information:
(1)NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, Bethesda, MD 20889.

The stress70 protein chaperone family plays a central role in the processing of 
cytosolic and secretory proteins. We have cloned a human cDNA, designated Stch, 
that is conserved in rat tissues and which encodes a novel microsome-associated 
member of the stress70 protein chaperone family. Stch mRNA is constitutively 
expressed in all human cell types and is induced by incubation with the calcium 
ionophore A23187, but not by exposure to heat shock. Inspection of the predicted 
amino acid sequence reveals that the STCH product contains a unique hydrophobic 
leader sequence and shares homology within the amino terminal domains of the 
stress70 gene family, but has a 50 residue insertion within the ATP-binding 
domains and truncates the carboxyl terminal peptide-binding region. 
Immunofluorescent and subcellular analyses show that STCH migrates predominantly 
as a 60 kDa species and is enriched in a membrane-bound microsome fraction. In 
contrast to purified BiP and dnaK, however, STCH demonstrates ATPase activity 
that is independent of peptide stimulation. Stch, therefore, encodes a 
calcium-inducible, microsome-associated ATPase activity with properties similar 
to a proteolytically cleaved N-terminal HSC70/BiP fragment. This truncated 
stress70 molecule may allow increased diversity in cellular responses to protein 
processing requirements.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1994.tb06371.x
PMCID: PMC394931
PMID: 8131751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The stress70 protein chaperone family plays a central role in the processing of cytosolic and secretory proteins. We have cloned a human cDNA, designated Stch, that is conserved in rat tissues and which encodes a novel microsome-associated member of the stress70 protein chaperone family. Stch mRNA is constitutively expressed in all human cell types and is induced by incubation with the calcium ionophore A23187, but not by exposure to heat shock. Inspection of the predicted amino acid sequence reveals that the STCH product contains a unique hydrophobic leader sequence and shares homology within the amino terminal domains of the stress70 gene family, but has a 50 residue insertion within the ATP-binding domains and truncates the carboxyl terminal peptide-binding region. Immunofluorescent and subcellular analyses show that STCH migrates predominantly as a 60 kDa species and is enriched in a membrane-bound microsome fraction. In contrast to purified BiP and dnaK, however, STCH demonstrates ATPase activity that is independent of peptide stimulation. Stch, therefore, encodes a calcium-inducible, microsome-associated ATPase activity with properties similar to a proteolytically cleaved N-terminal HSC70/BiP fragment. This truncated stress70 molecule may allow increased diversity in cellular responses to protein processing requirements.
