---
pmid: '24043815'
title: Endothelin-2 signaling in the neural retina promotes the endothelial tip cell
  state and inhibits angiogenesis.
authors:
- Rattner A
- Yu H
- Williams J
- Smallwood PM
- Nathans J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3791783
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1315509110
---

# Endothelin-2 signaling in the neural retina promotes the endothelial tip cell state and inhibits angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Rattner A, Yu H, Williams J, Smallwood PM, Nathans J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1315509110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1315509110)
**PMC:** [PMC3791783](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3791783/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 1;110(40):E3830-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1315509110. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Endothelin-2 signaling in the neural retina promotes the endothelial tip cell 
state and inhibits angiogenesis.

Rattner A(1), Yu H, Williams J, Smallwood PM, Nathans J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Neuroscience, and 
Ophthalmology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.

Endothelin signaling is required for neural crest migration and homeostatic 
regulation of blood pressure. Here, we report that constitutive overexpression 
of Endothelin-2 (Edn2) in the mouse retina perturbs vascular development by 
inhibiting endothelial cell migration across the retinal surface and subsequent 
endothelial cell invasion into the retina. Developing endothelial cells exist in 
one of two states: tip cells at the growing front and stalk cells in the 
vascular plexus behind the front. This division of endothelial cell states is 
one of the central organizing principles of angiogenesis. In the developing 
retina, Edn2 overexpression leads to overproduction of endothelial tip cells by 
both morphologic and molecular criteria. Spatially localized overexpression of 
Edn2 produces a correspondingly localized endothelial response. Edn2 
overexpression in the early embryo inhibits vascular development at 
midgestation, but Edn2 overexpression in developing skin and brain has no 
discernible effect on vascular structure. Inhibition of retinal angiogenesis by 
Edn2 requires expression of Endothelin receptor A but not Endothelin receptor B 
in the neural retina. Taken together, these observations imply that the neural 
retina responds to Edn2 by synthesizing one or more factors that promote the 
endothelial tip cell state and inhibit angiogenesis. The response to Edn2 is 
sufficiently potent that it overrides the activities of other homeostatic 
regulators of angiogenesis, such as Vegf.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1315509110
PMCID: PMC3791783
PMID: 24043815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
