---
pmid: '11112787'
title: Human complex I defects can be resolved by monoclonal antibody analysis into
  distinct subunit assembly patterns.
authors:
- Triepels RH
- Hanson BJ
- van den Heuvel LP
- Sundell L
- Marusich MF
- Smeitink JA
- Capaldi RA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009903200
---

# Human complex I defects can be resolved by monoclonal antibody analysis into distinct subunit assembly patterns.
**Authors:** Triepels RH, Hanson BJ, van den Heuvel LP, Sundell L, Marusich MF, Smeitink JA, Capaldi RA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M009903200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M009903200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8892-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009903200. Epub
2000  Dec 8.

Human complex I defects can be resolved by monoclonal antibody analysis into 
distinct subunit assembly patterns.

Triepels RH(1), Hanson BJ, van den Heuvel LP, Sundell L, Marusich MF, Smeitink 
JA, Capaldi RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, 
University Hospital Nijmegen St. Radboud, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Complex I defects are one of the most frequent causes of mitochondrial 
respiratory chain disorders. Therefore, it is important to find new approaches 
for detecting and characterizing Complex I deficiencies. In this paper, we 
introduce a new set of monoclonal antibodies that react with 39-, 30-, 20-, 18-, 
15-, and 8-kDa subunits of Complex I. These antibodies are shown to aid in 
diagnosis of Complex I deficiencies and add understanding to the 
genotype-phenotype relationships of different mutations. A total of 11 different 
patients were examined. Four patients had undefined Complex I defects, whereas 
the other patients had defects in NDUFV1, NDUFS2 (two patients), NDUFS4 (two 
patients), NDUFS7, and NDUFS8. We show here that Western blotting with these 
antibodies, particularly when used in conjunction with sucrose gradient studies 
and enzymatic activity measurements, helps distinguish catalytic versus assembly 
defects and further distinguishes between mutations in different subunits. 
Furthermore, different mutations in the same gene are shown to give very similar 
subunit profiles, and we show that one of the patients is a good candidate for 
having a defect in a Complex I assembly factor.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009903200
PMID: 11112787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
