---
pmid: '17553903'
title: AMP1 and MP antagonistically regulate embryo and meristem development in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Vidaurre DP
- Ploense S
- Krogan NT
- Berleth T
journal: Development
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.006759
---

# AMP1 and MP antagonistically regulate embryo and meristem development in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Vidaurre DP, Ploense S, Krogan NT, Berleth T
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.006759](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.006759)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2007 Jul;134(14):2561-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.006759. Epub 2007 Jun
6.

AMP1 and MP antagonistically regulate embryo and meristem development in 
Arabidopsis.

Vidaurre DP(1), Ploense S, Krogan NT, Berleth T.

Author information:
(1)University of Toronto, Department of Cell and Systems Biology, 25 Willcocks 
Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3B2, Canada.

AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF)-mediated signaling conveys positional information 
during embryonic and postembryonic organogenesis and mutations in MONOPTEROS 
(MP/ARF5) result in severe patterning defects during embryonic and postembryonic 
development. Here we show that MP patterning activity is largely dispensable 
when the presumptive carboxypeptidase ALTERED MERISTEM PROGRAM 1 (AMP1) is not 
functional, indicating that MP is primarily necessary to counteract AMP1 
activity. Closer inspection of the single and double mutant phenotypes reveals 
antagonistic influences of both genes on meristematic activities throughout the 
Arabidopsis life cycle. In the absence of MP activity, cells in apical meristems 
and along the paths of procambium formation acquire differentiated identities 
and this is largely dependent on differentiation-promoting AMP1 activity. 
Positions of antagonistic interaction between MP and AMP1 coincide with MP 
expression domains within the larger AMP1 expression domain. These observations 
suggest a model in which auxin-derived positional information through MP carves 
out meristematic niches by locally overcoming a general 
differentiation-promoting activity involving AMP1.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.006759
PMID: 17553903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
