---
pmid: '12070154'
title: Cells respond to and bind countin, a component of a multisubunit cell number
  counting factor.
authors:
- Gao T
- Ehrenman K
- Tang L
- Leippe M
- Brock DA
- Gomer RH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203075200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cells respond to and bind countin, a component of a multisubunit cell number counting factor.
**Authors:** Gao T, Ehrenman K, Tang L, Leippe M, Brock DA, Gomer RH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203075200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203075200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 6;277(36):32596-605. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203075200. Epub 
2002 Jun 17.

Cells respond to and bind countin, a component of a multisubunit cell number 
counting factor.

Gao T(1), Ehrenman K, Tang L, Leippe M, Brock DA, Gomer RH.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005-1892, 
USA.

In Dictyostelium discoideum counting factor (CF), a secreted approximately 
450-kDa complex of polypeptides, inhibits group and fruiting body size. When the 
gene encoding countin (a component of CF) was disrupted, cells formed large 
groups. We find that recombinant countin causes developing cells to form small 
groups, with an EC(50) of approximately 3 ng/ml, and affects cAMP signal 
transduction in the same manner as semipurified CF. Recombinant countin 
increases cell motility, decreases cell-cell adhesion, and regulates gene 
expression in a manner similar to the effect of CF. However, countin does not 
decrease adhesion or group size to the extent that semipurified CF does. A 1-min 
exposure of developing cells to countin causes an increase in F-actin 
polymerization and myosin phosphorylation and a decrease in myosin 
polymerization, suggesting that countin activates a rapid signal transduction 
pathway. (125)I-Labeled countin has countin bioactivity, and binding experiments 
suggest that vegetative and developing cells have approximately 53 cell-surface 
sites that bind countin with a K(D) of approximately 1.5 ng/ml or 60 pm. We 
hypothesize that countin regulates cell development through the same pathway as 
CF and that other proteins within the complex may modify the activity of countin 
and/or have independent size-regulating activities.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203075200
PMID: 12070154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
