---
pmid: '18955030'
title: DISC1-kendrin interaction is involved in centrosomal microtubule network formation.
authors:
- Shimizu S
- Matsuzaki S
- Hattori T
- Kumamoto N
- Miyoshi K
- Katayama T
- Tohyama M
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.100
---

# DISC1-kendrin interaction is involved in centrosomal microtubule network formation.
**Authors:** Shimizu S, Matsuzaki S, Hattori T, Kumamoto N, Miyoshi K, Katayama T, Tohyama M
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.100](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.100)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1051-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.100. Epub 2008 Oct 26.

DISC1-kendrin interaction is involved in centrosomal microtubule network 
formation.

Shimizu S(1), Matsuzaki S, Hattori T, Kumamoto N, Miyoshi K, Katayama T, Tohyama 
M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) was identified as a novel gene disrupted by 
a (1;11)(q42.1;q14.3) translocation segregating with schizophrenia, bipolar 
disorder and other major mental illnesses in a Scottish family. We previously 
identified 446-533 amino acids of DISC1 as the kendrin-binding region by means 
of a directed yeast two-hybrid interaction assay and showed that the 
DISC1-kendrin interaction is indispensable for the centrosomal localization of 
DISC1. In this study, to confirm the DISC1-kendrin interaction, we examined the 
interaction between deletion mutants of DISC1 and kendrin. Then, we demonstrated 
that the carboxy-terminus of DISC1 is indispensable for the interaction with 
kendrin. Furthermore, the immunocytochemistry revealed that the carboxy-terminus 
of DISC1 is also required for the centrosomal targeting of DISC1. Overexpression 
of the DISC1-binding region of kendrin or the DISC1 deletion mutant lacking the 
kendrin-binding region impairs the microtubule organization. These findings 
suggest that the DISC1-kendrin interaction plays a key role in the microtubule 
dynamics.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.100
PMID: 18955030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
