---
pmid: '21672318'
title: A method of utrophin up-regulation through RNAi-mediated knockdown of the transcription
  factor EN1.
authors:
- Wang Q
- Cao DH
- Jin CL
- Lin CK
- Ma HW
- Wu YY
journal: J Int Med Res
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1177/147323001103900117
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A method of utrophin up-regulation through RNAi-mediated knockdown of the transcription factor EN1.
**Authors:** Wang Q, Cao DH, Jin CL, Lin CK, Ma HW, Wu YY
**Journal:** J Int Med Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1177/147323001103900117](https://doi.org/10.1177/147323001103900117)

## Abstract

1. J Int Med Res. 2011;39(1):161-71. doi: 10.1177/147323001103900117.

A method of utrophin up-regulation through RNAi-mediated knockdown of the 
transcription factor EN1.

Wang Q(1), Cao DH, Jin CL, Lin CK, Ma HW, Wu YY.

Author information:
(1)Senior Profession College, Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.

The aim of this study was to induce up-regulation of the dystrophin-related gene 
UTRN that encodes the protein utrophin, to determine whether this could 
compensate for the lack of dystrophin function in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
The human UTRN promoter, which contains two putative binding sites for homeobox 
protein engrailed-1 (EN1), was analysed. It was found that EN1 binding site 2 in 
the UTRN gene promoter directly interacted with transcription factor EN1 in 
vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays of the EN1-UTRN promoter complex 
from rhabdomyosarcoma and HeLa cell lines confirmed that endogenous EN1 
interacted with this region in vivo. The findings suggest that EN1 directly 
interacts with the UTRN promoter. Small interfering RNA was used to inhibit EN1 
gene expression. Higher utrophin mRNA levels were observed in EN1-inhibited 
cells compared with controls. The increase in utrophin mRNA in rhabdomyosarcoma 
cells and HeLa cells may have resulted from inhibition of EN1 expression.

DOI: 10.1177/147323001103900117
PMID: 21672318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
