---
pmid: '22090488'
title: A seven-transmembrane receptor that mediates avoidance response to dihydrocaffeic
  acid, a water-soluble repellent in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Aoki R
- Yagami T
- Sasakura H
- Ogura K
- Kajihara Y
- Ibi M
- Miyamae T
- Nakamura F
- Asakura T
- Kanai Y
- Misu Y
- Iino Y
- Ezcurra M
- Schafer WR
- Mori I
- Goshima Y
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6633322
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4018-11.2011
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A seven-transmembrane receptor that mediates avoidance response to dihydrocaffeic acid, a water-soluble repellent in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Aoki R, Yagami T, Sasakura H, Ogura K, Kajihara Y, Ibi M, Miyamae T, Nakamura F, Asakura T, Kanai Y, Misu Y, Iino Y, Ezcurra M, Schafer WR, Mori I, Goshima Y
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4018-11.2011](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4018-11.2011)
**PMC:** [PMC6633322](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6633322/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2011 Nov 16;31(46):16603-10. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4018-11.2011.

A seven-transmembrane receptor that mediates avoidance response to 
dihydrocaffeic acid, a water-soluble repellent in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Aoki R(1), Yagami T, Sasakura H, Ogura K, Kajihara Y, Ibi M, Miyamae T, Nakamura 
F, Asakura T, Kanai Y, Misu Y, Iino Y, Ezcurra M, Schafer WR, Mori I, Goshima Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Neurobiology, Yokohama City 
University, Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

The ability to detect harmful chemicals rapidly is essential for the survival of 
all animals. In Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans), repellents trigger an 
avoidance response, causing animals to move away from repellents. Dihydrocaffeic 
acid (DHCA) is a water-soluble repellent and nonflavonoid catecholic compound 
that can be found in plant products. Using a Xenopus laevis (X. laevis) oocyte 
expression system, we identified a candidate dihydrocaffeic acid receptor 
(DCAR), DCAR-1. DCAR-1 is a novel seven-transmembrane protein that is expressed 
in the ASH avoidance sensory neurons of C. elegans. dcar-1 mutant animals are 
defective in avoidance response to DHCA, and cell-specific expression of dcar-1 
in the ASH neurons of dcar-1 mutant animals rescued the defect in avoidance 
response to DHCA. Our findings identify DCAR-1 as the first seven-transmembrane 
receptor required for avoidance of a water-soluble repellent, DHCA, in C. 
elegans.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4018-11.2011
PMCID: PMC6633322
PMID: 22090488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
