---
pmid: '2037576'
title: Purification and characterization of bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase
  from human liver.
authors:
- Johnson MR
- Barnes S
- Kwakye JB
- Diasio RB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Purification and characterization of bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase from human liver.
**Authors:** Johnson MR, Barnes S, Kwakye JB, Diasio RB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jun 5;266(16):10227-33.

Purification and characterization of bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase 
from human liver.

Johnson MR(1), Barnes S, Kwakye JB, Diasio RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Alabama, Birmingham 35294.

The bile acid-conjugating enzyme, bile acid-CoA: amino acid N-acyltransferase, 
was purified 480-fold from the soluble fraction of homogenized frozen human 
liver. Purification was accomplished by a combination of anion exchange 
chromatography, chromatofocusing, glycocholate-AH-Sepharose affinity 
chromatography, and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) gel 
filtration. Following purification, the reduced, denatured enzyme migrated as a 
single 50-kDa protein band by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis. A similar molecular mass was obtained for the native enzyme by 
HPLC gel filtration. Elution from the chromatofocusing column suggested an 
apparent isoelectric point of 6.0 (+/- 0.2). Using a rabbit polyclonal antibody 
raised against the purified enzyme, Western blot analysis using 100,000 x g 
human liver supernatant confirmed that the affinity-purified polyclonal antibody 
was specific for human liver bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase. The 
purified enzyme utilized glycine, taurine, and 2-fluoro-beta-alanine (a 
5-fluorouracil catabolite), but not beta-alanine, as substrates. Kinetic studies 
revealed apparent Km values for taurine, 2-fluoro-beta-alanine, and glycine of 
1.1, 2.2, and 5.8 mM, respectively, with corresponding Vmax values of 0.33, 
0.19, and 0.77 mumol/min/mg protein. These data demonstrate that a single 
monomeric enzyme is responsible for the conjugation of bile acids with glycine 
or taurine in human liver.

PMID: 2037576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
