---
pmid: '24022485'
title: Peroxiredoxin chaperone activity is critical for protein homeostasis in zinc-deficient
  yeast.
authors:
- MacDiarmid CW
- Taggart J
- Kerdsomboon K
- Kubisiak M
- Panascharoen S
- Schelble K
- Eide DJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3829442
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.512384
---

# Peroxiredoxin chaperone activity is critical for protein homeostasis in zinc-deficient yeast.
**Authors:** MacDiarmid CW, Taggart J, Kerdsomboon K, Kubisiak M, Panascharoen S, Schelble K, Eide DJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.512384](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.512384)
**PMC:** [PMC3829442](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3829442/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31313-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.512384. Epub 
2013 Sep 10.

Peroxiredoxin chaperone activity is critical for protein homeostasis in 
zinc-deficient yeast.

MacDiarmid CW(1), Taggart J, Kerdsomboon K, Kubisiak M, Panascharoen S, Schelble 
K, Eide DJ.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin 53706 and.

Zinc is required for the folding and function of many proteins. In Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, homeostatic and adaptive responses to zinc deficiency are regulated 
by the Zap1 transcription factor. One Zap1 target gene encodes the Tsa1 
peroxiredoxin, a protein with both peroxidase and protein chaperone activities. 
Consistent with its regulation, Tsa1 is critical for growth under low zinc 
conditions. We previously showed that Tsa1's peroxidase function decreases the 
oxidative stress that occurs in zinc deficiency. In this report, we show that 
Tsa1 chaperone, and not peroxidase, activity is the more critical function in 
zinc-deficient cells. Mutations restoring growth to zinc-deficient tsa1 cells 
inactivated TRR1, encoding thioredoxin reductase. Because Trr1 is required for 
oxidative stress tolerance, this result implicated the Tsa1 chaperone function 
in tolerance to zinc deficiency. Consistent with this hypothesis, the tsa1Δ zinc 
requirement was complemented by a Tsa1 mutant allele that retained only 
chaperone function. Additionally, growth of tsa1Δ was also restored by 
overexpression of holdase chaperones Hsp26 and Hsp42, which lack peroxidase 
activity, and the Tsa1 paralog Tsa2 contributed to suppression by trr1Δ, even 
though trr1Δ inactivates Tsa2 peroxidase activity. The essentiality of the Tsa1 
chaperone suggested that zinc-deficient cells experience a crisis of disrupted 
protein folding. Consistent with this model, assays of protein homeostasis 
suggested that zinc-limited tsa1Δ mutants accumulated unfolded proteins and 
induced a corresponding stress response. These observations demonstrate a clear 
physiological role for a peroxiredoxin chaperone and reveal a novel and 
unexpected role for protein homeostasis in tolerating metal deficiency.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.512384
PMCID: PMC3829442
PMID: 24022485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
