---
pmid: '33502047'
title: Severe congenital lactic acidosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by
  an intronic variant in NDUFB7.
authors:
- Correia SP
- Moedas MF
- Naess K
- Bruhn H
- Maffezzini C
- Calvo-Garrido J
- Lesko N
- Wibom R
- Schober FA
- Jemt A
- Stranneheim H
- Freyer C
- Wedell A
- Wredenberg A
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.24173
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Severe congenital lactic acidosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by an intronic variant in NDUFB7.
**Authors:** Correia SP, Moedas MF, Naess K, Bruhn H, Maffezzini C, Calvo-Garrido J, Lesko N, Wibom R, Schober FA, Jemt A, Stranneheim H, Freyer C, Wedell A, Wredenberg A
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24173](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24173)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Apr;42(4):378-384. doi: 10.1002/humu.24173. Epub 2021 Feb 4.

Severe congenital lactic acidosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by an 
intronic variant in NDUFB7.

Correia SP(1)(2), Moedas MF(3)(4), Naess K(1)(3), Bruhn H(1)(3), Maffezzini 
C(3)(4), Calvo-Garrido J(2)(4), Lesko N(1)(3), Wibom R(1)(3), Schober FA(2)(4), 
Jemt A(5), Stranneheim H(2), Freyer C(1)(3)(4), Wedell A(1)(2)(4), Wredenberg 
A(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Mutations in structural subunits and assembly factors of complex I of the 
oxidative phosphorylation system constitute the most common cause of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain defects. Such mutations can present a wide range 
of clinical manifestations, varying from mild deficiencies to severe, lethal 
disorders. We describe a patient presenting intrauterine growth restriction and 
anemia, which displayed postpartum hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, lactic acidosis, 
encephalopathy, and a severe complex I defect with fatal outcome. Whole genome 
sequencing revealed an intronic biallelic mutation in the NDUFB7 gene 
(c.113-10C>G) and splicing pattern alterations in NDUFB7 messenger RNA were 
confirmed by RNA Sequencing. The detected variant resulted in a significant 
reduction of the NDUFB7 protein and reduced complex I activity. Complementation 
studies with expression of wild-type NDUFB7 in patient fibroblasts normalized 
complex I function. Here we report a case with a primary complex I defect due to 
a homozygous mutation in an intron region of the NDUFB7 gene.

© 2021 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24173
PMID: 33502047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
