---
pmid: '10899978'
title: Regulation of abscisic acid signaling by the ethylene response pathway in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Ghassemian M
- Nambara E
- Cutler S
- Kawaide H
- Kamiya Y
- McCourt P
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC149053
doi: 10.1105/tpc.12.7.1117
---

# Regulation of abscisic acid signaling by the ethylene response pathway in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Ghassemian M, Nambara E, Cutler S, Kawaide H, Kamiya Y, McCourt P
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.12.7.1117](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.12.7.1117)
**PMC:** [PMC149053](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC149053/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2000 Jul;12(7):1117-26. doi: 10.1105/tpc.12.7.1117.

Regulation of abscisic acid signaling by the ethylene response pathway in 
Arabidopsis.

Ghassemian M(1), Nambara E, Cutler S, Kawaide H, Kamiya Y, McCourt P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Although abscisic acid (ABA) is involved in a variety of plant growth and 
developmental processes, few genes that actually regulate the transduction of 
the ABA signal into a cellular response have been identified. In an attempt to 
determine negative regulators of ABA signaling, we identified mutants, 
designated enhanced response to ABA3 (era3), that increased the sensitivity of 
the seed to ABA. Biochemical and molecular analyses demonstrated that era3 
mutants overaccumulate ABA, suggesting that era3 is a negative regulator of ABA 
synthesis. Subsequent genetic analysis of era3 alleles, however, showed that 
these are new alleles at the ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE2 locus. Other mutants 
defective in their response to ethylene also showed altered ABA sensitivity; 
from these results, we conclude that ethylene appears to be a negative regulator 
of ABA action during germination. In contrast, the ethylene response pathway 
positively regulates some aspects of ABA action that involve root growth in the 
absence of ethylene. We discuss the response of plants to ethylene and ABA in 
the context of how these two hormones could influence the same growth responses.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.12.7.1117
PMCID: PMC149053
PMID: 10899978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
