---
pmid: '17599051'
title: The evolutionarily conserved EBR module of RALT/MIG6 mediates suppression of
  the EGFR catalytic activity.
authors:
- Anastasi S
- Baietti MF
- Frosi Y
- Alemà S
- Segatto O
journal: Oncogene
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210590
---

# The evolutionarily conserved EBR module of RALT/MIG6 mediates suppression of the EGFR catalytic activity.
**Authors:** Anastasi S, Baietti MF, Frosi Y, Alemà S, Segatto O
**Journal:** Oncogene (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210590](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210590)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2007 Dec 13;26(57):7833-46. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210590. Epub 2007
Jun  18.

The evolutionarily conserved EBR module of RALT/MIG6 mediates suppression of the 
EGFR catalytic activity.

Anastasi S(1), Baietti MF, Frosi Y, Alemà S, Segatto O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Laboratory of Immunology, Regina Elena 
Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy. anastasi@ifo.it

Physiological signalling by the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) controls 
developmental processes and tissue homeostasis, whereas aberrant EGFR activity 
drives oncogenic cell transformation. Under normal conditions, the EGFR must 
therefore generate outputs of defined strength and duration. To this aim, cells 
balance EGFR activity via different modalities of negative signalling. 
Increasing attention is being drawn on transcriptionally controlled feedback 
inhibitors of EGFR, namely RALT/MIG6, LRIG1, SOCS4 and SOCS5. Genetic studies in 
mice have revealed the essential role of Ralt/Mig6 in regulating Egfr-driven 
skin morphogenesis and tumour formation, yet the mechanisms through which RALT 
abrogates EGFR activity are still undefined. We report that RALT suppresses EGFR 
function by inhibiting its catalytic activity. The evolutionarily conserved 
ErbB-binding region (EBR) is necessary and sufficient to carry out 
RALT-dependent suppression of EGFR kinase activity in vitro and in intact cells. 
The mechanism involves binding of the EBR to the 953RYLVIQ958 sequence, which is 
located in the alphaI helix of the EGFR kinase and has been shown to participate 
in allosteric control of EGFR catalytic activity. Our results uncover a novel 
mechanism of temporal regulation of EGFR activity in vertebrate organisms.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210590
PMID: 17599051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
