---
pmid: '24785657'
title: NRBF2 regulates macroautophagy as a component of Vps34 Complex I.
authors:
- Cao Y
- Wang Y
- Abi Saab WF
- Yang F
- Pessin JE
- Backer JM
journal: Biochem J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4180102
doi: 10.1042/BJ20140515
---

# NRBF2 regulates macroautophagy as a component of Vps34 Complex I.
**Authors:** Cao Y, Wang Y, Abi Saab WF, Yang F, Pessin JE, Backer JM
**Journal:** Biochem J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20140515](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20140515)
**PMC:** [PMC4180102](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4180102/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2014 Jul 15;461(2):315-22. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140515.

NRBF2 regulates macroautophagy as a component of Vps34 Complex I.

Cao Y(1), Wang Y(1), Abi Saab WF(1), Yang F(2), Pessin JE, Backer JM(1).

Author information:
(1)*Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY, U.S.A.
(2)†Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
U.S.A.

Macroautophagy is a physiological cellular response to nutrient stress, which 
leads to the engulfment of cytosolic contents by a double-walled membrane 
structure, the phagophore. Phagophores seal to become autophagosomes, which then 
fuse with lysosomes to deliver their contents for degradation. Macroautophagy is 
regulated by numerous cellular factors, including the Class III PI3K 
(phosphoinositide 3-kinase) Vps34 (vacuolar protein sorting 34). The autophagic 
functions of Vps34 require its recruitment to a complex that includes Vps15, 
Beclin-1 and Atg14L (autophagy-related 14-like protein) and is known as Vps34 
Complex I. We have now identified NRBF2 (nuclear receptor-binding factor 2) as a 
new member of Vps34 Complex I. NRBF2 binds to complexes that include Vps34, 
Vps15, Beclin-1 and ATG-14L, but not the Vps34 Complex II component UVRAG (UV 
radiation resistance-associated gene). NRBF2 directly interacts with Vps15 via 
the Vps15 WD40 domain as well as other regions of Vps15. The formation of 
GFP-LC3 (light chain 3) punctae and PE (phosphatidylethanolamine)-conjugated LC3 
(LC3-II) in serum-starved cells was inhibited by NRBF2 knockdown in the absence 
and presence of lysosomal inhibitors, and p62 levels were increased. Thus NRBF2 
plays a critical role in the induction of starvation-induced autophagy as a 
specific member of Vps34 Complex I.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20140515
PMCID: PMC4180102
PMID: 24785657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
