---
pmid: '21282606'
title: Nε-lysine acetylation determines dissociation from GAP junctions and lateralization
  of connexin 43 in normal and dystrophic heart.
authors:
- Colussi C
- Rosati J
- Straino S
- Spallotta F
- Berni R
- Stilli D
- Rossi S
- Musso E
- Macchi E
- Mai A
- Sbardella G
- Castellano S
- Chimenti C
- Frustaci A
- Nebbioso A
- Altucci L
- Capogrossi MC
- Gaetano C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3041095
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1013124108
---

# Nε-lysine acetylation determines dissociation from GAP junctions and lateralization of connexin 43 in normal and dystrophic heart.
**Authors:** Colussi C, Rosati J, Straino S, Spallotta F, Berni R, Stilli D, Rossi S, Musso E, Macchi E, Mai A, Sbardella G, Castellano S, Chimenti C, Frustaci A, Nebbioso A, Altucci L, Capogrossi MC, Gaetano C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1013124108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1013124108)
**PMC:** [PMC3041095](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3041095/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 15;108(7):2795-800. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1013124108. Epub 2011 Jan 31.

Nε-lysine acetylation determines dissociation from GAP junctions and 
lateralization of connexin 43 in normal and dystrophic heart.

Colussi C(1), Rosati J, Straino S, Spallotta F, Berni R, Stilli D, Rossi S, 
Musso E, Macchi E, Mai A, Sbardella G, Castellano S, Chimenti C, Frustaci A, 
Nebbioso A, Altucci L, Capogrossi MC, Gaetano C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Biologia Vascolare e Medicina Rigenerativa, Centro 
Cardiologico Monzino, 20138 Milan, Italy.

Wanting to explore the epigenetic basis of Duchenne cardiomyopathy, we found 
that global histone acetylase activity was abnormally elevated and the acetylase 
P300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) coimmunoprecipitated with connexin 43 (Cx43), 
which was N(ε)-lysine acetylated and lateralized in mdx heart. This observation 
was paralleled by Cx43 dissociation from N-cadherin and zonula occludens 1, 
whereas pp60-c-Src association was unaltered. In vivo treatment of mdx with the 
pan-histone acetylase inhibitor anacardic acid significantly reduced Cx43 
N(ε)-lysine acetylation and restored its association to GAP junctions (GJs) at 
intercalated discs. Noteworthy, in normal as well as mdx mice, the class IIa 
histone deacetylases 4 and 5 constitutively colocalized with Cx43 either at GJs 
or in the lateralized compartments. The class I histone deacetylase 3 was also 
part of the complex. Treatment of normal controls with the histone deacetylase 
pan-inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (MC1568) or the class 
IIa-selective inhibitor 
3-{4-[3-(3-fluorophenyl)-3-oxo-1-propen-1-yl]-1-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-yl}-N-hydroxy-2-propenamide 
(MC1568) determined Cx43 hyperacetylation, dissociation from GJs, and 
distribution along the long axis of ventricular cardiomyocytes. Consistently, 
the histone acetylase activator pentadecylidenemalonate 1b (SPV106) 
hyperacetylated cardiac proteins, including Cx43, which assumed a lateralized 
position that partly reproduced the dystrophic phenotype. In the presence of 
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, cell to cell permeability was significantly 
diminished, which is in agreement with a Cx43 close conformation in the 
consequence of hyperacetylation. Additional experiments, performed with Cx43 
acetylation mutants, revealed, for the acetylated form of the molecule, a 
significant reduction in plasma membrane localization and a tendency to nuclear 
accumulation. These results suggest that Cx43 N(ε)-lysine acetylation may have 
physiopathological consequences for cell to cell coupling and cardiac function.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1013124108
PMCID: PMC3041095
PMID: 21282606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
