---
pmid: '16467472'
title: The function and properties of the Azf1 transcriptional regulator change with
  growth conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Slattery MG
- Liko D
- Heideman W
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1405897
doi: 10.1128/EC.5.2.313-320.2006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The function and properties of the Azf1 transcriptional regulator change with growth conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Slattery MG, Liko D, Heideman W
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.5.2.313-320.2006](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.5.2.313-320.2006)
**PMC:** [PMC1405897](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1405897/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2006 Feb;5(2):313-20. doi: 10.1128/EC.5.2.313-320.2006.

The function and properties of the Azf1 transcriptional regulator change with 
growth conditions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Slattery MG(1), Liko D, Heideman W.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, 425 N. 
Charter Street, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Azf1 activates CLN3 transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells growing in 
glucose. Paradoxically, other studies have shown Azf1 to be almost undetectable 
in glucose-grown cells. Microarray experiments showed that Azf1 activates 
nonoverlapping gene sets in different carbon sources: in glucose, Azf1 activates 
carbon and energy metabolism genes, and in glycerol-lactate, Azf1 activates 
genes needed for cell wall maintenance. Consistent with the decreased expression 
of cell wall maintenance genes observed with azf1Delta mutants, we observed a 
marked growth defect in the azf1Delta cells at 37 degrees C in nonfermentable 
medium. Cell wall integrity assays, such as sensitivity to calcofluor white, 
sodium dodecyl sulfate, or caffeine, confirmed cell wall defects in azf1Delta 
mutants in nonfermentable medium. Gel shift experiments show that Azf1 binds to 
DNA elements with the sequence AAAAGAAA (A4GA3), a motif enriched in the 
promoters of Azf1-sensitive genes and predicted by whole-genome studies. This 
suggests that many of the Azf1-dependent transcripts may be regulated directly 
by Azf1 binding. We found that the levels of Azf1 protein in glucose-grown cells 
were comparable to Azf1 levels in cells grown in glycerol-lactate; however, this 
could only be demonstrated with a cell extraction procedure that minimizes 
proteolysis. Glucose produces conditions that destabilize the Azf1 protein, a 
finding that may reflect a glucose-induced change in Azf1 tertiary or quaternary 
structure.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.5.2.313-320.2006
PMCID: PMC1405897
PMID: 16467472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
