---
pmid: '14570703'
title: 'Molecular basis of the functional podocin-nephrin complex: mutations in the
  NPHS2 gene disrupt nephrin targeting to lipid raft microdomains.'
authors:
- Huber TB
- Simons M
- Hartleben B
- Sernetz L
- Schmidts M
- Gundlach E
- Saleem MA
- Walz G
- Benzing T
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg360
---

# Molecular basis of the functional podocin-nephrin complex: mutations in the NPHS2 gene disrupt nephrin targeting to lipid raft microdomains.
**Authors:** Huber TB, Simons M, Hartleben B, Sernetz L, Schmidts M, Gundlach E, Saleem MA, Walz G, Benzing T
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg360](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg360)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 15;12(24):3397-405. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg360. Epub 2003
 Oct 21.

Molecular basis of the functional podocin-nephrin complex: mutations in the 
NPHS2 gene disrupt nephrin targeting to lipid raft microdomains.

Huber TB(1), Simons M, Hartleben B, Sernetz L, Schmidts M, Gundlach E, Saleem 
MA, Walz G, Benzing T.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, University Hospital Freiburg, Germany.

Hereditary nephrotic syndrome is a heterogeneous disease, characterized by heavy 
proteinuria and renal failure. Mutations of NPHS1 or NPHS2, the genes encoding 
for nephrin and podocin, lead to early onset of heavy proteinuria, and rapid 
progression to end-stage renal disease, suggesting that both proteins are 
essential for the integrity of the glomerular filter. Podocin is a stomatin 
protein family member with a predicted hairpin-like structure localizing to the 
insertion site of the slit diaphragm of podocytes, the visceral glomerular 
epithelial cells of the kidney. Here we investigate the pathomechanisms of 
different disease-causing podocin mutations. We show that wild-type podocin is 
targeted to the plasma membrane, and forms homo-oligomers involving the carboxy 
and amino terminal cytoplasmic domains. The association of podocin with 
specialized lipid raft microdomains of the plasma membrane was a prerequisite 
for recruitment of nephrin into rafts. In contrast, disease-causing mutations of 
podocin (R138Q and R138X) failed to recruit nephrin into rafts either because 
these mutants were retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (R138Q), or because 
they failed to associate with rafts (R138X) despite their presence in the plasma 
membrane. None of the mutants did augment nephrin signaling, suggesting that 
lipid raft targeting facilitates nephrin signaling. Our findings demonstrate 
that the failure of mutant podocin to recruit nephrin into lipid rafts may be 
essential for the pathogenesis of NPHS2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg360
PMID: 14570703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
