---
pmid: '3052244'
title: Biochemical and genetic identity of alpha-keto acid reductase and cytoplasmic
  malate dehydrogenase from human erythrocytes.
authors:
- Friedrich CA
- Ferrell RE
- Siciliano MJ
- Kitto GB
journal: Ann Hum Genet
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.1988.tb01075.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical and genetic identity of alpha-keto acid reductase and cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase from human erythrocytes.
**Authors:** Friedrich CA, Ferrell RE, Siciliano MJ, Kitto GB
**Journal:** Ann Hum Genet (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-1809.1988.tb01075.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-1809.1988.tb01075.x)

## Abstract

1. Ann Hum Genet. 1988 Jan;52(1):25-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.1988.tb01075.x.

Biochemical and genetic identity of alpha-keto acid reductase and cytoplasmic 
malate dehydrogenase from human erythrocytes.

Friedrich CA(1), Ferrell RE, Siciliano MJ, Kitto GB.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Health Science 
Center, Houston 77225.

We have recently shown that cytoplasmic malate dehydrogenase (MDH-s) from 
several non-human species catalyses the reduction of aromatic alpha-keto acids 
in the presence of NADH (Friedrich et al. 1987), an activity previously 
attributed to the enzyme aromatic alpha-keto acid reductase (KAR E.C.1.1.1.96). 
Here we present evidence that this also occurs in humans, and that the 
previously characterized human KAR is not the product of a genetically distinct 
locus. Human MDH-s and KAR activities co-migrate after starch gel 
electrophoresis, and electrophoretic variants of human MDH-s exhibited identical 
variation for KAR. Both enzymes show almost no electrophoretic variation among 
human populations of diverse origin. The reduction of aromatic alpha-keto acids 
is substantially inhibited by malate, the end-product of the MDH reaction. 
Antibodies raised against purified chicken MDH-s equally inhibited both MDH-s 
and KAR in chickens and humans. The bulk of the KAR activity in human blood 
appears to be due to MDH-s, with a minor fraction catalysed by LDH, as is the 
case in most other species studied. The previous assignment of a gene for KAR to 
human chromosome 12 in human/Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrids is questioned 
because interspecific hybrid bands of both MDH-s and LDH appear with slightly 
different mobility approximately midway between the human and hamster controls 
in somatic cell hybrid studies, and the meaning of this artifact is discussed. 
The discovery that MDH reacts with intermediate metabolites of phenylalanine and 
tyrosine has implications in relation to the mechanism by which mental 
retardation may be produced in phenylketonuria (PKU), and the effect of MDH 
inhibition on oxidative phosphorylation in the various tyrosinaemias is 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.1988.tb01075.x
PMID: 3052244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
