---
pmid: '15960975'
title: Physical association and coordinate function of the H3 K4 methyltransferase
  MLL1 and the H4 K16 acetyltransferase MOF.
authors:
- Dou Y
- Milne TA
- Tackett AJ
- Smith ER
- Fukuda A
- Wysocka J
- Allis CD
- Chait BT
- Hess JL
- Roeder RG
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.031
---

# Physical association and coordinate function of the H3 K4 methyltransferase MLL1 and the H4 K16 acetyltransferase MOF.
**Authors:** Dou Y, Milne TA, Tackett AJ, Smith ER, Fukuda A, Wysocka J, Allis CD, Chait BT, Hess JL, Roeder RG
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.031)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2005 Jun 17;121(6):873-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.031.

Physical association and coordinate function of the H3 K4 methyltransferase MLL1 
and the H4 K16 acetyltransferase MOF.

Dou Y(1), Milne TA, Tackett AJ, Smith ER, Fukuda A, Wysocka J, Allis CD, Chait 
BT, Hess JL, Roeder RG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10021, USA.

A stable complex containing MLL1 and MOF has been immunoaffinity purified from a 
human cell line that stably expresses an epitope-tagged WDR5 subunit. Stable 
interactions between MLL1 and MOF were confirmed by reciprocal 
immunoprecipitation, cosedimentation, and cotransfection analyses, and 
interaction sites were mapped to MLL1 C-terminal and MOF zinc finger domains. 
The purified complex has a robust MLL1-mediated histone methyltransferase 
activity that can effect mono-, di-, and trimethylation of H3 K4 and a 
MOF-mediated histone acetyltransferase activity that is specific for H4 K16. 
Importantly, both activities are required for optimal transcription activation 
on a chromatin template in vitro and on an endogenous MLL1 target gene, Hox a9, 
in vivo. These results indicate an activator-based mechanism for joint MLL1 and 
MOF recruitment and targeted methylation and acetylation and provide a molecular 
explanation for the closely correlated distribution of H3 K4 methylation and H4 
K16 acetylation on active genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.04.031
PMID: 15960975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
