---
pmid: '10523303'
title: The Aspergillus nidulans sfaD gene encodes a G protein beta subunit that is
  required for normal growth and repression of sporulation.
authors:
- Rosén S
- Yu JH
- Adams TH
journal: EMBO J
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1171627
doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.20.5592
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Aspergillus nidulans sfaD gene encodes a G protein beta subunit that is required for normal growth and repression of sporulation.
**Authors:** Rosén S, Yu JH, Adams TH
**Journal:** EMBO J (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/18.20.5592](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.20.5592)
**PMC:** [PMC1171627](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1171627/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1999 Oct 15;18(20):5592-600. doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.20.5592.

The Aspergillus nidulans sfaD gene encodes a G protein beta subunit that is 
required for normal growth and repression of sporulation.

Rosén S(1), Yu JH, Adams TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

flbA encodes an Aspergillus nidulans RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) 
domain protein that antagonizes FadA (G(i)alpha-subunit of heterotrimeric G 
protein)-mediated growth signaling to allow asexual development. We previously 
defined and characterized five suppressors of flbA (sfa) loss-of-function 
mutations and showed that one suppressor (sfaB) resulted from a novel 
dominant-negative allele of fadA. In this report we show that a second 
suppressor gene (sfaD) is predicted to encode the beta subunit of a 
heterotrimeric G protein. Deletion of sfaD suppressed all defects resulting from 
complete loss-of-flbA function mutations, caused a hyperactive sporulation 
phenotype and severely reduced vegetative growth. However, the sfaD deletion 
could not suppress the growth activation caused by dominant-activating fadA 
alleles, indicating that constitutively active FadA can cause proliferative 
growth in the absence of Gbetagamma signaling. We propose that SfaD and FadA are 
both positive growth regulators with partially overlapping functions and that 
FlbA has an important role in controlling the activities of both proteins. 
Inactivation of signaling events stimulated by both components of the 
heterotrimeric G protein is essential for both sexual and asexual sporulation.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.20.5592
PMCID: PMC1171627
PMID: 10523303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

flbA encodes an Aspergillus nidulans RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) domain protein that antagonizes FadA (G(i)alpha-subunit of heterotrimeric G protein)-mediated growth signaling to allow asexual development. We previously defined and characterized five suppressors of flbA (sfa) loss-of-function mutations and showed that one suppressor (sfaB) resulted from a novel dominant-negative allele of fadA. In this report we show that a second suppressor gene (sfaD) is predicted to encode the beta subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein. Deletion of sfaD suppressed all defects resulting from complete loss-of-flbA function mutations, caused a hyperactive sporulation phenotype and severely reduced vegetative growth. However, the sfaD deletion could not suppress the growth activation caused by dominant-activating fadA alleles, indicating that constitutively active FadA can cause proliferative growth in the absence of Gbetagamma signaling. We propose that SfaD and FadA are both positive growth regulators with partially overlapping functions and that FlbA has an important role in controlling the activities of both proteins. Inactivation of signaling events stimulated by both components of the heterotrimeric G protein is essential for both sexual and asexual sporulation.
