---
pmid: '8631904'
title: Calcineurin binds the transcription factor NFAT1 and reversibly regulates its
  activity.
authors:
- Loh C
- Shaw KT
- Carew J
- Viola JP
- Luo C
- Perrino BA
- Rao A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10884
---

# Calcineurin binds the transcription factor NFAT1 and reversibly regulates its activity.
**Authors:** Loh C, Shaw KT, Carew J, Viola JP, Luo C, Perrino BA, Rao A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.18.10884](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.18.10884)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10884-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10884.

Calcineurin binds the transcription factor NFAT1 and reversibly regulates its 
activity.

Loh C(1), Shaw KT, Carew J, Viola JP, Luo C, Perrino BA, Rao A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

NFAT1 (previously termed NFATp) is a cytoplasmic transcription factor involved 
in the induction of cytokine genes. We have previously shown that the 
dephosphorylation of NFAT1, accompanied by its nuclear translocation and 
increased DNA binding activity, is regulated by calcium- and 
calcineurin-dependent mechanisms, as each of these hallmarks of NFAT1 activation 
is elicited by ionomycin and blocked by the immunosuppressive drugs cyclosporin 
A and FK506 (Shaw, K.T.-Y., Ho, A.M., Raghavan, A., Kim, J., Jain, J., Park, J., 
Sharma, S., Rao, A., and Hogan, P.G. (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 
11205-11209). Here we show that the activation state of NFAT1 in T cells is 
remarkably sensitive to the level of calcineurin activity. Addition of 
cyclosporin A, even in the presence of ongoing ionomycin stimulation, results in 
rephosphorylation of NFAT1, its reappearance in the cytoplasm, and a return of 
its DNA binding activity to low levels. Similar effects are observed upon 
removal of ionomycin or addition of EGTA. We also demonstrate a direct 
interaction between calcineurin and NFAT1 that is consistent with a direct 
enzyme-substrate relation between these two proteins and that may underlie the 
sensitivity of NFAT1 activation to the level of calcineurin activity. The 
NFAT1-calcineurin interaction, which involves an N-terminal region of NFAT1 
conserved in other NFAT family proteins, may provide a target for the design of 
novel immunosuppressive drugs.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.18.10884
PMID: 8631904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
