---
pmid: '23878393'
title: Role of membrane association and Atg14-dependent phosphorylation in beclin-1-mediated
  autophagy.
authors:
- Fogel AI
- Dlouhy BJ
- Wang C
- Ryu SW
- Neutzner A
- Hasson SA
- Sideris DP
- Abeliovich H
- Youle RJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3753860
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00079-13
---

# Role of membrane association and Atg14-dependent phosphorylation in beclin-1-mediated autophagy.
**Authors:** Fogel AI, Dlouhy BJ, Wang C, Ryu SW, Neutzner A, Hasson SA, Sideris DP, Abeliovich H, Youle RJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00079-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00079-13)
**PMC:** [PMC3753860](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3753860/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;33(18):3675-88. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00079-13. Epub 2013
Jul  22.

Role of membrane association and Atg14-dependent phosphorylation in 
beclin-1-mediated autophagy.

Fogel AI(1), Dlouhy BJ, Wang C, Ryu SW, Neutzner A, Hasson SA, Sideris DP, 
Abeliovich H, Youle RJ.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Section, National Institute for Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

During autophagy, a double membrane envelops cellular material for trafficking 
to the lysosome. Human beclin-1 and its yeast homologue, Atg6/Vps30, are 
scaffold proteins bound in a lipid kinase complex with multiple cellular 
functions, including autophagy. Several different Atg6 complexes exist, with an 
autophagy-specific form containing Atg14. However, the roles of Atg14 and 
beclin-1 in the activation of this complex remain unclear. We here addressed the 
mechanism of beclin-1 complex activation and reveal two critical steps in this 
pathway. First, we identified a unique domain in beclin-1, conserved in the 
yeast homologue Atg6, which is involved in membrane association and, 
unexpectedly, controls autophagosome size and number in yeast. Second, we 
demonstrated that human Atg14 is critical in controlling an autophagy-dependent 
phosphorylation of beclin-1. We map these novel phosphorylation sites to serines 
90 and 93 and demonstrate that phosphorylation at these sites is necessary for 
maximal autophagy. These results help clarify the mechanism of beclin-1 and 
Atg14 during autophagy.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00079-13
PMCID: PMC3753860
PMID: 23878393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
