---
pmid: '11063707'
title: GL3 encodes a bHLH protein that regulates trichome development in arabidopsis
  through interaction with GL1 and TTG1.
authors:
- Payne CT
- Zhang F
- Lloyd AM
journal: Genetics
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1461316
doi: 10.1093/genetics/156.3.1349
---

# GL3 encodes a bHLH protein that regulates trichome development in arabidopsis through interaction with GL1 and TTG1.
**Authors:** Payne CT, Zhang F, Lloyd AM
**Journal:** Genetics (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/156.3.1349](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/156.3.1349)
**PMC:** [PMC1461316](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1461316/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2000 Nov;156(3):1349-62. doi: 10.1093/genetics/156.3.1349.

GL3 encodes a bHLH protein that regulates trichome development in arabidopsis 
through interaction with GL1 and TTG1.

Payne CT(1), Zhang F, Lloyd AM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology and the Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712-1095, USA.

Arabidopsis trichome development and differentiation is a well-studied model for 
plant cell-fate determination and morphogenesis. Mutations in TRANSPARENT TESTA 
GLABRA1 (TTG1) result in several pleiotropic defects including an almost 
complete lack of trichomes. The complex phenotype caused by ttg1 mutations is 
suppressed by ectopic expression of the maize anthocyanin regulator R. Here it 
is demonstrated that the Arabidopsis trichome development locus GLABRA3 (GL3) 
encodes an R homolog. GL3 and GLABRA1 (GL1) interact when overexpressed together 
in plants. Yeast two-hybrid assays indicate that GL3 participates in physical 
interactions with GL1, TTG1, and itself, but that GL1 and TTG1 do not interact. 
These data suggest a reiterated combinatorial model for the differential 
regulation of such diverse developmental pathways as trichome cell-fate 
determination, root hair spacing, and anthocyanin secondary metabolism.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/156.3.1349
PMCID: PMC1461316
PMID: 11063707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Arabidopsis trichome development and differentiation is a well-studied model for plant cell-fate determination and morphogenesis. Mutations in TRANSPARENT TESTA GLABRA1 (TTG1) result in several pleiotropic defects including an almost complete lack of trichomes. The complex phenotype caused by ttg1 mutations is suppressed by ectopic expression of the maize anthocyanin regulator R. Here it is demonstrated that the Arabidopsis trichome development locus GLABRA3 (GL3) encodes an R homolog. GL3 and GLABRA1 (GL1) interact when overexpressed together in plants. Yeast two-hybrid assays indicate that GL3 participates in physical interactions with GL1, TTG1, and itself, but that GL1 and TTG1 do not interact. These data suggest a reiterated combinatorial model for the differential regulation of such diverse developmental pathways as trichome cell-fate determination, root hair spacing, and anthocyanin secondary metabolism.
