---
pmid: '22985361'
title: 'Human cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) contains two classes of binding sites
  for S-adenosylmethionine (SAM): complex regulation of CBS activity and stability
  by SAM.'
authors:
- Pey AL
- Majtan T
- Sanchez-Ruiz JM
- Kraus JP
journal: Biochem J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1042/BJ20120731
---

# Human cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) contains two classes of binding sites for S-adenosylmethionine (SAM): complex regulation of CBS activity and stability by SAM.
**Authors:** Pey AL, Majtan T, Sanchez-Ruiz JM, Kraus JP
**Journal:** Biochem J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20120731](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20120731)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2013 Jan 1;449(1):109-21. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120731.

Human cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) contains two classes of binding sites for 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM): complex regulation of CBS activity and stability by 
SAM.

Pey AL(1), Majtan T, Sanchez-Ruiz JM, Kraus JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Chemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Granada, 
Granada 18071, Spain. angelpey@ugr.es

CBS (cystathionine β-synthase) is a multidomain tetrameric enzyme essential in 
the regulation of homocysteine metabolism, whose activity is enhanced by the 
allosteric regulator SAM (S-adenosylmethionine). Missense mutations in CBS are 
the major cause of inherited HCU (homocystinuria). In the present study we apply 
a novel approach based on a combination of calorimetric methods, functional 
assays and kinetic modelling to provide structural and energetic insight into 
the effects of SAM on the stability and activity of WT (wild-type) CBS and seven 
HCU-causing mutants. We found two sets of SAM-binding sites in the C-terminal 
regulatory domain with different structural and energetic features: a high 
affinity set of two sites, probably involved in kinetic stabilization of the 
regulatory domain, and a low affinity set of four sites, which are involved in 
the enzyme activation. We show that the regulatory domain displays a low kinetic 
stability in WT CBS, which is further decreased in many HCU-causing mutants. We 
propose that the SAM-induced stabilization may play a key role in modulating 
steady-state levels of WT and mutant CBS in vivo. Our strategy may be valuable 
for understanding ligand effects on proteins with a complex architecture and 
their role in human genetic diseases and for the development of novel 
pharmacological strategies.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20120731
PMID: 22985361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
