---
pmid: '16854592'
title: Expression, purification, and characterization of human and rat acetyl coenzyme
  A carboxylase (ACC) isozymes.
authors:
- Cheng D
- Chu CH
- Chen L
- Feder JN
- Mintier GA
- Wu Y
- Cook JW
- Harpel MR
- Locke GA
- An Y
- Tamura JK
journal: Protein Expr Purif
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.06.005
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Expression, purification, and characterization of human and rat acetyl coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC) isozymes.
**Authors:** Cheng D, Chu CH, Chen L, Feder JN, Mintier GA, Wu Y, Cook JW, Harpel MR, Locke GA, An Y, Tamura JK
**Journal:** Protein Expr Purif (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pep.2006.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pep.2006.06.005)

## Abstract

1. Protein Expr Purif. 2007 Jan;51(1):11-21. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.06.005. Epub
 2006 Jun 10.

Expression, purification, and characterization of human and rat acetyl coenzyme 
A carboxylase (ACC) isozymes.

Cheng D(1), Chu CH, Chen L, Feder JN, Mintier GA, Wu Y, Cook JW, Harpel MR, 
Locke GA, An Y, Tamura JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obesity and Metabolic Research, Pharmaceutical Research 
Institute, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, PO Box 5400, Princeton, NJ 08543-5400, 
USA. dong.cheng@bms.com

Acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) carboxylase isozyme 1 (ACC1) and acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase isozyme 2 (ACC2) are critical for de novo fatty acid synthesis and 
for the regulation of beta-oxidation. Emerging evidence indicates that one or 
both isozymes might be therapeutic targets for the treatment of obesity, type 2 
diabetes, and dyslipidemia. One of the major obstacles in the field is the lack 
of readily-available source of recombinant human ACC enzymes to support 
systematic drug discovery efforts. Here, we describe an efficient and optimal 
protocol for expressing and isolating recombinant mammalian ACCs with high yield 
and purity. The resultant human ACC2, human ACC1, and rat ACC2 possess high 
specific activities, are properly biotinylated, and exhibit kinetic parameters 
very similar to the native ACC enzymes. We believe that the current study paves 
a road to a systematic approach for drug design revolving around the ACC 
inhibition mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2006.06.005
PMID: 16854592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
