---
pmid: '12716909'
title: CR6-interacting factor 1 interacts with Gadd45 family proteins and modulates
  the cell cycle.
authors:
- Chung HK
- Yi YW
- Jung NC
- Kim D
- Suh JM
- Kim H
- Park KC
- Song JH
- Kim DW
- Hwang ES
- Yoon SH
- Bae YS
- Kim JM
- Bae I
- Shong M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M212835200
---

# CR6-interacting factor 1 interacts with Gadd45 family proteins and modulates the cell cycle.
**Authors:** Chung HK, Yi YW, Jung NC, Kim D, Suh JM, Kim H, Park KC, Song JH, Kim DW, Hwang ES, Yoon SH, Bae YS, Kim JM, Bae I, Shong M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M212835200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M212835200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 25;278(30):28079-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M212835200. Epub 
2003 Apr 25.

CR6-interacting factor 1 interacts with Gadd45 family proteins and modulates the 
cell cycle.

Chung HK(1), Yi YW, Jung NC, Kim D, Suh JM, Kim H, Park KC, Song JH, Kim DW, 
Hwang ES, Yoon SH, Bae YS, Kim JM, Bae I, Shong M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Cell Biology, National Research Laboratory Program, 
Chungnam National University School of Medicine, Daejeon 301-721 Korea.

The Gadd45 family of proteins includes Gadd45alpha, MyD118/Gadd45beta, and 
CR6/OIG37/Gadd45gamma. These proteins play important roles in maintaining 
genomic stability and in regulating the cell cycle. This study reports the 
cloning of a novel protein called CR6-interacting factor 1 (CRIF1) which 
interacts with Gadd45alpha, MyD118/Gadd45beta, and CR6/OIG37/Gadd45gamma. CRIF1 
binds specifically to the Gadd45 family proteins, as determined by an in vitro 
glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay and an in vivo mammalian cell 
two-hybrid assay along with coimmunoprecipitation assays. CRIF1 mRNA is highly 
expressed in the thyroid gland, heart, lymph nodes, trachea, and adrenal 
tissues. CRIF1 localizes exclusively to the nucleus and colocalizes with 
Gadd45gamma. Recombinant CRIF1 inhibits the histone H1 kinase activity of 
immunoprecipitated Cdc2-cyclin B1 and Cdk2-cyclin E, and the inhibitory effects 
were additive with Gadd45 proteins. Overexpression of CRIF1 increases the 
percentage of cells in G1, decreases the percentage of cells in S phase, and 
suppresses growth in NIH3T3 cells. The down-regulation of endogenous CRIF1 by 
the transfection of the small interfering RNA duplexes resulted in the 
inactivation of Rb by phosphorylation and decreased the G1 phase cell 
populations. Expression of CRIF1 is barely detectable in adrenal adenoma and 
papillary thyroid cancer and much lower than in adjacent normal tissue. The 
results presented here suggest that CRIF1 is a novel nuclear protein that 
interacts with Gadd45 and may play a role in negative regulation of cell cycle 
progression and cell growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M212835200
PMID: 12716909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
