---
pmid: '9245697'
title: Interaction of human angiogenin with copper modulates angiogenin binding to
  endothelial cells.
authors:
- Soncin F
- Guitton JD
- Cartwright T
- Badet J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1997.7018
---

# Interaction of human angiogenin with copper modulates angiogenin binding to endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Soncin F, Guitton JD, Cartwright T, Badet J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1997.7018](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1997.7018)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jul 30;236(3):604-10. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1997.7018.

Interaction of human angiogenin with copper modulates angiogenin binding to 
endothelial cells.

Soncin F(1), Guitton JD, Cartwright T, Badet J.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité 1813, Institut National 
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Université Paris XII-Val de Marne, 
Créteil, France.

Angiogenin is a potent inducer of blood-vessel formation with ribonucleolytic 
activity. Angiogenin binds to high affinity endothelial cell receptors and with 
lower affinity to extracellular matrix components. Here we report the effect of 
copper and zinc on these interactions. There was a 4.3-fold increase in 
angiogenin binding to calf pulmonary artery endothelial cells in the presence of 
Cu2+ in vitro. A 3.8-fold increase was observed with Zn2+, whereas Ni2+, Co2+, 
or Li+ had no effect. Specific angiogenin binding to the lower affinity matrix 
sites was increased by 2.7- and 1.9-fold in the presence of Cu2+ and Zn2+ 
respectively. Metal ion affinity chromatography and atomic absorption 
spectrometry were used to show the direct interaction of angiogenin with copper 
and zinc ions. Angiogenin bound 2.4 mol of copper per mole of protein. We 
suggest that copper, a modulator of angiogenesis in vivo, may be involved in the 
regulation of the biological activity of angiogenin.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1997.7018
PMID: 9245697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
