---
pmid: '14656219'
title: Glycoproteins VI and Ib-IX-V stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of tyrosine
  kinase Syk and phospholipase Cgamma2 at distinct sites.
authors:
- Suzuki-Inoue K
- Wilde JI
- Andrews RK
- Auger JM
- Siraganian RP
- Sekiya F
- Rhee SG
- Watson SP
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1224016
doi: 10.1042/BJ20031430
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Glycoproteins VI and Ib-IX-V stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of tyrosine kinase Syk and phospholipase Cgamma2 at distinct sites.
**Authors:** Suzuki-Inoue K, Wilde JI, Andrews RK, Auger JM, Siraganian RP, Sekiya F, Rhee SG, Watson SP
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20031430](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20031430)
**PMC:** [PMC1224016](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1224016/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Mar 15;378(Pt 3):1023-9. doi: 10.1042/BJ20031430.

Glycoproteins VI and Ib-IX-V stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of tyrosine 
kinase Syk and phospholipase Cgamma2 at distinct sites.

Suzuki-Inoue K(1), Wilde JI, Andrews RK, Auger JM, Siraganian RP, Sekiya F, Rhee 
SG, Watson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 
3QT, UK. katsuei@yamanashi.ac.jp

Glycoproteins GPVI and GPIb-IX-V stimulate robust tyrosine phosphorylation of 
Syk and PLCg2 (phospholipase Cg2) in washed platelets, but only the former 
stimulates pronounced activation of phospholipase. Using phospho-specific 
antibodies, we demonstrate that GPVI, but not GPIb-IX-V, stimulates significant 
tyrosine phosphorylation of Syk at the autophosphorylation site pY525/526, a 
marker of Syk activity. In addition, GPVI stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of 
PLCg2 at Tyr753 and Tyr759, whereas GPIb-IX-V only induces significant 
phosphorylation at Tyr753. Both receptors stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of 
Btk at the regulatory Tyr223 and Tyr551. Syk and Btk phosphorylate peptides from 
PLCg2 containing Tyr753 and Tyr759 respectively, suggesting that they may 
stimulate phosphorylation at these sites in phospholipase. Studies using 
PLCg2-deficient platelets demonstrated that phospholipase is not required for 
the activation of integrin aIIbb3 by GPIb-IX-V. Our results demonstrate 
fundamental differences between GPVI and GPIb-IX-V in the regulation of tyrosine 
phosphorylation of Syk and PLCg2 consistent with the functional impairment of 
phospholipase in signalling by GPIb-IX-V.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20031430
PMCID: PMC1224016
PMID: 14656219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
