---
pmid: '28641114'
title: A Critical Role of Presynaptic Cadherin/Catenin/p140Cap Complexes in Stabilizing
  Spines and Functional Synapses in the Neocortex.
authors:
- Li MY
- Miao WY
- Wu QZ
- He SJ
- Yan G
- Yang Y
- Liu JJ
- Taketo MM
- Yu X
journal: Neuron
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.022
---

# A Critical Role of Presynaptic Cadherin/Catenin/p140Cap Complexes in Stabilizing Spines and Functional Synapses in the Neocortex.
**Authors:** Li MY, Miao WY, Wu QZ, He SJ, Yan G, Yang Y, Liu JJ, Taketo MM, Yu X
**Journal:** Neuron (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.022)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2017 Jun 21;94(6):1155-1172.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.022.

A Critical Role of Presynaptic Cadherin/Catenin/p140Cap Complexes in Stabilizing 
Spines and Functional Synapses in the Neocortex.

Li MY(1), Miao WY(2), Wu QZ(2), He SJ(2), Yan G(3), Yang Y(4), Liu JJ(5), Taketo 
MM(6), Yu X(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, CAS 
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, CAS 
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology and CAS Center for Excellence in Brain 
Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; State Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and 
Developmental Biology and CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(6)Division of Experimental Therapeutics, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida Konoé-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(7)Institute of Neuroscience and State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, CAS 
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; School of Life Science and Technology, 
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 201210, China. Electronic address: 
yuxiang@ion.ac.cn.

The formation of functional synapses requires coordinated assembly of 
presynaptic transmitter release machinery and postsynaptic trafficking of 
functional receptors and scaffolds. Here, we demonstrate a critical role of 
presynaptic cadherin/catenin cell adhesion complexes in stabilizing functional 
synapses and spines in the developing neocortex. Importantly, presynaptic 
expression of stabilized β-catenin in either layer (L) 4 excitatory neurons or 
L2/3 pyramidal neurons significantly upregulated excitatory synaptic 
transmission and dendritic spine density in L2/3 pyramidal neurons, while its 
sparse postsynaptic expression in L2/3 neurons had no such effects. In addition, 
presynaptic β-catenin expression enhanced release probability of glutamatergic 
synapses. Newly identified β-catenin-interacting protein p140Cap is required in 
the presynaptic locus for mediating these effects. Together, our results 
demonstrate that cadherin/catenin complexes stabilize functional synapses and 
spines through anterograde signaling in the neocortex and provide important 
molecular evidence for a driving role of presynaptic components in spinogenesis 
in the neocortex.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.022
PMID: 28641114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
