---
pmid: '20440841'
title: Crystal structures of truncated alphaA and alphaB crystallins reveal structural
  mechanisms of polydispersity important for eye lens function.
authors:
- Laganowsky A
- Benesch JL
- Landau M
- Ding L
- Sawaya MR
- Cascio D
- Huang Q
- Robinson CV
- Horwitz J
- Eisenberg D
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2868245
doi: 10.1002/pro.380
---

# Crystal structures of truncated alphaA and alphaB crystallins reveal structural mechanisms of polydispersity important for eye lens function.
**Authors:** Laganowsky A, Benesch JL, Landau M, Ding L, Sawaya MR, Cascio D, Huang Q, Robinson CV, Horwitz J, Eisenberg D
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pro.380](https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.380)
**PMC:** [PMC2868245](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2868245/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2010 May;19(5):1031-43. doi: 10.1002/pro.380.

Crystal structures of truncated alphaA and alphaB crystallins reveal structural 
mechanisms of polydispersity important for eye lens function.

Laganowsky A(1), Benesch JL, Landau M, Ding L, Sawaya MR, Cascio D, Huang Q, 
Robinson CV, Horwitz J, Eisenberg D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and 
Proteomics, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Small heat shock proteins alphaA and alphaB crystallin form highly polydisperse 
oligomers that frustrate protein aggregation, crystallization, and amyloid 
formation. Here, we present the crystal structures of truncated forms of bovine 
alphaA crystallin (AAC(59-163)) and human alphaB crystallin (ABC(68-162)), both 
containing the C-terminal extension that functions in chaperone action and 
oligomeric assembly. In both structures, the C-terminal extensions swap into 
neighboring molecules, creating runaway domain swaps. This interface, termed DS, 
enables crystallin polydispersity because the C-terminal extension is 
palindromic and thereby allows the formation of equivalent residue interactions 
in both directions. That is, we observe that the extension binds in opposite 
directions at the DS interfaces of AAC(59-163) and ABC(68-162). A second dimeric 
interface, termed AP, also enables polydispersity by forming an antiparallel 
beta sheet with three distinct registration shifts. These two polymorphic 
interfaces enforce polydispersity of alpha crystallin. This evolved 
polydispersity suggests molecular mechanisms for chaperone action and for 
prevention of crystallization, both necessary for transparency of eye lenses.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.380
PMCID: PMC2868245
PMID: 20440841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
