---
pmid: '16892051'
title: Interactions between E2F1 and SirT1 regulate apoptotic response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Wang C
- Chen L
- Hou X
- Li Z
- Kabra N
- Ma Y
- Nemoto S
- Finkel T
- Gu W
- Cress WD
- Chen J
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1468
---

# Interactions between E2F1 and SirT1 regulate apoptotic response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Wang C, Chen L, Hou X, Li Z, Kabra N, Ma Y, Nemoto S, Finkel T, Gu W, Cress WD, Chen J
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1468](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1468)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;8(9):1025-31. doi: 10.1038/ncb1468. Epub 2006 Aug 6.

Interactions between E2F1 and SirT1 regulate apoptotic response to DNA damage.

Wang C(1), Chen L, Hou X, Li Z, Kabra N, Ma Y, Nemoto S, Finkel T, Gu W, Cress 
WD, Chen J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Oncology Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research 
Institute, 12902 Magnolia Drive, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

The nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent deacetylase Sir2 (silent 
information regulator 2) regulates gene silencing in yeast and promotes lifespan 
extension during caloric restriction. The mammalian homologue of Sir2 (SirT1) 
regulates p53, NF-kappaB and Forkhead transcription factors, and is implicated 
in stress response. This report shows that the cell-cycle and apoptosis 
regulator E2F1 induces SirT1 expression at the transcriptional level. 
Furthermore, SirT1 binds to E2F1 and inhibits E2F1 activities, forming a 
negative feedback loop. Knockdown of SirT1 by small interference RNA (siRNA) 
increases E2F1 transcriptional and apoptotic functions. DNA damage by etoposide 
causes E2F1-dependent induction of SirT1 expression and knockdown of SirT1 
increases sensitivity to etoposide. These results reveal a mutual regulation 
between E2F1 and SirT1 that affects cellular sensitivity to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1468
PMID: 16892051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
