---
pmid: '11781842'
title: The Bloom syndrome protein interacts and cooperates with p53 in regulation
  of transcription and cell growth control.
authors:
- Garkavtsev IV
- Kley N
- Grigorian IA
- Gudkov AV
journal: Oncogene
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205120
---

# The Bloom syndrome protein interacts and cooperates with p53 in regulation of transcription and cell growth control.
**Authors:** Garkavtsev IV, Kley N, Grigorian IA, Gudkov AV
**Journal:** Oncogene (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205120](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205120)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2001 Dec 13;20(57):8276-80. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205120.

The Bloom syndrome protein interacts and cooperates with p53 in regulation of 
transcription and cell growth control.

Garkavtsev IV(1), Kley N, Grigorian IA, Gudkov AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Bloom syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with mutations in 
BLM gene encoding protein that belongs to the family of DNA helicases. It is 
characterized by predisposition to cancer, immunodeficiency, high sensitivity to 
UV and genomic instability of somatic cells. Here we show physical and 
functional cooperation between BLM and p53 proteins. Ectopic expression of BLM 
causes anti-proliferative effect in p53 wild type, but not in p53-deficient 
cells; p53-mediated transactivation is attenuated in primary fibroblasts from 
Bloom syndrome patients. BLM and p53 proteins physically interact in the cells 
as demonstrated in yeast and mammalian two-hybrid systems; interaction sites are 
mapped to 237-272 aa residues of BML and 285-340 aa of p53. Ectopic expression 
of the fragment of wild type BML containing p53-interactive domain suppresses 
p53-mediated transcription and interferes with p53-mediated growth inhibition. 
These observations indicate that BLM might be an important component of p53 
function and suggest that Bloom Syndrome phenotype may in part be the result of 
the deregulation of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205120
PMID: 11781842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
