---
pmid: '30352685'
title: Stasimon/Tmem41b localizes to mitochondria-associated ER membranes and is essential
  for mouse embryonic development.
authors:
- Van Alstyne M
- Lotti F
- Dal Mas A
- Area-Gomez E
- Pellizzoni L
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6242727
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.073
---

# Stasimon/Tmem41b localizes to mitochondria-associated ER membranes and is essential for mouse embryonic development.
**Authors:** Van Alstyne M, Lotti F, Dal Mas A, Area-Gomez E, Pellizzoni L
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.073](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.073)
**PMC:** [PMC6242727](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6242727/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2018 Nov 30;506(3):463-470. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.073. Epub 2018 Oct 22.

Stasimon/Tmem41b localizes to mitochondria-associated ER membranes and is 
essential for mouse embryonic development.

Van Alstyne M(1), Lotti F(1), Dal Mas A(1), Area-Gomez E(2), Pellizzoni L(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, Columbia University, New York, 
NY, 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, 10032, USA.
(2)Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, Columbia University, New York, 
NY, 10032, USA; Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, NY, 
10032, USA.
(3)Center for Motor Neuron Biology and Disease, Columbia University, New York, 
NY, 10032, USA; Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, 10032, USA. Electronic address: lp2284@cumc.columbia.edu.

Stasimon (also known as Tmem41b) is an evolutionarily conserved transmembrane 
protein first identified for its contribution to motor system dysfunction in 
animal models of the childhood neurodegenerative disease spinal muscular atrophy 
(SMA). Stasimon was shown to be required for normal neurotransmission in the 
motor circuit of Drosophila larvae and proper development of motor axons in 
zebrafish embryos as well as to suppress analogous neuronal phenotypes in SMA 
models of these organisms. However, the subcellular localization and molecular 
functions of Stasimon are poorly understood. Here, we combined 
immunoprecipitation with mass spectrometry to characterize the Stasimon 
interactome in mammalian cells, which reveals association with components of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria, and the COPI vesicle trafficking 
machinery. Expanding on the interaction results, we used subcellular 
fractionation studies and super-resolution microscopy to identify Stasimon as an 
ER-resident protein that localizes at mitochondria-associated ER membranes 
(MAM), functionally specialized contact sites between ER and mitochondria 
membranes. Lastly, through characterization of novel knockout mice, we show that 
Stasimon is an essential gene for mouse embryonic development. Together, these 
findings identify Stasimon as a novel transmembrane protein component of the MAM 
with an essential requirement for mammalian development.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.10.073
PMCID: PMC6242727
PMID: 30352685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.
