---
pmid: '22509046'
title: Immunotoxin resistance via reversible methylation of the DPH4 promoter is a
  unique survival strategy.
authors:
- Wei H
- Xiang L
- Wayne AS
- Chertov O
- FitzGerald DJ
- Bera TK
- Pastan I
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3345006
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1204523109
---

# Immunotoxin resistance via reversible methylation of the DPH4 promoter is a unique survival strategy.
**Authors:** Wei H, Xiang L, Wayne AS, Chertov O, FitzGerald DJ, Bera TK, Pastan I
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1204523109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1204523109)
**PMC:** [PMC3345006](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3345006/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 1;109(18):6898-903. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1204523109. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Immunotoxin resistance via reversible methylation of the DPH4 promoter is a 
unique survival strategy.

Wei H(1), Xiang L, Wayne AS, Chertov O, FitzGerald DJ, Bera TK, Pastan I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

HA22 is a recombinant immunotoxin composed of an anti-CD22 Fv fused to a portion 
of Pseudomonas exotoxin A. HA22 produced a high rate of complete remissions in 
drug-resistant hairy cell leukemia and has a lower response rate in pediatric 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To understand why patients with ALL have 
poorer responses, we isolated an ALL cell line that is resistant to killing by 
HA22. The resistance is unstable; without HA22 the cells revert to HA22 
sensitivity in 4 mo. We showed that in the resistant cell line, HA22 is unable 
to ADP ribosylate and inactivate elongation factor-2 (EF2), owing to a low level 
of DPH4 mRNA and protein, which prevents diphthamide biosynthesis and renders 
EF2 refractory to HA22. Analysis of the promoter region of the DPH4 gene shows 
that the CpG island was hypomethylated in the HA22-sensitive cells, heavily 
methylated in the resistant cells, and reverted to low methylation in the 
revertant cells. Our data show that immunotoxin resistance is associated with 
reversible CpG island methylation and silencing of DPH4 gene transcription. 
Incubation of sensitive cells with the methylation inhibitor 5-azacytidine 
prevented the emergence of resistant cells, suggesting that this agent in 
combination with HA22 may be useful in the treatment of some cases of ALL.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1204523109
PMCID: PMC3345006
PMID: 22509046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

HA22 is a recombinant immunotoxin composed of an anti-CD22 Fv fused to a portion of Pseudomonas exotoxin A. HA22 produced a high rate of complete remissions in drug-resistant hairy cell leukemia and has a lower response rate in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To understand why patients with ALL have poorer responses, we isolated an ALL cell line that is resistant to killing by HA22. The resistance is unstable; without HA22 the cells revert to HA22 sensitivity in 4 mo. We showed that in the resistant cell line, HA22 is unable to ADP ribosylate and inactivate elongation factor-2 (EF2), owing to a low level of DPH4 mRNA and protein, which prevents diphthamide biosynthesis and renders EF2 refractory to HA22. Analysis of the promoter region of the DPH4 gene shows that the CpG island was hypomethylated in the HA22-sensitive cells, heavily methylated in the resistant cells, and reverted to low methylation in the revertant cells. Our data show that immunotoxin resistance is associated with reversible CpG island methylation and silencing of DPH4 gene transcription. Incubation of sensitive cells with the methylation inhibitor 5-azacytidine prevented the emergence of resistant cells, suggesting that this agent in combination with HA22 may be useful in the treatment of some cases of ALL.

Results

We isolated an HA22-resistant cell line by intermittent exposure to HA22 ( Materials and Methods ). Cytotoxicity assays showed that the parental cell line was sensitive to HA22, with an IC 50 of 1.1 ng/mL ( Fig. 1 A ), whereas the resistant line (HAL-01-R) was not killed by 100 ng/mL HA22 ( Fig. 1 A ). Further, HAL-01-R cells exhibited cross-resistance to diphtheria toxin and immunotoxin HB21-PE40 that targets the human transferrin receptor ( Fig. 1 B ) but was sensitive to two other protein synthesis inhibitors, cycloheximide and ricin ( Fig. 1 B ). The resistant cell line was maintained for several months in HA22 and had approximately the same growth rate as the parental cells ( Fig. 1 C ). When the resistant line was grown without HA22, the cells slowly reverted to sensitivity ( Fig. 1 D ). After 120 d the IC 50 was 9.5 ng/mL.

To elucidate the mechanism of resistance, we analyzed several steps in the immunotoxin pathway. We measured the number of CD22 binding sites on the cell surface and found that there was no decrease in CD22 expression ( Fig. 2 A ). We measured HA22 internalization by flow cytometry using HA22 labeled with Alexa 647 and found that the rates of HA22 internalization were not decreased (and actually were slightly increased) in the resistant cell line, as was the total amount accumulated ( Fig. 2 B ). These data show that resistance is not due to a defect in binding or internalization of HA22.

The next step in the immunotoxin pathway that can be accurately measured is the inactivation of EF2, which leads to inhibition of protein synthesis. Fig. 2 C shows that 3 H-leucine incorporation was not reduced by HA22 in the resistant cells, indicating that either the toxin did not reach the cytosol or that EF2 could not be inactivated by the toxin. There is no assay that measures the translocation of the toxin fragment that contains the ADP ribosylation activity into the cytosol. Instead, we determined if cellular EF2 could function as a substrate for toxin-mediated ADP-ribosylation. We added HA22 and 6-biotin-17-NAD to cell-free extracts prepared from sensitive or resistant cells and probed for biotin-ADP-ribose associated with EF2. Using this assay, it is possible to compare the extent of EF2 modification from each cell type. The Western blot in Fig. 2 D shows that HA22 can catalyze the incorporation of ADP ribose into EF2 in sensitive HAL-01 cells but not in resistant cells. The amount of EF2 was unchanged. Because His715 must be modified to diphthamide to be ADP ribosylated by toxin, this finding indicates that either a defect in diphthamide biosynthesis or a modification of amino acids in the diphthamide loop causes the resistance. We prepared EF2 cDNA and sequenced the ORF from resistant cells and did not find any mutations.

We measured the levels of mRNA that encode each of the five diphthamide enzymes (DPH1–5) by quantitative PCR (qPCR) and found that only the levels of DPH4 mRNA were substantially reduced in resistant cells ( Fig. 3 A and Table S1 ). Immunoblots showed that the level of DPH4 protein was also substantially reduced ( Fig. 3 B ). To show that low DPH4 levels alone can cause toxin resistance, we used shRNA to knock down DPH4 mRNA and protein in HAL-01 cells ( Fig. 3 C and D ) and found a reduction in the amount of EF2 that could be ADP ribosylated ( Fig. 3 E ) and an increase in resistance to killing by HA22 ( Fig. 3 F ). These findings show that a reduction in DPH4 protein is sufficient to cause HA22 resistance.

To determine whether His-715 of EF2 was modified to diphthamide in the resistant cells, we isolated EF2 by diethylaminoethyl (DEAE) chromatography and gel electrophoresis and digested the EF2 band by trypsin. The peptides were analyzed by MALDI-MS. Fig. 4 shows the results for selected peptides from cells. MS/MS analysis of m/z 1745.861 from HAL-01-R cells identifies a peptide (FDVHDVTLHADAIHR) that contains an unmodified His-715 residue that was not found in the analysis of m/z 1745.844 from HAL-01 cells. Instead, analysis of m/z 1828.908 and 1836.179 from HAL-01 cells demonstrated that both ions correspond to a diphthamide-modified peptide but with loss of a trimethylamino group that could have occurred because of an elimination reaction ( 19 ) during protein isolation, in the case of m/z 1828.908 ( Fig. S1 ), and during MALDI analysis, in the case of the metastable ion 1836.179. Thus, direct sequence analysis of EF2 in the resistant cells shows it is not modified by diphthamide.

DNA Hypermethylation in the DPH4 Promoter Region Resulted in DPH4 Down-Regulation.

Drug resistance can occur by multiple mechanisms ( 20 ). Because the resistant cell line reverted to sensitive when grown without HA22, it seemed likely that the resistance was due to a regulatory or epigenetic change and not a structural mutation. Because the ALL cell line is diploid, it seemed unlikely that the DPH4 locus could be reversibly inactivated by a single mutation affecting the transcription of the gene. A common epigenetic change in cancer cells is CpG methylation in the promoter region that diminishes transcription of the affected gene.

The sequence of the promoter region of DPH4 is shown in Fig. S2 . It contains a single CpG island, which spans the transcriptional start site. The methylation status of the promoter region of the parental sensitive line (HAL-01), the resistant line (HAL-01-R), and the immunotoxin sensitive revertant line (HAL-01-Rev) is shown in Fig. 5 and Table S2 . CpG residues in the region −134 to +55 relative to the ATG were hypomethylated in the sensitive cells, hypermethylated in resistant cells, and hypomethylated in the revertant cells ( Fig. 5 and Table S2 ). Thus, the methylation status was strongly correlated with the levels of DPH4 mRNA and protein. To assess whether DNA hypermethylation was a global change or specific for the DPH4 promoter, we analyzed the methylation status of 24 gene promoters that are reported to be methylated in a variety of leukemia and lymphoma cell lines and found that methylation status did not correlate with the status of the DPH4 gene ( Fig. S3 ). Thus, changes in DPH4 CpG methylation are gene specific.

CpG methylation is catalyzed by three DNMTs ( 17 ). Because miRNA-126 and miRNA-29 can regulate DNA methylation by targeting DNMT1 and DNMT3 ( 21 , 22 ), we analyzed miRNAs from sensitive and resistant cells with an Affymetrix miRNA array system. We found that the level of miR-126 was decreased 14.3-fold in the resistant line ( Table S3 ) and that levels of other miRNAs varied but not in any systematic way. Recently it was shown that high expression of miR-126 inversely correlates with DNMT1 levels in CD4 + T cells and that miR-126 can inhibit DNMT1 translation by interacting with the 3′ untranslated region of the mRNA ( 21 ). To investigate whether the decreased level of miR-126 in resistant cells might have caused an increase in DNMT1 and contributed to the increased methylation at the DPH4 promoter, we measured DNMT1 RNA levels and found no difference between sensitive and resistant cell lines.

Discussion

We describe here the isolation and characterization of an ALL cell line with reversible resistance to the cytotoxic effects of immunotoxin HA22 through an epigenetic mechanism. HA22 is composed of an anti-CD22 Fv linked to a toxic fragment of PE38 ( 6 , 13 , 14 ). We established that the resistance was due to low levels of DPH4 mRNA and protein. Without DPH4 the cell cannot modify His-715 of EF2 to diphthamide, and EF2 cannot be ADP ribosylated and inactivated by PE38, diphtheria toxin, or immunotoxins containing these toxins. We also showed that the CpG island in the DPH4 promoter region is hypomethylated in sensitive cells, which express DPH4, and hypermethylated in resistant cells, which do not have a diphthamide residue at His-715. Revertants return to a hypomethylated state and toxin sensitivity. Although there are many studies showing changes in CpG methylation patterns between drug-sensitive and -resistant cells ( 26 – 30 ), we are unaware of a study in which the methylation status and expression pattern of a specific gene is the basis of drug resistance.

There are many reports showing that drug resistance can be reversed by the treatment of cells or tumors with the demethylating agents azacytidine or 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) ( 31 ). Most studies describe an association of demethylating agent treatment with increased sensitivity to a variety of chemotherapeutic agents and do not establish the mechanism of action. Plumb et al. ( 27 ) have studied cisplatin-resistant ovarian and colon cancer xenografts and showed that the expression of hMLH, a mismatch repair gene, is associated with the reversal of drug resistance upon treatment with azacytidine. Fulda et al. ( 28 ) reported that the decreased expression of caspase-8 and hypermethylation are correlated with drug resistance in Ewings tumors and that the resistance can be reversed by azacytidine. In our report we show that the ability of HA22 to kill cells via inactivation of EF2 is lost because of an epigenetic change in the extent of methylation within the promoter region of the DPH4 gene and that resistance is prevented by azacytidine treatment.

The mechanism of selective modification of the DPH4 promoter region is not known. Methylation of CpG islands is considered a dynamic process ( 32 ). Because we could isolate HA22-resistant cells at high (500 ng/mL) concentrations of HA22, we assume that there is not a slow increase in methylation that gives rise to the resistant phenotype, but instead that the promoter region is heavily methylated in a small number of ALL cells at all times and that these cells are HA22 resistant. These cells should not be detected in normal cell-killing experiments, in which the viability of a small number of cells is analyzed. However, when we used a large number of cells in the selection, we could isolate resistant cells. It would be of interest to be able to analyze the methylation status of single cells before exposure to HA22 to examine this hypothesis.

We are carrying out clinical trials with HA22 in chemotherapy-refractory HCL and ALL. In HCL, HA22 resistance is rarely seen, and the overall response rate approaches 90%, with more than 60% of patients at the highest dose achieving complete remissions ( 12 ). In ALL the response rate is significantly lower, and the complete responses not as durable ( 15 ). Drug resistance is an important cause of relapse in ALL, with multiple molecular mechanisms that vary with the drug and the biologic subtype ( 33 – 35 ). Because the methylation inhibitor azacytidine prevented the development of HA22 resistance, this combination may prevent resistance in some ALL patients. Hypermethylation was demonstrated in subtypes of childhood ALL ( 36 , 37 ), and rare complete responses were reported after treatment with azacytidine and decitabine ( 38 , 39 ).

Modification of EF2 to diphthamide at residue 715 occurs in many eukaryotic organisms. It was suggested that the modification maintains the fidelity of translation but is clearly not required for the viability of cultured cells. Mice with inactivation of one DPH1 allele are viable but have an increased incidence of cancer; upon inactivation of both alleles viable progeny are not obtained ( 9 ). Likewise inactivation of both alleles of DPH3 and - 4 are embryonic lethal ( 10 , 11 ).

We used standard biochemical methods to show that the mutant cells could not make DPH4 RNA and protein and that HA22 could not catalyze the incorporation of NAD into the EF2 of mutant cells. To determine whether EF2 was modified by diphthamide we developed a method that used small-scale purification of EF2, trypsin digestion, and MS analysis and detected a peptide with unmodified His-715 in HA22-resistant cells and a diphthamide-modified peptide in normal cells. We will use this method to evaluate mechanisms of immunotoxin resistance in patients.
