---
pmid: '19719479'
title: Role of WRINKLED1 in the transcriptional regulation of glycolytic and fatty
  acid biosynthetic genes in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Baud S
- Wuillème S
- To A
- Rochat C
- Lepiniec L
journal: Plant J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04011.x
---

# Role of WRINKLED1 in the transcriptional regulation of glycolytic and fatty acid biosynthetic genes in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Baud S, Wuillème S, To A, Rochat C, Lepiniec L
**Journal:** Plant J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04011.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04011.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2009 Dec;60(6):933-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04011.x.

Role of WRINKLED1 in the transcriptional regulation of glycolytic and fatty acid 
biosynthetic genes in Arabidopsis.

Baud S(1), Wuillème S, To A, Rochat C, Lepiniec L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Semences, Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin, UMR204, 
INRA/AgroParisTech, F-78026 Versailles, France. sbaud@versailles.inra.fr

The WRINKLED1 (WRI1) protein is an important regulator of oil accumulation in 
maturing Arabidopsis seeds. WRI1 is a member of a plant-specific family of 
transcription factors (AP2/EREBP) that share either one or two copies of a 
DNA-binding domain called the AP2 domain. Here, it is shown that WRI1 acts as a 
transcriptional enhancer of genes involved in carbon metabolism in transgenic 
seeds overexpressing this transcription factor. PKp-beta1 and BCCP2, two genes 
encoding enzymes of the glycolysis and fatty acid biosynthetic pathway, 
respectively, have been chosen to investigate the regulatory action exerted by 
WRI1 over these pathways. Using the reporter gene uidA, it was possible to 
demonstrate in planta that WRI1 regulates the activity of both PKp-beta1 and 
BCCP2 promoters. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and yeast one-hybrid 
experiments showed that WRI1 was able to interact with the BCCP2 promoter. To 
further elucidate the regulatory mechanism controlling the transcription of 
these genes, functional dissections of PKp-beta1 and BCCP2 promoters were 
performed. Two enhancers, of 54 and 79 bp, respectively, have thus been isolated 
that are essential to direct the activity of these promoters in oil-accumulating 
tissues of the embryo. A consensus site is present in these enhancers as well as 
in other putative target promoters of WRI1. Loss of this consensus sequence in 
the BCPP2 promoter decreases both the strength of the interaction between WRI1 
and this promoter in yeast and the activity of the promoter in planta.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04011.x
PMID: 19719479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
