---
pmid: '10608844'
title: RA-GEF, a novel Rap1A guanine nucleotide exchange factor containing a Ras/Rap1A-associating
  domain, is conserved between nematode and humans.
authors:
- Liao Y
- Kariya K
- Hu CD
- Shibatohge M
- Goshima M
- Okada T
- Watari Y
- Gao X
- Jin TG
- Yamawaki-Kataoka Y
- Kataoka T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.53.37815
---

# RA-GEF, a novel Rap1A guanine nucleotide exchange factor containing a Ras/Rap1A-associating domain, is conserved between nematode and humans.
**Authors:** Liao Y, Kariya K, Hu CD, Shibatohge M, Goshima M, Okada T, Watari Y, Gao X, Jin TG, Yamawaki-Kataoka Y, Kataoka T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.53.37815](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.53.37815)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 31;274(53):37815-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.53.37815.

RA-GEF, a novel Rap1A guanine nucleotide exchange factor containing a 
Ras/Rap1A-associating domain, is conserved between nematode and humans.

Liao Y(1), Kariya K, Hu CD, Shibatohge M, Goshima M, Okada T, Watari Y, Gao X, 
Jin TG, Yamawaki-Kataoka Y, Kataoka T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology II, Kobe University School of Medicine, 7-5-1 
Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

A yeast two-hybrid screening for Ras-binding proteins in nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans has identified a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) containing a 
Ras/Rap1A-associating (RA) domain, termed Ce-RA-GEF. Both Ce-RA-GEF and its 
human counterpart Hs-RA-GEF possessed a PSD-95/DlgA/ZO-1 (PDZ) domain and a Ras 
exchanger motif (REM) domain in addition to the RA and GEF domains. They also 
contained a region homologous to a cyclic nucleotide monophosphate-binding 
domain, which turned out to be incapable of binding cAMP or cGMP. Although the 
REM and GEF domains are conserved with other GEFs acting on Ras family small 
GTP-binding proteins, the RA and PDZ domains are unseen in any of them. 
Hs-RA-GEF exhibited not only a GTP-dependent binding activity to Rap1A at its RA 
domain but also an activity to stimulate GDP/GTP exchange of Rap1A both in vitro 
and in vivo at the segment containing its REM and GEF domains. However, it did 
not exhibit any binding or GEF activity toward Ras. On the other hand, Ce-RA-GEF 
associated with and stimulated GDP/GTP exchange of both Ras and Rap1A. These 
results indicate that Ce-RA-GEF and Hs-RA-GEF define a novel class of Rap1A GEF 
molecules, which are conserved through evolution.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.53.37815
PMID: 10608844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
