---
pmid: '19666465'
title: 'Critical role for tetrahydrobiopterin recycling by dihydrofolate reductase
  in regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase coupling: relative importance
  of the de novo biopterin synthesis versus salvage pathways.'
authors:
- Crabtree MJ
- Tatham AL
- Hale AB
- Alp NJ
- Channon KM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2788863
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041483
---

# Critical role for tetrahydrobiopterin recycling by dihydrofolate reductase in regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase coupling: relative importance of the de novo biopterin synthesis versus salvage pathways.
**Authors:** Crabtree MJ, Tatham AL, Hale AB, Alp NJ, Channon KM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.041483](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.041483)
**PMC:** [PMC2788863](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2788863/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 9;284(41):28128-28136. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041483.
Epub  2009 Aug 7.

Critical role for tetrahydrobiopterin recycling by dihydrofolate reductase in 
regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase coupling: relative importance of 
the de novo biopterin synthesis versus salvage pathways.

Crabtree MJ(1), Tatham AL(1), Hale AB(1), Alp NJ(1), Channon KM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
keith.channon@cardiov.ox.ac.uk.

Tetrahyrobiopterin (BH4) is a required cofactor for the synthesis of nitric 
oxide by endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS), and BH4 bioavailability 
within the endothelium is a critical factor in regulating the balance between NO 
and superoxide production by eNOS (eNOS coupling). BH4 levels are determined by 
the activity of GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH), the rate-limiting enzyme in de 
novo BH4 biosynthesis. However, BH4 levels may also be influenced by oxidation, 
forming 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (BH2), which promotes eNOS uncoupling. Conversely, 
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) can regenerate BH4 from BH2, but the functional 
importance of DHFR in maintaining eNOS coupling remains unclear. We investigated 
the role of DHFR in regulating BH4 versus BH2 levels in endothelial cells and in 
cell lines expressing eNOS combined with tet-regulated GTPCH expression in order 
to compare the effects of low or high levels of de novo BH4 biosynthesis. 
Pharmacological inhibition of DHFR activity by methotrexate or genetic knockdown 
of DHFR protein by RNA interference reduced intracellular BH4 and increased BH2 
levels resulting in enzymatic uncoupling of eNOS, as indicated by increased 
eNOS-dependent superoxide but reduced NO production. In contrast to the 
decreased BH4:BH2 ratio induced by DHFR knockdown, GTPCH knockdown greatly 
reduced total biopterin levels but with no change in BH4:BH2 ratio. In cells 
expressing eNOS with low biopterin levels, DHFR inhibition or knockdown further 
diminished the BH4:BH2 ratio and exacerbated eNOS uncoupling. Taken together, 
these data reveal a key role for DHFR in eNOS coupling by maintaining the 
BH4:BH2 ratio, particularly in conditions of low total biopterin availability.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041483
PMCID: PMC2788863
PMID: 19666465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Tetrahyrobiopterin (BH4) is a required cofactor for the synthesis of nitric oxide by endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS), and BH4 bioavailability within the endothelium is a critical factor in regulating the balance between NO and superoxide production by eNOS (eNOS coupling). BH4 levels are determined by the activity of GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH), the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo BH4 biosynthesis. However, BH4 levels may also be influenced by oxidation, forming 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (BH2), which promotes eNOS uncoupling. Conversely, dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) can regenerate BH4 from BH2, but the functional importance of DHFR in maintaining eNOS coupling remains unclear. We investigated the role of DHFR in regulating BH4 versus BH2 levels in endothelial cells and in cell lines expressing eNOS combined with tet -regulated GTPCH expression in order to compare the effects of low or high levels of de novo BH4 biosynthesis. Pharmacological inhibition of DHFR activity by methotrexate or genetic knockdown of DHFR protein by RNA interference reduced intracellular BH4 and increased BH2 levels resulting in enzymatic uncoupling of eNOS, as indicated by increased eNOS-dependent superoxide but reduced NO production. In contrast to the decreased BH4:BH2 ratio induced by DHFR knockdown, GTPCH knockdown greatly reduced total biopterin levels but with no change in BH4:BH2 ratio. In cells expressing eNOS with low biopterin levels, DHFR inhibition or knockdown further diminished the BH4:BH2 ratio and exacerbated eNOS uncoupling. Taken together, these data reveal a key role for DHFR in eNOS coupling by maintaining the BH4:BH2 ratio, particularly in conditions of low total biopterin availability.

DISCUSSION

In this study we used both pharmacologic inhibition and genetic manipulation to determine the role of DHFR in the regulation of BH4 levels in sEnd.1 endothelial cells and in cell lines which express tetracycline-regulatable human GTCPH and an eNOS-GFP fusion construct, described previously ( 7 ). We reveal a key role for DHFR and the recycling pathway of BH4 biosynthesis in the maintenance of intracellular BH4 homeostasis. We also show that DHFR protein expression is an important factor in the preservation of eNOS coupling and subsequently the production of nitric oxide and superoxide. The major findings of this study are as follows. First, we demonstrate that endothelial cells contain substantial amounts of DHFR protein and that further augmentation of DHFR does not affect NO, BH4, or superoxide biosynthesis. Second, inhibition of DHFR activity or reduction of DHFR protein levels (after exposure to MTX- or DHFR-specific siRNA, respectively) results in BH4 oxidation to BH2, decreased production of NO, and elevation of eNOS-derived superoxide, indicative of eNOS uncoupling. Third, that this initiation of eNOS uncoupling by inhibition/knockdown of DHFR protein activity is exacerbated in conditions where BH4 is low or limiting. Finally, we reveal that DHFR is protective against eNOS uncoupling, demonstrated when cells expressing abundant eNOS are exposed to MTX, particularly at low levels of GTPCH expression, where reduced cellular BH4 increases the susceptibility to eNOS uncoupling, including “self-induced” eNOS uncoupling resulting from eNOS-dependent BH4 oxidation. Taken together, our findings provide clear mechanistic evidence to support a critical role of the recycling pathway in the regulation of cellular BH4 homeostasis and eNOS coupling, even in the absence of vascular disease or exogenous oxidative stress.

Biosynthesis of BH4, initially characterized by its cofactor role in reactions catalyzed by the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases, proceeds via the de novo pathway involving enzymes GTPCH, 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase, and sepiapterin reductase ( Fig. 1 ) ( 18 ). As the rate-limiting enzyme in BH4 synthesis, GTPCH regulation takes place at the transcriptional and post-translational levels, with activity and mRNA shown to be induced by mediators such as interferon-γ, tumor necrosis factor-α, and lipopolysaccharide ( 19 – 21 ). Indeed, steady-state BH4 levels in cells and tissues have previously been shown to directly correlate with GTPCH mRNA levels. BH4, also a cofactor for NOS enzymes, is required for efficient oxidation of arginine and ultimately NO production. When BH4 availability is limiting, eNOS generates superoxide rather than NO, BH4 becomes oxidized to catalytically incompetent BH2, and a futile feed-forward cascade of BH4 destruction proceeds.

A BH2 reductase activity of DHFR was first observed in cell and tissue extracts. In a Chinese hamster ovary cell mutant lacking dihydrofolate reductase (DUKX-BII), endogenous formation of BH4 proceeds normally, but unlike the parent cells that express DHFR, extracts do not convert sepiapterin or BH2 to BH4 ( 22 ). These studies implicate the biopterin recycling pathway in the regulation of steady-state BH4 levels. Our data suggest that this BH2 reductase activity of DHFR is crucial in determining cellular BH4 homeostasis, NO bioavailability, and ultimately eNOS coupling. The marked accumulation of BH2, resulting from DHFR inhibition or knockdown, would compete with BH4 for eNOS binding, diminish NO production, and elevate the synthesis of eNOS-derived superoxide. The lack of any change in total biopterin levels by DHFR inhibition or knockdown suggests that de novo synthesis of BH4 is unaffected. In contrast, GTPCH-specific siRNA diminished total intracellular biopterins by more than 90% with no change in BH4:BH2 ratio. Although elevated production of eNOS-derived superoxide was observed in GTPCH siRNA-treated cells, previous data from our group has shown this to be because of the reduced BH4:eNOS stoichiometry, not a decrease in BH4:BH2 ratio ( 7 ). Combined knockdown of GTPCH and DHFR in sEnd.1 endothelial cells provides insight into a differing significance or importance of DHFR activity at high versus low levels of total biopterin. When combined, DHFR- and GTPCH-specific knockdown resulted in significantly elevated eNOS-derived superoxide when compared with either treatment alone, possibly as a result of the increased accumulation of BH2 and diminished ratio of BH4:BH2.

To complement this finding we specifically tested the role of DHFR in eNOS coupling using cell lines with tetracycline-regulated expression of human GTPCH and an eNOS-GFP fusion protein (GCH and GCH/eNOS cells) ( 7 ) that are characterized by a doxycycline-induced decrease in BH4:BH2 ratio in the presence but not the absence of eNOS. Herein, we demonstrate that this eNOS uncoupling is further exacerbated in the absence of DHFR activity, as evidenced by MTX-induced superoxide production in GCH/eNOS cells that are inhibitable by l -NAME. These data would suggest that GTPCH protein is the principal enzyme determining overall production of BH4, whereas DHFR maintains the BH4 pool in a reduced state, limiting the accumulation of oxidized biopterins. Because BH4 recycling by DHFR will simultaneously increase BH4 and reduce BH2, the impact of DHFR on BH4:BH2 ratio is substantial, conferring DHFR as having a potentially critical role in regulating eNOS coupling and ultimately eNOS function. Indeed, DHFR has recently been shown to have other regulatory effects on eNOS that may complement our observations. Michel and co-workers ( 8 ) have shown that perturbation of BH4 metabolism differentially affects BH4 levels and eNOS phosphorylation sites. Knockdown of DHFR by siRNA inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor-induced dephosphorylation of eNOS at Ser-116, an effect that is completely recovered by the addition of exogenous BH4. DHFR would have important consequences for the development of endothelial dysfunction in vascular disease states; our work supports and adds to the important observations of Chalupsky and Cai ( 2 ), who reported that oxidative stimuli such as angiotensin II can reduce DHFR activity in endothelial cells, leading to eNOS uncoupling.

Experiments using endothelium-targeted eNOS overexpressing mice have indicated that increased eNOS protein alone is not sufficient to maintain endothelial function in vascular disease. Kawashima and co-workers ( 23 ) reported that overexpression of eNOS in an apoE-KO background paradoxically resulted in increased vascular superoxide production, at least in part from uncoupled eNOS, which was prevented when supplementary BH4 was administered, or when these mice were further crossed with endothelium-targeted GTPCH transgenic mice ( 24 ). Although these data describe BH4 deficiency as a result of oxidation to BH2, evidence from this study and the observation that DHFR levels are diminished in mouse models of diabetes may suggest that insufficient recycling of BH2 to BH4 by DHFR is at least in part responsible, allowing the accumulation of BH2 and eNOS uncoupling to occur. Indeed, DHFR protein levels are significantly decreased in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice, and diabetes-induced impairment of myocyte function is exacerbated after treatment of the mice with MTX ( 25 ). Furthermore, because of the lack of DHFR activity, adult cardiac myocytes have limited capacity to synthesize BH4 after cytokine stimulation following treatment of rat cardiac allograft recipients with sepiapterin ( 26 ). An insufficiency of DHFR may also explain results obtained in hypercholesterolemic rabbits where prolonged exposure to sepiapterin impaired vasorelaxation despite repletion of endogenous BH4 ( 27 ).

Pharmacological supplementation of BH4 improves endothelium-dependent relaxations and augments NO-mediated effects on forearm blood flow in smokers and those with diabetes and elevated cholesterol ( 28 – 30 ). However, inefficient utilization of the administered BH4 remains problematic ( 31 , 32 ). Recent studies in cells and in vivo suggest that DHFR is required for biopterin transport. BH4 accumulation in various tissues after supplementation with BH4, BH2, or sepiapterin can be inhibited by MTX; indeed after MTX treatment the increase in tissue biopterin was almost exclusively BH2 ( 33 ). It was concluded that the elevation in BH4 by supplementation was mainly through a “salvage pathway” that included BH2 as the key intermediate in the production of BH4 through the action of dihydrofolate reductase. It is, therefore, likely that DHFR expression is critical to cells that do not contain the apparatus required for efficient synthesis of BH4. BH2 may be transported from cells such as endothelial cells, reduced back to BH4 by DHFR, and made available for the synthesis of NO or catecholamines.

NO homeostasis is tightly regulated, and sufficient NO production by the endothelium is required to maintain normal endothelial function. Because of the essential functions of DHFR and tetrahydrofolates, the DHFR inhibitor, MTX, has become the most widely used single therapeutic agent for cancer ( 1 , 2 ) and the preferred therapeutic for rheumatoid arthritis ( 34 , 35 ). Although little is known about the potential effects of MTX on the vasculature, one adverse effect of MTX treatment and DHFR inhibition may be because of the role of DHFR in regulating nitric oxide availability and biopterin metabolism. Perhaps patients receiving MTX therapy should be administered BH4 to supplement possibly deficient levels and maintain vascular function. Accordingly, therapeutic strategies to augment endothelial BH4 levels and/or suppress intracellular BH2 accumulation are rational approaches to maintain eNOS coupling in vascular conditions.
