---
pmid: '9324362'
title: 'Listeriosis in p47(phox-/-) and TRp55-/- mice: protection despite absence
  of ROI and susceptibility despite presence of RNI.'
authors:
- Endres R
- Luz A
- Schulze H
- Neubauer H
- Fütterer A
- Holland SM
- Wagner H
- Pfeffer K
journal: Immunity
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80363-5
---

# Listeriosis in p47(phox-/-) and TRp55-/- mice: protection despite absence of ROI and susceptibility despite presence of RNI.
**Authors:** Endres R, Luz A, Schulze H, Neubauer H, Fütterer A, Holland SM, Wagner H, Pfeffer K
**Journal:** Immunity (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80363-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80363-5)

## Abstract

1. Immunity. 1997 Sep;7(3):419-32. doi: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80363-5.

Listeriosis in p47(phox-/-) and TRp55-/- mice: protection despite absence of ROI 
and susceptibility despite presence of RNI.

Endres R(1), Luz A, Schulze H, Neubauer H, Fütterer A, Holland SM, Wagner H, 
Pfeffer K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technical 
University of Munich, Federal Republic of Germany.

The significance of host defense mechanisms in primary listeriosis in vivo is 
incompletely understood. Here, we show that tumor necrosis factor receptor 
p55-/- (TRp55-/-) mice are susceptible to Listeria monocytogenes infection in 
the presence of leukocyte recruitment, inflammatory cytokine production 
(including IFNgamma), nitric oxide synthesis, and oxidative burst formation. 
Mice deficient for oxidative burst (p47[phox-/-] mice) are relatively resistant 
to listeriosis. Despite activation of these antibacterial effector systems, 
TRp55-/- phagocytes in vivo are incapable of confining and eradicating L. 
monocytogenes inside phagolysosomes. Bone marrow chimeras reveal that for 
eradication of L. monocytogenes, TRp55 is crucially required only on cells from 
hematopoietic origin. Unexpectedly, prior to death, exocrine pancreatic cells 
undergo apoptosis in TRp55-/- mice. Collectively, these data demonstrate that in 
vivo, TRp55 initiates a protective, listericidal mechanism in phagocytes that 
differs from nitric oxide production and oxidative burst formation and that 
uncontrolled listeriosis results in necrotizing pancreatitis in TRp55-/- mice.

DOI: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)80363-5
PMID: 9324362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
