---
pmid: '8013906'
title: Identification of genes required for normal pheromone-induced cell polarization
  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Chenevert J
- Valtz N
- Herskowitz I
journal: Genetics
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1205909
doi: 10.1093/genetics/136.4.1287
---

# Identification of genes required for normal pheromone-induced cell polarization in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Chenevert J, Valtz N, Herskowitz I
**Journal:** Genetics (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1093/genetics/136.4.1287](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/136.4.1287)
**PMC:** [PMC1205909](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1205909/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 1994 Apr;136(4):1287-96. doi: 10.1093/genetics/136.4.1287.

Identification of genes required for normal pheromone-induced cell polarization 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Chenevert J(1), Valtz N, Herskowitz I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San 
Francisco 94143-0448.

In response to mating pheromones, cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
adopt a polarized "shmoo" morphology, in which the cytoskeleton and proteins 
involved in mating are localized to a cell-surface projection. This polarization 
is presumed to reflect the oriented morphogenesis that occurs between mating 
partners to facilitate cell and nuclear fusion. To identify genes involved in 
pheromone-induced cell polarization, we have isolated mutants defective in 
mating to an enfeebled partner and studied a subset of these mutants. The 34 
mutants of interest are proficient for pheromone production, arrest in response 
to pheromone, mate to wild-type strains, and exhibit normal cell polarity during 
vegetative growth. The mutants were divided into classes based on their 
morphological responses to mating pheromone. One class is unable to localize 
cell-surface growth in response to mating factor and instead enlarges in a 
uniform manner. These mutants harbor special alleles of genes required for cell 
polarization during vegetative growth, BEM1 and CDC24. Another class of mutants 
forms bilobed, peanut-like shapes when treated with pheromone and defines two 
genes, PEA1 and PEA2. PEA1 is identical to SPA2. A third class forms normally 
shaped but tiny shmoos and defines the gene TNY1. A final group of mutants 
exhibits apparently normal shmoo morphology. The nature of their mating defect 
is yet to be determined. We discuss the possible roles of these gene products in 
establishing cell polarity during mating.

DOI: 10.1093/genetics/136.4.1287
PMCID: PMC1205909
PMID: 8013906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
