---
pmid: '20551324'
title: Erk5 activation elicits a vasoprotective endothelial phenotype via induction
  of Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4).
authors:
- Ohnesorge N
- Viemann D
- Schmidt N
- Czymai T
- Spiering D
- Schmolke M
- Ludwig S
- Roth J
- Goebeler M
- Schmidt M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2924030
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.103127
---

# Erk5 activation elicits a vasoprotective endothelial phenotype via induction of Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4).
**Authors:** Ohnesorge N, Viemann D, Schmidt N, Czymai T, Spiering D, Schmolke M, Ludwig S, Roth J, Goebeler M, Schmidt M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.103127](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.103127)
**PMC:** [PMC2924030](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2924030/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 20;285(34):26199-210. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.103127. Epub
 2010 Jun 15.

Erk5 activation elicits a vasoprotective endothelial phenotype via induction of 
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4).

Ohnesorge N(1), Viemann D, Schmidt N, Czymai T, Spiering D, Schmolke M, Ludwig 
S, Roth J, Goebeler M, Schmidt M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Mannheim 68167, Germany.

The MEK5/Erk5 MAPK cascade has recently been implicated in the regulation of 
endothelial integrity and represents a candidate pathway mediating the 
beneficial effects of laminar flow, a major factor preventing vascular 
dysfunction and disease. Here we expressed a constitutively active mutant of 
MEK5 (MEK5D) to study the transcriptional and functional responses to Erk5 
activation in human primary endothelial cells. We provide evidence that 
constitutive Erk5 activation elicits an overall protective phenotype 
characterized by increased apoptosis resistance and a decreased angiogenic, 
migratory, and inflammatory potential. This is supported by bioinformatic 
microarray analysis, which uncovered a statistical overrepresentation of 
corresponding functional clusters as well as a significant induction of 
anti-thrombotic, hemostatic, and vasodilatory genes. We identify KLF4 as a novel 
Erk5 target and demonstrate a critical role of this transcription factor 
downstream of Erk5. We show that KLF4 expression largely reproduces the 
protective phenotype in endothelial cells, whereas KLF4 siRNA suppresses 
expression of various Erk5 targets. Additionally, we show that vasoprotective 
statins potently induce KLF4 and KLF4-dependent gene expression via activation 
of Erk5. Our data underscore a major protective function of the MEK5/Erk5/KLF4 
module in ECs and implicate agonistic Erk5 activation as potential strategy for 
treatment of vascular diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.103127
PMCID: PMC2924030
PMID: 20551324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
