---
pmid: '18305152'
title: TDP-43 regulates retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation through the repression
  of cyclin-dependent kinase 6 expression.
authors:
- Ayala YM
- Misteli T
- Baralle FE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2268791
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0800546105
---

# TDP-43 regulates retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation through the repression of cyclin-dependent kinase 6 expression.
**Authors:** Ayala YM, Misteli T, Baralle FE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0800546105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800546105)
**PMC:** [PMC2268791](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2268791/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 11;105(10):3785-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0800546105. Epub 2008 Feb 27.

TDP-43 regulates retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation through the repression 
of cyclin-dependent kinase 6 expression.

Ayala YM(1), Misteli T, Baralle FE.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 
99, 34012 Trieste, Italy.

TDP-43 (for TAR DNA binding protein) is a highly conserved heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) involved in specific pre-mRNA splicing and 
transcription events. TDP-43 recently has been identified as the main component 
of cytoplasmic inclusions in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), two neurodegenerative disorders. The 
cellular role of this protein remains to be identified. Here, we show that loss 
of TDP-43 results in dysmorphic nuclear shape, misregulation of the cell cycle, 
and apoptosis. Removal of TDP-43 in human cells significantly increases 
cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (Cdk6) protein and transcript levels. The control of 
Cdk6 expression mediated by TDP-43 involves GT repeats in the target gene 
sequence. Cdk6 up-regulation in TDP-43-depleted cells is accompanied by an 
increase in phosphorylation of two of its major targets, the retinoblastoma 
protein pRb and pRb-related protein pRb2/p130. TDP-43 silencing also is followed 
by changes in the expression levels of several factors that control cell 
proliferation. Morphological nuclear defects and increased apoptosis upon TDP-43 
loss are mediated via the pRb pathway because pRb-negative cells (Saos-2) do not 
undergo programmed cell death or nuclear shape deformation upon TDP-43 removal. 
Our results identify a regulatory target of TDP-43 and show that TDP-43 
depletion has important consequences in essential metabolic processes in human 
cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0800546105
PMCID: PMC2268791
PMID: 18305152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
