---
pmid: '1732208'
title: Characterization of Saccharopolyspora erythraea cytochrome P-450 genes and
  enzymes, including 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase.
authors:
- Andersen JF
- Hutchinson CR
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC206148
doi: 10.1128/jb.174.3.725-735.1992
---

# Characterization of Saccharopolyspora erythraea cytochrome P-450 genes and enzymes, including 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase.
**Authors:** Andersen JF, Hutchinson CR
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.174.3.725-735.1992](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.174.3.725-735.1992)
**PMC:** [PMC206148](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC206148/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1992 Feb;174(3):725-35. doi: 10.1128/jb.174.3.725-735.1992.

Characterization of Saccharopolyspora erythraea cytochrome P-450 genes and 
enzymes, including 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase.

Andersen JF(1), Hutchinson CR.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53706.

Previous studies of erythromycin biosynthesis have indicated that a cytochrome 
P-450 monooxygenase system is responsible for hydroxylation of 
6-deoxyerythronolide B to erythronolide B as part of erythromycin biosynthesis 
in Saccharopolyspora erythraea (A. Shafiee and C. R. Hutchinson, Biochemistry 
26:6204-6210 1987). The enzyme was previously purified to apparent homogeneity 
and found to have a catalytic turnover number of approximately 10(-3) min-1. 
More recently, disruption of a P-450-encoding sequence (eryF) in the region of 
ermE, the erythromycin resistance gene of S. erythraea, produced a 
6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylation-deficient mutant (J. M. Weber, J. O. Leung, 
S. J. Swanson, K. B. Idler, and J. B. McAlpine, Science 252:114-116, 1991). In 
this study we purified the catalytically active cytochrome P-450 fraction from 
S. erythraea and found by using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis that it consists of a major and a minor P-450 species. The gene 
encoding the major species (orf405) was cloned from genomic DNA and found to be 
distinct from eryF. Both the orf405 and eryF genes were expressed in Escherichia 
coli, and the properties of the proteins were compared. Heterologously expressed 
EryF and Orf405 both reacted with antisera prepared against the 
6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase described by Shafiee and Hutchinson (1987), 
and the EryF polypeptide comigrated with the minor P-450 species from S. 
erythraea on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels. In 
comparisons of enzymatic activity, EryF hydroxylated a substrate with a turnover 
number of 53 min-1, whereas Orf405 showed no detectable activity with a 
6-deoxyerythronolide B analog. Both enzymes showed weak activity in the 
O-dealkylation of 7-ethoxycoumarin. We conclude that the previously isolated 
6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase was a mixture of two P-450 enzymes and that 
only the minor form shows 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase activity.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.174.3.725-735.1992
PMCID: PMC206148
PMID: 1732208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Previous studies of erythromycin biosynthesis have indicated that a cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase system is responsible for hydroxylation of 6-deoxyerythronolide B to erythronolide B as part of erythromycin biosynthesis in Saccharopolyspora erythraea (A. Shafiee and C. R. Hutchinson, Biochemistry 26:6204-6210 1987). The enzyme was previously purified to apparent homogeneity and found to have a catalytic turnover number of approximately 10(-3) min-1. More recently, disruption of a P-450-encoding sequence (eryF) in the region of ermE, the erythromycin resistance gene of S. erythraea, produced a 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylation-deficient mutant (J. M. Weber, J. O. Leung, S. J. Swanson, K. B. Idler, and J. B. McAlpine, Science 252:114-116, 1991). In this study we purified the catalytically active cytochrome P-450 fraction from S. erythraea and found by using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis that it consists of a major and a minor P-450 species. The gene encoding the major species (orf405) was cloned from genomic DNA and found to be distinct from eryF. Both the orf405 and eryF genes were expressed in Escherichia coli, and the properties of the proteins were compared. Heterologously expressed EryF and Orf405 both reacted with antisera prepared against the 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase described by Shafiee and Hutchinson (1987), and the EryF polypeptide comigrated with the minor P-450 species from S. erythraea on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels. In comparisons of enzymatic activity, EryF hydroxylated a substrate with a turnover number of 53 min-1, whereas Orf405 showed no detectable activity with a 6-deoxyerythronolide B analog. Both enzymes showed weak activity in the O-dealkylation of 7-ethoxycoumarin. We conclude that the previously isolated 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase was a mixture of two P-450 enzymes and that only the minor form shows 6-deoxyerythronolide B hydroxylase activity.
