---
pmid: '11273703'
title: The mitochondrial proteins Ssq1 and Jac1 are required for the assembly of iron
  sulfur clusters in mitochondria.
authors:
- Lutz T
- Westermann B
- Neupert W
- Herrmann JM
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4527
---

# The mitochondrial proteins Ssq1 and Jac1 are required for the assembly of iron sulfur clusters in mitochondria.
**Authors:** Lutz T, Westermann B, Neupert W, Herrmann JM
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmbi.2001.4527](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.2001.4527)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2001 Mar 30;307(3):815-25. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4527.

The mitochondrial proteins Ssq1 and Jac1 are required for the assembly of iron 
sulfur clusters in mitochondria.

Lutz T(1), Westermann B, Neupert W, Herrmann JM.

Author information:
(1)Institut f체r Physiologische, Chemie der Universit채t M체nchen, Goethestrasse 
33, M체nchen, 80336, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Mol Biol 2001 May 18;308(5):1091.

Mitochondria of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae contain three different Hsp70 
chaperones, Ssc1, Ecm10 and Ssq1. Ssc1 is an essential protein that mediates the 
import of nuclear-encoded proteins into the organelle and their subsequent 
folding. The nucleotide state of Ssc1 is thereby regulated by the nucleotide 
exchange factor Mge1. Here, we show that Mge1 interacts with Ssq1 in an 
ATP-dependent manner, suggesting that Mge1 also regulates Ssq1 function. In 
contrast to Ssc1, Ssq1 does not associate with the Tim44 subunit of the protein 
translocating complex, indicating a different function of both chaperones. 
Mutants in Ssq1 were reported to have low levels of iron sulfur (FeS) 
cluster-containing enzymes. Employing an assay that allowed us to monitor the 
conversion of the apoform of mitochondrial ferredoxin into its FeS-containing 
holoform, Ssq1 was demonstrated to be required for the FeS cluster assembly in 
mitochondria. The mitochondrial DnaJ homolog Jac1 is crucial for this process, 
whereas Mdj1 function is dispensable. Furthermore, the presence of frataxin is 
necessary for FeS cluster assembly into ferredoxin suggesting a role for 
frataxin at the level of the formation of holo-ferredoxin.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4527
PMID: 11273703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
