---
pmid: '28130298'
title: Global Transcriptional Responses to Osmotic, Oxidative, and Imipenem Stress
  Conditions in Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- Bojanovič K
- D'Arrigo I
- Long KS
journal: Appl Environ Microbiol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5359501
doi: 10.1128/AEM.03236-16
---

# Global Transcriptional Responses to Osmotic, Oxidative, and Imipenem Stress Conditions in Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** Bojanovič K, D'Arrigo I, Long KS
**Journal:** Appl Environ Microbiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1128/AEM.03236-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03236-16)
**PMC:** [PMC5359501](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5359501/)

## Abstract

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2017 Mar 17;83(7):e03236-16. doi:
10.1128/AEM.03236-16.  Print 2017 Apr 1.

Global Transcriptional Responses to Osmotic, Oxidative, and Imipenem Stress 
Conditions in Pseudomonas putida.

Bojanovič K(1), D'Arrigo I(1), Long KS(2).

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark kalon@biosustain.dtu.dk.

Bacteria cope with and adapt to stress by modulating gene expression in response 
to specific environmental cues. In this study, the transcriptional response of 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 to osmotic, oxidative, and imipenem stress conditions 
at two time points was investigated via identification of differentially 
expressed mRNAs and small RNAs (sRNAs). A total of 440 sRNA transcripts were 
detected, of which 10% correspond to previously annotated sRNAs, 40% to novel 
intergenic transcripts, and 50% to novel transcripts antisense to annotated 
genes. Each stress elicits a unique response as far as the extent and dynamics 
of the transcriptional changes. Nearly 200 protein-encoding genes exhibited 
significant changes in all stress types, implicating their participation in a 
general stress response. Almost half of the sRNA transcripts were differentially 
expressed under at least one condition, suggesting possible functional roles in 
the cellular response to stress conditions. The data show a larger fraction of 
differentially expressed sRNAs than of mRNAs with >5-fold expression changes. 
The work provides detailed insights into the mechanisms through which P. putida 
responds to different stress conditions and increases understanding of bacterial 
adaptation in natural and industrial settings.IMPORTANCE This study maps the 
complete transcriptional response of P. putida KT2440 to osmotic, oxidative, and 
imipenem stress conditions at short and long exposure times. Over 400 sRNA 
transcripts, consisting of both intergenic and antisense transcripts, were 
detected, increasing the number of identified sRNA transcripts in the strain by 
a factor of 10. Unique responses to each type of stress are documented, 
including both the extent and dynamics of the gene expression changes. The work 
adds rich detail to previous knowledge of stress response mechanisms due to the 
depth of the RNA sequencing data. Almost half of the sRNAs exhibit significant 
expression changes under at least one condition, suggesting their involvement in 
adaptation to stress conditions and identifying interesting candidates for 
further functional characterization.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03236-16
PMCID: PMC5359501
PMID: 28130298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
