---
pmid: '16107329'
title: 'The enigmatic acyl carrier protein phosphodiesterase of Escherichia coli:
  genetic and enzymological characterization.'
authors:
- Thomas J
- Cronan JE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505736200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The enigmatic acyl carrier protein phosphodiesterase of Escherichia coli: genetic and enzymological characterization.
**Authors:** Thomas J, Cronan JE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M505736200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M505736200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 14;280(41):34675-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M505736200. Epub 
2005 Aug 17.

The enigmatic acyl carrier protein phosphodiesterase of Escherichia coli: 
genetic and enzymological characterization.

Thomas J(1), Cronan JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

The acyl carrier proteins (ACPs) of fatty acid synthesis are functional only 
when modified by attachment of the prosthetic group, 4'-phosphopantetheine 
(4'-PP), which is transferred from CoA to the hydroxyl group of a specific 
serine residue. Almost 40 years ago Vagelos and Larrabee reported an enzyme from 
Escherichia coli that removed the prosthetic group. We report that this enzyme, 
called ACP hydrolyase or ACP phosphodiesterase, is encoded by a gene (yajB) of 
previously unknown function that we have renamed acpH. A mutant E. coli strain 
having a total deletion of the acpH gene has been constructed that grows 
normally, showing that phosphodiesterase activity is not essential for growth, 
although it is required for turnover of the ACP prosthetic group in vivo. ACP 
phosphodiesterase (AcpH) has been purified to homogeneity for the first time and 
is a soluble protein that very readily aggregates upon overexpression in vivo or 
concentration in vitro. The purified enzyme has been shown to cleave acyl-ACP 
species with acyl chains of 6-16 carbon atoms and is active on some, but not 
all, non-native ACP species tested. Possible physiological roles for AcpH are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505736200
PMID: 16107329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
