---
pmid: '20675382'
title: CYR61 regulates BMP-2-dependent osteoblast differentiation through the {alpha}v{beta}3
  integrin/integrin-linked kinase/ERK pathway.
authors:
- Su JL
- Chiou J
- Tang CH
- Zhao M
- Tsai CH
- Chen PS
- Chang YW
- Chien MH
- Peng CY
- Hsiao M
- Kuo ML
- Yen ML
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2951207
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087122
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# CYR61 regulates BMP-2-dependent osteoblast differentiation through the {alpha}v{beta}3 integrin/integrin-linked kinase/ERK pathway.
**Authors:** Su JL, Chiou J, Tang CH, Zhao M, Tsai CH, Chen PS, Chang YW, Chien MH, Peng CY, Hsiao M, Kuo ML, Yen ML
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.087122](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.087122)
**PMC:** [PMC2951207](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2951207/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 8;285(41):31325-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087122. Epub 
2010 Jul 30.

CYR61 regulates BMP-2-dependent osteoblast differentiation through the 
{alpha}v{beta}3 integrin/integrin-linked kinase/ERK pathway.

Su JL(1), Chiou J, Tang CH, Zhao M, Tsai CH, Chen PS, Chang YW, Chien MH, Peng 
CY, Hsiao M, Kuo ML, Yen ML.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, College of Medicine, and the eGraduate 
Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung 
404,Taiwan.

Osteoporosis is one of the most common bone pathologies. A number of novel 
molecules have been reported to increase bone formation including cysteine-rich 
protein 61 (CYR61), a ligand of integrin receptor, but mechanisms remain 
unclear. It is known that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), especially BMP-2, 
are crucial regulators of osteogenesis. However, the interaction between CYR61 
and BMP-2 is unclear. We found that CYR61 significantly increases proliferation 
and osteoblastic differentiation in MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and primary cultured 
osteoblasts. CYR61 enhances mRNA and protein expression of BMP-2 in a time- and 
dose-dependent manner. Moreover, CYR61-mediated proliferation and osteoblastic 
differentiation are significantly decreased by knockdown of BMP-2 expression or 
inhibition of BMP-2 activity. In this study we found integrin α(v)β(3) is 
critical for CYR61-mediated BMP-2 expression and osteoblastic differentiation. 
We also found that integrin-linked kinase, which is downstream of the α(v)β(3) 
receptor, is involved in CYR61-induced BMP-2 expression and subsequent 
osteoblastic differentiation through an ERK-dependent pathway. Taken together, 
our results show that CYR61 up-regulates BMP-2 mRNA and protein expression, 
resulting in enhanced cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation 
through activation of the α(v)β(3) integrin/integrin-linked kinase/ERK signaling 
pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.087122
PMCID: PMC2951207
PMID: 20675382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Osteoporosis is one of the most common bone pathologies. A number of novel molecules have been reported to increase bone formation including cysteine-rich protein 61 (CYR61), a ligand of integrin receptor, but mechanisms remain unclear. It is known that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), especially BMP-2, are crucial regulators of osteogenesis. However, the interaction between CYR61 and BMP-2 is unclear. We found that CYR61 significantly increases proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation in MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and primary cultured osteoblasts. CYR61 enhances mRNA and protein expression of BMP-2 in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Moreover, CYR61-mediated proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation are significantly decreased by knockdown of BMP-2 expression or inhibition of BMP-2 activity. In this study we found integrin α v β 3 is critical for CYR61-mediated BMP-2 expression and osteoblastic differentiation. We also found that integrin-linked kinase, which is downstream of the α v β 3 receptor, is involved in CYR61-induced BMP-2 expression and subsequent osteoblastic differentiation through an ERK-dependent pathway. Taken together, our results show that CYR61 up-regulates BMP-2 mRNA and protein expression, resulting in enhanced cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation through activation of the α v β 3 integrin/integrin-linked kinase/ERK signaling pathway.

Introduction

Bone is a mineralized tissue that underlies multiple mechanical and metabolic functions of the skeleton ( 1 ). Bone functions include maintaining blood calcium levels, providing mechanical support to soft tissues and serving as levers for muscle action, supporting hematopoiesis, and housing the brain and spinal cord ( 2 ). Formation and maintenance of bone tissue are regulated in a sophisticated fashion by bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts ( 3 ). Development and differentiation of these two cell types are under tight regulation by a number of endogenous substances such as hormones, growth factors, and cytokines ( 4 ). These factors are individually secreted through endocrine, paracrine/autocrine, and neurocrine systems, with subsequent interaction essential to the delicate balance between bone-forming and -resorbing cells in the marrow microenvironment. An imbalance between the two cell types leads to pathogenesis of certain bone diseases including osteopetrosis and osteoporosis ( 5 , 6 ).

Osteoporosis is the most common human metabolic bone disorder characterized by progressive and age-dependent bone loss and increasing bone fracture risk. It is an important public health issue in postmenopausal women; if untreated, more than half of white women will experience fractures during their lifetime. Between 30 and 50% of women and 15–30% of men will suffer a fracture related to osteoporosis in their lifetime ( 7 ). Fractures increase morbidity and mortality and impose a financial burden on the community ( 8 ). A most compelling therapeutic need for osteoporosis at the present time is a drug that will substantially increase bone formation. The use of an anabolic agent that stimulates bone formation, restores trabecular bone microarchitecture, and rebuilds bone that has been lost, possibly in conjunction with an inhibitor of bone resorption, would be an ideal therapeutic approach for patients. Therefore, it is clearly necessary to identify novel molecular targets to develop bone-forming drugs aimed to combat osteoporosis by rebuilding the lost bone.

Multiple anabolic signaling pathways are positively involved in controlling bone formation, such as bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), 3 Wnt, and Runx2 pathways. Among the BMP family, BMP2 is the best documented bone growth factor that stimulates osteoblast differentiation and bone formation ( 9 ). Genetic manipulation studies suggest that BMP2 is critical for postnatal bone formation ( 10 ). Aging studies have found that production and bone-forming activity of BMP2 are both significantly decreased in aged bones ( 11 , 12 ). In human, BMP2 was recently recognized as an osteoporosis-associated gene through human polymorphism studies ( 13 ). Collectively, these findings suggest that decay of BMP2 function, which leads to an inhibition of bone formation, is one molecular mechanism that contributes to the development of osteoporosis with aging. Therefore, BMP2 has become an ideal target for drug development ( 14 – 17 ). BMP2 gene expression is transcriptionally regulated through various intracellular mechanisms that constitute a complex cross-talk between multiple signaling pathways, including estrogen receptors ( 18 ), PGE2 ( 19 ), HOXa13 ( 20 ), retinoic acid ( 21 ), 1,25(OH) vitamin D3 ( 19 ), hedgehog/Gli ( 22 ), Wnt/β-catenin ( 23 ) and BMP/Smad ( 24 ), responsible for regulation of osteoblast functions. However, the precise mechanisms by which some of these pathways, such as 1,25-(OH) vitamin D3 and Wnt/β-catenin, regulate BMP2 expression in osteoblasts need to be well elucidated. Recent evidence has indicated that cysteine-rich protein 61 (CYR61), a member of the connective tissue growth factor/cysteine-rich 61/nephroblastoma overexpressed (CCN) family ( 25 ), may play a important role in regulating BMP2 expression in osteoblasts by mediating the effects of 1,25-(OH) vitamin D3 and Wnt/β-catenin on BMP2 genes.

CYR61 is the first cloned member of the CCN family, an immediate early gene family consisting of six members with homologous DNA sequence that exhibit diverse cellular functions such as regulation of cell division, chemotaxis, adhesion, motility, tumorigenesis, angiogenesis, and ion transport ( 26 – 34 ). Interestingly, in vitro evidence has suggested that CYR61, as an extracellular signaling molecule in bone ( 35 ), plays an essential role in maintaining normal osteoblast functions, including osteogenic commitment of mesenchymal cells ( 36 , 37 ), proliferation and maturation of osteoblast precursor cells ( 37 , 38 ), and migration of osteoblastic cells ( 37 , 39 ). In osteoblastic cells, CYR61 mRNA expression is up-regulated by 1,25-(OH) vitamin D3 ( 36 ) and the canonical Wnt signaling ( 37 ), Both 1,25-(OH) vitamin D3 and Wnt signaling are important for osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Because these two mechanisms were found to induce BMP2 gene expression in osteoblasts ( 19 , 23 ) and BMP2 is a critical factor responsible for osteoblast differentiation, we hypothesized that, as a positive extracellular signaling protein, CYR61 controls osteoblast functions by regulating BMP2 gene expression in osteoblasts. This study was designed to test this hypothesis and also determine the precise signaling mechanisms involved in CYR61 regulation of BMP2 transcription in osteoblasts.

In the current work we found that CYR61 increases cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation; these results fit in with previous studies ( 36 – 39 ). We also provide the novel molecular mechanisms involved in CYR61-mediated osteogenic effects in this study. BMP-2-dependent phenomenon is critical for CYR61-induced osteogenic effects in fetal mouse pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 cells and primary cultured osteoblast cells. In addition, α v β 3 integrin/integrin-linked kinase (ILK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling pathways are involved in CYR61-mediated induction of BMP-2 expression and subsequent cell proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation.

DISCUSSION

In this study with osteoblasts, elevation of BMP-2 mRNA and protein levels followed recombinant CYR61 protein treatment through integrin α v β 3 receptor induction of the ILK and ERK signaling pathway. Our findings provide the first evidence that BMP-2-dependent osteoblastic differentiation may be regulated by CYR61, providing a link and molecular mechanism between CCN family and BMP family proteins in the physiology of bone.

CCN proteins are known to be involved in development, homeostasis, and repair of mesenchymal tissues. CCN proteins have four modules; they are an insulin-like growth factor-binding protein domain (module I), a Von Willebrand factor domain (module II), a thrombospondin-homology domain (module III), and a cysteine knot, heparin binding domain (module IV). Because the amino acid sequences of human CYR61 protein are very similar to mouse CYR61 protein ( 35 ), our experimental model seems to be appropriate. It has been reported that BMP-2 can induce expression of several CCN family proteins such as CYR61, Connective Tissue Growth Factor, WISP1, and WISP2 ( 50 ). Our results show for the first time that CYR61 can also act as an inducer to enhance BMP-2 expression in osteoblast cells ( Fig. 2 ). Taking together our data and the data of others, we hypothesize there might be a feedback regulatory loop between CYR61 and BMP-2 or further CCN family and BMP family members. Feedback mechanism and other biological functions require further examination.

BMPs play an important role in bone tissue formation and remodeling ( 51 ). It has been well documented that stimulation of osteoblastic differentiation is characterized mainly by increased expression of AP, type I collagen, and osteocalcin ( 51 ). BMP-2 has been shown to activate SMAD signaling, but it inhibits the p38 MAPK and PI3K/p70 S6K signaling pathway, which is involved in osteoblastic differentiation ( 52 , 53 ). Our study indicates that production of BMP-2 increased in rCYR61-treated MC3T3-E1 cells and that treatment with BMP-2-neutralizing antibody or BMP-2-specific siRNA can inhibit MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation.

Integrin-linked kinase ( 4 ) was discovered in 1996; its kinase activity is stimulated by integrins and soluble mediators including growth factors and chemokines ( 46 ). The same paper reported that the function of ILK in bone formation is promotion of chondrocyte proliferation, adhesion, and spreading. However, the role of ILK in osteoblastic differentiation is still unclear ( 46 ). We present in this study the first evidence to show that ILK also plays a critical role in CYR61-mediated BMP-2 expression and subsequent osteoblastic differentiation ( Fig. 6 ). Previous research showed that ILK was not required for some specific conditions, such as cyclic strain-mediated ERK1/2 activation ( 54 ). In our study we found ILK is involved in CYR61-mediated ERK activation. This discrepancy may be due to different cell types as well as different experimental conditions. It has been reported that ILK modulates cell spreading, migration, and cytoskeletal organization by activating p21-Activated Kinase interactive exchange factor (α-PIX, also known as ARHGEF6), a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1 and Cdc42 ( 55 ). Other studies have indicated that Rac/Cdc42 activates the ERK pathway and promotes cell migration ( 56 ). Considering previous studies and our current data raises the possibility that ILK might regulate ERK through indirect interaction.

The ERK1/2 signaling pathway is important in osteoblast cell proliferation and differentiation ( 57 , 58 ). A number of studies have reported that ERK is an important mediator of BMP-2-induced osteoblastic differentiation and that inhibition of ERK1/2 results in suppression of differentiation markers ( 59 ). Suzuki et al. ( 67 ) reported that ERKs play an essential role in cell replication during osteoblastic differentiation. In our study phosphorylation of ERK1/2 rapidly increased within 10 min of rCYR61 treatment and then decreased by 30 min ( Fig. 7 A ). Furthermore, MEK inhibitors PD98059 and U0126 both inhibited BMP-2 protein production ( Fig. 7 B ). Thus, we demonstrated that CYR61-induced BMP-2 expression is regulated via the ERK pathway.

The murine homologue of CYR61 is an extracellular matrix-associated protein that modulates basic fibroblast growth factor signaling, angiogenesis, and binds to integrin α v β 3 ( 44 ).In the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7, overexpression of CCN1/Cyr61 up-regulates α v β 3 and binds to it to activate ERK1/2 MAPK, thus promoting cell proliferation and survival ( 60 ). In the present study, integrin α v β 3 was proven able to regulate rCYR61-induced BMP-2 expression, osteoblast cell proliferation and migration, and osteoblastic differentiation ( Fig. 5 ). Furthermore, blockade of integrin α v β 3 inhibited ERK1/2 phosphorylation and BMP-2 protein expression. Thus, these results indicate that rCYR61-induced BMP-2-dependent osteoblastic differentiation is mediated through integrin α v β 3.

In addition to the BMP pathway that we have demonstrated here to be involved in CYR61 action on osteoblasts, the canonical Wnt pathway is also an important regulator of CYR61 activity in bone cells, as we described in the Introduction ( 37 , 39 ). It has been reported that Wnt3a treatment significantly increased CYR61 mRNA levels in osteoblast-like cells ( 37 ), suggesting that CYR61 is potential downstream target of the Wnt signaling in controlling osteoblast maturation. Previously, we have found that the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is a powerful enhancer of BMP2 gene expression in osteoblasts ( 23 ). However, we were not able to identify the functional binding site(s) in the BMP2 promoter responsible for β-catenin/TCF4 transactivation. Based on the results of current study, we reason that the stimulation of BMP2 expression by Wnt signaling in osteoblasts is likely mediated through CYR61. Not only regulating CYR61 gene expression, the recent report of Craig et al. ( 61 ) suggests that Wnt pathway may also directly bind to CYR61 and modulate CYR61 activity on osteoblasts. They found that Sclerostin, a proven endogenous antagonist that blocks both BMP and Wnt signaling pathways by binding to BMP ligands ( 62 , 63 ) or Wnt receptor LRP5 ( 64 , 65 ), can directly interact with CYR61 protein and affect proliferation of mature MC3T3/E1 osteoblast cells. The results from another study have suggested that Wnt induces osteoblast differentiation through BMPs, which is blocked by BMP antagonist Sclerostin, and the expression of BMP proteins in this autocrine loop is essential for Wnt-3A-induced osteoblast differentiation ( 66 ). Given the fact that both Wnt and BMP signaling pathways are extremely critical for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation, we think that, as an active coordinator in the cross-talk between these anabolic pathways, CYR61 and its signaling mechanism are a potential molecular target for identifying drugs that stimulate bone formation.

In summary, BMP-2-dependent osteoblastic differentiation may be regulated by CYR61 in pre-osteoblastic cells. The effects of rCYR61 on osteoblast cell maturation are strongly associated with BMP-2 production followed by ERK1/2 activation. Therefore, data suggest that rCYR61 may be beneficial in stimulating osteoblastic activity and promoting formation of bone tissue through integrin α v β 3 /ILK/ERK signaling.
