---
pmid: '17438265'
title: Four domains of p300 each bind tightly to a sequence spanning both transactivation
  subdomains of p53.
authors:
- Teufel DP
- Freund SM
- Bycroft M
- Fersht AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1855428
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0702010104
---

# Four domains of p300 each bind tightly to a sequence spanning both transactivation subdomains of p53.
**Authors:** Teufel DP, Freund SM, Bycroft M, Fersht AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0702010104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0702010104)
**PMC:** [PMC1855428](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1855428/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 24;104(17):7009-14. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0702010104. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Four domains of p300 each bind tightly to a sequence spanning both 
transactivation subdomains of p53.

Teufel DP(1), Freund SM, Bycroft M, Fersht AR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Protein Engineering and Department of Chemistry, Cambridge 
University, MRC Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.

The transcriptional coactivator p300 binds to and mediates the transcriptional 
functions of the tetrameric tumor suppressor p53. Both proteins consist of 
independently folded domains linked by intrinsically disordered sequences. A 
well studied short sequence of the p53 transactivation domain, p53(15-29), binds 
weakly to four folded domains of p300 [Taz1/cysteine-histidine-rich region 1 
(CH1), Kix, Taz2/CH3, IBiD], with dissociation constants (K(D)) in the 100 muM 
region. However, we found that a longer N-terminal transactivation domain 
construct p53(1-57) bound tightly to each p300 domain. Taz2/CH3 had the greatest 
affinity (K(D) = 27 nM) and competes with the N-terminal domain of Mdm2 for the 
p53 N terminus. p300 thus can protect the N terminus of p53 against the binding 
of other proteins. Mutations of p53 that abrogate transactivation (L22Q/W23S, 
W53Q/F54S) greatly weakened binding to each p300 domain, linking phenotypic 
defects to weakened coactivator binding. We propose a complex between tetrameric 
p53 and p300 in which four domains of p300 wrap around the four transactivation 
domains of p53.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0702010104
PMCID: PMC1855428
PMID: 17438265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The transcriptional coactivator p300 binds to and mediates the transcriptional functions of the tetrameric tumor suppressor p53. Both proteins consist of independently folded domains linked by intrinsically disordered sequences. A well studied short sequence of the p53 transactivation domain, p53(15–29), binds weakly to four folded domains of p300 [Taz1/cysteine–histidine-rich region 1 (CH1), Kix, Taz2/CH3, IBiD], with dissociation constants ( K D ) in the 100 μM region. However, we found that a longer N-terminal transactivation domain construct p53(1–57) bound tightly to each p300 domain. Taz2/CH3 had the greatest affinity ( K D = 27 nM) and competes with the N-terminal domain of Mdm2 for the p53 N terminus. p300 thus can protect the N terminus of p53 against the binding of other proteins. Mutations of p53 that abrogate transactivation (L22Q/W23S, W53Q/F54S) greatly weakened binding to each p300 domain, linking phenotypic defects to weakened coactivator binding. We propose a complex between tetrameric p53 and p300 in which four domains of p300 wrap around the four transactivation domains of p53.

Discussion

The p53 N-terminal binding proteins studied to date bind, in general, to only one of the two transactivation subdomains. Mdm2 ( 33 ) and its homolog Mdm4 ( 34 ), components of the transcriptional machinery such as TBP, the TFIIH subunits TAFII40 and TAFII60 ( 35 ), and human TAFII31 ( 17 , 36 ), all interact mainly with TAD1. In contrast, replication protein A ( 37 ) and the p62/Tfb1 subunit of TFIIH ( 38 , 39 ) bind to TAD2. Here, we found that both TAD1 and TAD2 of the p53 transactivation domain can simultaneously interact with three evolutionarily unrelated domains of p300 (Taz1/Taz2, Kix, and IBiD).

A precedent for such an extended interaction site spanning ≈40 residues is that of the related C-terminal activation domain of Hif 1-α, whose structure has been determined in complex with Taz1 of p300 ( 40 , 41 ). The C-terminal activation domain contains a similar pattern of hydrophobic residues at the respective p53 QS1/QS2 sites that are directly involved in binding Taz1. Because of the homology of Taz1 and Taz2, and the sequence similarity between the C-terminal activation domain and p53 TAD, a similar structure of the Taz2:p53 complex is plausible.
