---
pmid: '9890893'
title: Identification of tyrosine phosphorylation sites in human Gab-1 protein by
  EGF receptor kinase in vitro.
authors:
- Lehr S
- Kotzka J
- Herkner A
- Klein E
- Siethoff C
- Knebel B
- Noelle V
- Brüning JC
- Klein HW
- Meyer HE
- Krone W
- Müller-Wieland D
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi9818265
---

# Identification of tyrosine phosphorylation sites in human Gab-1 protein by EGF receptor kinase in vitro.
**Authors:** Lehr S, Kotzka J, Herkner A, Klein E, Siethoff C, Knebel B, Noelle V, Brüning JC, Klein HW, Meyer HE, Krone W, Müller-Wieland D
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi9818265](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi9818265)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jan 5;38(1):151-9. doi: 10.1021/bi9818265.

Identification of tyrosine phosphorylation sites in human Gab-1 protein by EGF 
receptor kinase in vitro.

Lehr S(1), Kotzka J, Herkner A, Klein E, Siethoff C, Knebel B, Noelle V, Brüning 
JC, Klein HW, Meyer HE, Krone W, Müller-Wieland D.

Author information:
(1)Klinik II und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin am Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin 
Köln, Institut für Biochemie der Universit at zu Köln, Germany.

Grb2-associated binder-1 (Gab-1) has been identified recently in a cDNA library 
of glioblastoma tumors and appears to play a central role in cellular growth 
response, transformation, and apoptosis. Structural and functional features 
indicate that Gab-1 is a multisubstrate docking protein downstream in the 
signaling pathways of different receptor tyrosine kinases, including the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Therefore, the aim of the study was to 
characterize the phosphorylation of recombinant human Gab-1 (hGab-1) protein by 
EGFR in vitro. Using the pGEX system to express the entire protein and different 
domains of hGab-1 as glutathione S-transferase proteins, kinetic data for 
phosphorylation of these proteins by wheat germ agglutinine-purified EGFR and 
the recombinant EGFR (rEGFR) receptor kinase domain were determined. Our data 
revealed similar affinities of hGab-1-C for both receptor preparations (KM = 2.7 
microM for rEGFR vs 3.2 microM for WGA EGFR) as well as for the different 
recombinant hGab-1 domains. To identify the specific EGFR phosphorylation sites, 
hGab-1-C was sequenced by Edman degradation and mass spectrometry. The entire 
protein was phosphorylated by rEGFR at eight tyrosine residues (Y285, Y373, 
Y406, Y447, Y472, Y619, Y657, and Y689). Fifty percent of the identified 
radioactivity was incorporated in tyrosine Y657 as the predominant peak in HPLC 
analysis, a site exhibiting features of a potential Syp (PTP1D) binding site. 
Accordingly, GST-pull down assays with A431 and HepG2 cell lysates showed that 
phosphorylated intact hGab-1 was able to bind Syp. This binding appears to be 
specific, because it was abolished by changing the Y657 of hGab-1 to F657. These 
results demonstrate that hGab-1 is a high-affinity substrate for the EGFR and 
the major tyrosine phosphorylation site Y657 in the C terminus is a specific 
binding site for the tyrosine phosphatase Syp.

DOI: 10.1021/bi9818265
PMID: 9890893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
