---
pmid: '17341584'
title: CD8 Raft localization is induced by its assembly into CD8alpha beta heterodimers,
  Not CD8alpha alpha homodimers.
authors:
- Pang DJ
- Hayday AC
- Bijlmakers MJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701027200
---

# CD8 Raft localization is induced by its assembly into CD8alpha beta heterodimers, Not CD8alpha alpha homodimers.
**Authors:** Pang DJ, Hayday AC, Bijlmakers MJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M701027200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M701027200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 4;282(18):13884-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M701027200. Epub
2007  Mar 6.

CD8 Raft localization is induced by its assembly into CD8alpha beta 
heterodimers, Not CD8alpha alpha homodimers.

Pang DJ(1), Hayday AC, Bijlmakers MJ.

Author information:
(1)Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, King's College London, School of 
Medicine at Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT, United Kingdom.

The coreceptor CD8 is expressed as a CD8alphabeta heterodimer on major 
histocompatibility complex class I-restricted TCRalphabeta T cells, and as a 
CD8alphaalpha homodimer on subsets of memory T cells, intraepithelial 
lymphocytes, natural killer cells, and dendritic cells. Although the role of 
CD8alphaalpha is not well understood, it is increasingly clear that this protein 
is not a functional homologue of CD8alphabeta. On major histocompatibility 
complex class I-restricted T cells, CD8alphabeta is a more efficient TCR 
coreceptor than CD8alphaalpha. This property has for the mouse protein been 
attributed to the recruitment of CD8alphabeta into lipid rafts, which is 
dependent on CD8beta palmitoylation. Here, these divergent distributions of 
CD8alphabeta and CD8alphaalpha are demonstrated for the human CD8 proteins as 
well. However, although palmitoylation of both CD8alpha and CD8beta chains was 
detected, this modification did not contribute to raft localization. In 
contrast, arginines in the cytoplasmic domain are crucial for raft localization 
of CD8betabeta. Most strikingly, the assembly of a non-raft localized CD8beta 
chain with a non-raft localized CD8alpha chain resulted in raft-localized 
CD8alphabeta heterodimers. Using chimeric CD8 proteins, this property of the 
heterodimer was found to be determined by the assembly of CD8alpha and CD8beta 
extracellular regions. The presence of two CD8alpha extracellular regions, on 
the other hand, appears to preclude raft localization. Thus, heterodimer 
formation and raft association are intimately linked for CD8alphabeta. These 
results emphasize that lipid raft localization is a key feature of human 
CD8alphabeta that clearly distinguishes it from CD8alphaalpha.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M701027200
PMID: 17341584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
