---
pmid: '17635912'
title: The mitochondrial TOM complex is required for tBid/Bax-induced cytochrome c
  release.
authors:
- Ott M
- Norberg E
- Walter KM
- Schreiner P
- Kemper C
- Rapaport D
- Zhivotovsky B
- Orrenius S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703155200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The mitochondrial TOM complex is required for tBid/Bax-induced cytochrome c release.
**Authors:** Ott M, Norberg E, Walter KM, Schreiner P, Kemper C, Rapaport D, Zhivotovsky B, Orrenius S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M703155200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M703155200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 21;282(38):27633-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M703155200. Epub
2007  Jul 16.

The mitochondrial TOM complex is required for tBid/Bax-induced cytochrome c 
release.

Ott M(1), Norberg E, Walter KM, Schreiner P, Kemper C, Rapaport D, Zhivotovsky 
B, Orrenius S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Division of Toxicology, Karolinska 
Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Cytochrome c release from mitochondria is a key event in apoptosis signaling 
that is regulated by Bcl-2 family proteins. Cleavage of the BH3-only protein Bid 
by multiple proteases leads to the formation of truncated Bid (tBid), which, in 
turn, promotes the oligomerization/insertion of Bax into the mitochondrial outer 
membrane and the resultant release of proteins residing in the intermembrane 
space. Bax, a monomeric protein in the cytosol, is targeted by a yet unknown 
mechanism to the mitochondria. Several hypotheses have been put forward to 
explain this targeting specificity. Using mitochondria isolated from different 
mutants of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and recombinant proteins, we have 
now investigated components of the mitochondrial outer membrane that might be 
required for tBid/Bax-induced cytochrome c release. Here, we show that the 
protein translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane is required for Bax 
insertion and cytochrome c release.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M703155200
PMID: 17635912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
