---
pmid: '8896567'
title: Mutations in the testis/liver isoform of the phosphorylase kinase gamma subunit
  (PHKG2) cause autosomal liver glycogenosis in the gsd rat and in humans.
authors:
- Maichele AJ
- Burwinkel B
- Maire I
- Søvik O
- Kilimann MW
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1196-337
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations in the testis/liver isoform of the phosphorylase kinase gamma subunit (PHKG2) cause autosomal liver glycogenosis in the gsd rat and in humans.
**Authors:** Maichele AJ, Burwinkel B, Maire I, Søvik O, Kilimann MW
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1196-337](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1196-337)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1996 Nov;14(3):337-40. doi: 10.1038/ng1196-337.

Mutations in the testis/liver isoform of the phosphorylase kinase gamma subunit 
(PHKG2) cause autosomal liver glycogenosis in the gsd rat and in humans.

Maichele AJ(1), Burwinkel B, Maire I, Søvik O, Kilimann MW.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany.

Heritable deficiency of phosphorylase kinase (Phk), a regulatory enzyme of 
glycogen metabolism, is responsible for 25% of all cases of glycogen storage 
disease and occurs with a frequency of -1 in 100,000 births. It is genetically 
and clinically heterogeneous, occurring in X-linked and autosomal-recessive 
forms and exhibiting various patterns of principally affected tissues (liver 
only, muscle only, liver and muscle, liver and kidney, heart only). This 
heterogeneity is thought to reflect the enzyme's structural complexity [subunit 
composition, (alpha beta gamma delta)4] and isoform diversity. Two isoforms 
encoded by separate genes are known for the subunits alpha (muscle [alpha M] and 
liver [alpha L isoforms) and gamma (muscle [gamma M] and testis [gamma T] 
isoforms), whereas only one gene appears to exist for the subunit beta. The 
subunit delta is calmodulin; identical calmodulins are expressed from three 
different human genes. Additional isoform diversity arises by differential mRNA 
splicing of the alpha M, alpha L and beta subunits. Mutations responsible for 
the various forms of Phk deficiency are sought in those subunit/isoform genes 
with a matching chromosomal location and tissue-specificity of expression. We 
report here that autosomal liver-specific Phk deficiency is associated with 
mutations in the gene encoding the testis/liver isoform of the catalytic gamma 
subunit (PHKG2). We found homozygous PHKG2 mutations in three human patients of 
consanguineous parentage and in the gsd (glycogen storage disease) rat strain, 
which is thus identified as an animal model for the human disorder. One human 
mutation is a single base-pair insertion in codon 89 that causes a frameshift 
and premature chain termination. The three other mutations result in 
non-conservative replacements of amino acid residues (V106E, G189E, D215N) that 
are highly conserved within the catalytic core regions of all protein kinases. 
These are the first mutations to be reported for an autosomal form of Phk 
deficiency. The findings suggest that the PHKG2 gene product is the predominant 
isoform of the catalytic gamma subunit of Phk not only in testis but also in 
liver, erythrocytes and, possibly, other non-muscle tissues.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1196-337
PMID: 8896567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
