---
reference_id: PMID:22284826
title: Lack of the mitochondrial protein acylglycerol kinase causes Sengers syndrome.
authors:
- Mayr JA
- Haack TB
- Graf E
- Zimmermann FA
- Wieland T
- Haberberger B
- Superti-Furga A
- Kirschner J
- Steinmann B
- Baumgartner MR
- Moroni I
- Lamantea E
- Zeviani M
- Rodenburg RJ
- Smeitink J
- Strom TM
- Meitinger T
- Sperl W
- Prokisch H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.005
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Lack of the mitochondrial protein acylglycerol kinase causes Sengers syndrome.
**Authors:** Mayr JA, Haack TB, Graf E, Zimmermann FA, Wieland T, Haberberger B, Superti-Furga A, Kirschner J, Steinmann B, Baumgartner MR, Moroni I, Lamantea E, Zeviani M, Rodenburg RJ, Smeitink J, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Sperl W, Prokisch H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):314-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.005.
Epub  2012 Jan 26.

Lack of the mitochondrial protein acylglycerol kinase causes Sengers syndrome.

Mayr JA(1), Haack TB, Graf E, Zimmermann FA, Wieland T, Haberberger B,
Superti-Furga A, Kirschner J, Steinmann B, Baumgartner MR, Moroni I, Lamantea E,
Zeviani M, Rodenburg RJ, Smeitink J, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Sperl W, Prokisch H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Austria.

Exome sequencing of an individual with congenital cataracts, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, and lactic acidosis, all typical symptoms of
Sengers syndrome, discovered two nonsense mutations in the gene encoding
mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase (AGK). Mutation screening of AGK in further
individuals with congenital cataracts and cardiomyopathy identified numerous
loss-of-function mutations in an additional eight families, confirming the
causal nature of AGK deficiency in Sengers syndrome. The loss of AGK led to a
decrease of the adenine nucleotide translocator in the inner mitochondrial
membrane in muscle, consistent with a role of AGK in driving the assembly of the
translocator as a result of its effects on phospholipid metabolism in
mitochondria.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.005
PMCID: PMC3276657
PMID: 22284826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]