---
pmid: '9660788'
title: The cellular trafficking and zinc dependence of secretory and lysosomal sphingomyelinase,
  two products of the acid sphingomyelinase gene.
authors:
- Schissel SL
- Keesler GA
- Schuchman EH
- Williams KJ
- Tabas I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18250
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The cellular trafficking and zinc dependence of secretory and lysosomal sphingomyelinase, two products of the acid sphingomyelinase gene.
**Authors:** Schissel SL, Keesler GA, Schuchman EH, Williams KJ, Tabas I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.29.18250](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.29.18250)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18250-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18250.

The cellular trafficking and zinc dependence of secretory and lysosomal 
sphingomyelinase, two products of the acid sphingomyelinase gene.

Schissel SL(1), Keesler GA, Schuchman EH, Williams KJ, Tabas I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10032, USA.

The acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) gene, which has been implicated in 
ceramide-mediated cell signaling and atherogenesis, gives rise to both lysosomal 
SMase (L-SMase), which is reportedly cation-independent, and secretory SMase 
(S-SMase), which is fully or partially dependent on Zn2+ for enzymatic activity. 
Herein we present evidence for a model to explain how a single mRNA gives rise 
to two forms of SMase with different cellular trafficking and apparent 
differences in Zn2+ dependence. First, we show that both S-SMase and L-SMase, 
which contain several highly conserved zinc-binding motifs, are directly 
activated by zinc. In addition, SMase assayed from a lysosome-rich fraction of 
Chinese hamster ovary cells was found to be partially zinc-dependent, suggesting 
that intact lysosomes from these cells contain subsaturating levels of Zn2+. 
Analysis of Asn-linked oligosaccharides and of N-terminal amino acid sequence 
indicated that S-SMase arises by trafficking through the Golgi secretory 
pathway, not by cellular release of L-SMase during trafficking to lysosomes or 
after delivery to lysosomes. Most importantly, when Zn2+-dependent S-SMase was 
incubated with SMase-negative cells, the enzyme was internalized, trafficked to 
lysosomes, and became zinc-independent. We conclude that L-SMase is exposed to 
cellular Zn2+ during trafficking to lysosomes, in lysosomes, and/or during cell 
homogenization. In contrast, the pathway targeting S-SMase to secretion appears 
to be relatively sequestered from cellular pools of Zn2+; thus S-SMase requires 
exogeneous Zn2+ for full activity. This model provides important information for 
understanding the enzymology and regulation of L- and S-SMase and for exploring 
possible roles of ASM gene products in cell signaling and atherogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.29.18250
PMID: 9660788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
