---
pmid: '9778245'
title: Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor
  PTEN.
authors:
- Stambolic V
- Suzuki A
- de la Pompa JL
- Brothers GM
- Mirtsos C
- Sasaki T
- Ruland J
- Penninger JM
- Siderovski DP
- Mak TW
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81780-8
---

# Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN.
**Authors:** Stambolic V, Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, Brothers GM, Mirtsos C, Sasaki T, Ruland J, Penninger JM, Siderovski DP, Mak TW
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81780-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81780-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1998 Oct 2;95(1):29-39. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81780-8.

Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent cell survival by the tumor suppressor 
PTEN.

Stambolic V(1), Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, Brothers GM, Mirtsos C, Sasaki T, 
Ruland J, Penninger JM, Siderovski DP, Mak TW.

Author information:
(1)Amgen Institute, and Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

PTEN is a tumor suppressor with sequence homology to protein tyrosine 
phosphatases and the cytoskeletal protein tensin. mPTEN-mutant mouse embryos 
display regions of increased proliferation. In contrast, mPTEN-deficient 
immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts exhibit decreased sensitivity to cell 
death in response to a number of apoptotic stimuli, accompanied by 
constitutively elevated activity and phosphorylation of protein kinase B/Akt, a 
crucial regulator of cell survival. Expression of exogenous PTEN in mutant cells 
restores both their sensitivity to agonist-induced apoptosis and normal pattern 
of PKB/Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, PTEN negatively regulates intracellular 
levels of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5) trisphosphate in cells and 
dephosphorylates it in vitro. Our results show that PTEN may exert its role as a 
tumor suppressor by negatively regulating the PI3'K/PKB/Akt signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81780-8
PMID: 9778245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
