---
pmid: '9691089'
title: Molecular basis of hepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency.
authors:
- IJlst L
- Mandel H
- Oostheim W
- Ruiter JP
- Gutman A
- Wanders RJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC508913
doi: 10.1172/JCI2927
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Molecular basis of hepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency.
**Authors:** IJlst L, Mandel H, Oostheim W, Ruiter JP, Gutman A, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI2927](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI2927)
**PMC:** [PMC508913](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC508913/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1998 Aug 1;102(3):527-31. doi: 10.1172/JCI2927.

Molecular basis of hepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency.

IJlst L(1), Mandel H, Oostheim W, Ruiter JP, Gutman A, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Amsterdam, Academic Medical 
Center, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation is important for energy production, 
which is stressed by the different defects found in this pathway. Most of the 
enzyme deficiencies causing these defects are well characterized at both the 
protein and genomic levels. One exception is carnitine palmitoyltransferase I 
(CPT I) deficiency, of which until now no mutations have been reported although 
the defect is enzymatically well characterized. CPT I is the key enzyme in the 
carnitine-dependent transport across the mitochondrial inner membrane and its 
deficiency results in a decreased rate of fatty acid beta-oxidation. Here we 
report the first delineation of the molecular basis of hepatic CPT I deficiency 
in a new case. cDNA analysis revealed that this patient was homozygous for a 
missense mutation (D454G). The effect of the identified mutation was 
investigated by heterologous expression in yeast. The expressed mutant CPT IA 
displayed only 2% of the activity of the expressed wild-type CPT IA, indicating 
that the D454G mutation is the disease-causing mutation. Furthermore, in 
patient's fibroblasts the CPT IA protein was markedly reduced on immunoblot, 
suggesting that the mutation renders the protein unstable.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI2927
PMCID: PMC508913
PMID: 9691089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
