---
pmid: '23314747'
title: Myb-domain protein Teb1 controls histone levels and centromere assembly in
  fission yeast.
authors:
- Valente LP
- Dehé PM
- Klutstein M
- Aligianni S
- Watt S
- Bähler J
- Cooper JP
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3567493
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.339
---

# Myb-domain protein Teb1 controls histone levels and centromere assembly in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Valente LP, Dehé PM, Klutstein M, Aligianni S, Watt S, Bähler J, Cooper JP
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2012.339](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.339)
**PMC:** [PMC3567493](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3567493/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 Feb 6;32(3):450-60. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.339. Epub 2013 Jan
11.

Myb-domain protein Teb1 controls histone levels and centromere assembly in 
fission yeast.

Valente LP(1), Dehé PM, Klutstein M, Aligianni S, Watt S, Bähler J, Cooper JP.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, London WC2A 3LY, UK.

The TTAGGG motif is common to two seemingly unrelated dimensions of chromatin 
function-the vertebrate telomere repeat and the promoter regions of many 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe genes, including all of those encoding canonical 
histones. The essential S. pombe protein Teb1 contains two Myb-like DNA binding 
domains related to those found in telomere proteins and binds the human telomere 
repeat sequence TTAGGG. Here, we analyse Teb1 binding throughout the genome and 
the consequences of reduced Teb1 function. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP)-on-chip analysis reveals robust Teb1 binding at many promoters, notably 
including all of those controlling canonical histone gene expression. A 
hypomorphic allele, teb1-1, confers reduced binding and reduced levels of 
histone transcripts. Prompted by previously suggested connections between 
histone expression and centromere identity, we examined localization of the 
centromeric histone H3 variant Cnp1 and found reduced centromeric binding along 
with reduced centromeric silencing. These data identify Teb1 as a master 
regulator of histone levels and centromere identity.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.339
PMCID: PMC3567493
PMID: 23314747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
