---
pmid: '20081196'
title: The Engrailed homeobox genes determine the different foliation patterns in
  the vermis and hemispheres of the mammalian cerebellum.
authors:
- Cheng Y
- Sudarov A
- Szulc KU
- Sgaier SK
- Stephen D
- Turnbull DH
- Joyner AL
journal: Development
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2858911
doi: 10.1242/dev.027045
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Engrailed homeobox genes determine the different foliation patterns in the vermis and hemispheres of the mammalian cerebellum.
**Authors:** Cheng Y, Sudarov A, Szulc KU, Sgaier SK, Stephen D, Turnbull DH, Joyner AL
**Journal:** Development (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.027045](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.027045)
**PMC:** [PMC2858911](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2858911/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):519-29. doi: 10.1242/dev.027045.

The Engrailed homeobox genes determine the different foliation patterns in the 
vermis and hemispheres of the mammalian cerebellum.

Cheng Y(1), Sudarov A, Szulc KU, Sgaier SK, Stephen D, Turnbull DH, Joyner AL.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Little is known about the genetic pathways and cellular processes responsible 
for regional differences in cerebellum foliation, which interestingly are 
accompanied by regionally distinct afferent circuitry. We have identified the 
Engrailed (En) homeobox genes as being crucial to producing the distinct medial 
vermis and lateral hemisphere foliation patterns in mammalian cerebella. By 
producing a series of temporal conditional mutants in En1 and/or En2, we 
demonstrate that both En genes are required to ensure that folia exclusive to 
the vermis or hemispheres form in the appropriate mediolateral position. 
Furthermore, En1/En2 continue to regulate foliation after embryonic day 14, at 
which time Fgf8 isthmic organizer activity is complete and the major output 
cells of the cerebellar cortex have been specified. Changes in spatially 
restricted gene expression occur prior to foliation in mutants, and foliation is 
altered from the onset and is accompanied by changes in the thickness of the 
layer of proliferating granule cell precursors. In addition, the positioning and 
timing of fissure formation are altered. Thus, the En genes represent a new 
class of genes that are fundamental to patterning cerebellum foliation 
throughout the mediolateral axis and that act late in development.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.027045
PMCID: PMC2858911
PMID: 20081196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
