---
pmid: '18602473'
title: 'Aggregation and catabolism of disease-associated intra-Abeta mutations: reduced
  proteolysis of AbetaA21G by neprilysin.'
authors:
- Betts V
- Leissring MA
- Dolios G
- Wang R
- Selkoe DJ
- Walsh DM
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3160758
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.001
---

# Aggregation and catabolism of disease-associated intra-Abeta mutations: reduced proteolysis of AbetaA21G by neprilysin.
**Authors:** Betts V, Leissring MA, Dolios G, Wang R, Selkoe DJ, Walsh DM
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.001)
**PMC:** [PMC3160758](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3160758/)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Sep;31(3):442-50. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.001. Epub
2008  Jun 17.

Aggregation and catabolism of disease-associated intra-Abeta mutations: reduced 
proteolysis of AbetaA21G by neprilysin.

Betts V(1), Leissring MA, Dolios G, Wang R, Selkoe DJ, Walsh DM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Research, The Conway Institute for 
Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, 
Dublin 4, Republic of Ireland.

Five point mutations within the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) sequence of the APP 
gene are associated with hereditary diseases which are similar or identical to 
Alzheimer's disease and encode: the A21G (Flemish), E22G (Arctic), E22K 
(Italian), E22Q (Dutch) and the D23N (Iowa) amino acid substitutions. Although a 
substantial body of data exists on the effects of these mutations on Abeta 
production, whether or not intra-Abeta mutations alter degradation and how this 
relates to their aggregation state remain unclear. Here we report that the E22G, 
E22Q and the D23N substitutions significantly increase fibril nucleation and 
extension, whereas the E22K substitution exhibits only an increased rate of 
extension and the A21G substitution actually causes a decrease in the extension 
rate. These substantial differences in aggregation together with our observation 
that aggregated wild type Abeta(1-40) was much less well degraded than monomeric 
wild type Abeta(1-40), prompted us to assess whether or not disease-associated 
intra-Abeta mutations alter proteolysis independent of their effects on 
aggregation. Neprilysin (NEP), insulin degrading enzyme (IDE) and plasmin play a 
major role in Abeta catabolism, therefore we compared the ability of these 
enzymes to degrade wild type and mutant monomeric Abeta peptides. Experiments 
investigating proteolysis revealed that all monomeric peptides are degraded 
similarly by IDE and plasmin, but that the Flemish peptide was degraded 
significantly more slowly by NEP than wild type Abeta or any of the other mutant 
peptides. This finding suggests that resistance to NEP-mediated proteolysis may 
underlie the pathogenicity associated with the A21G mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.06.001
PMCID: PMC3160758
PMID: 18602473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
