---
pmid: '19643811'
title: Association of a novel mitochondrial protein M19 with mitochondrial nucleoids.
authors:
- Sumitani M
- Kasashima K
- Ohta E
- Kang D
- Endo H
journal: J Biochem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvp118
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Association of a novel mitochondrial protein M19 with mitochondrial nucleoids.
**Authors:** Sumitani M, Kasashima K, Ohta E, Kang D, Endo H
**Journal:** J Biochem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvp118](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvp118)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2009 Nov;146(5):725-32. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvp118. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Association of a novel mitochondrial protein M19 with mitochondrial nucleoids.

Sumitani M(1), Kasashima K, Ohta E, Kang D, Endo H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, Tochigi 329-0498, 
Japan.

We have identified a novel mitochondrial protein, termed M19, by proteomic 
analysis of mitochondrial membrane proteins from HeLa cells. M19 is highly 
conserved among vertebrates, and possesses no homologous domains with other 
known proteins. By northern and western blotting, mouse M19 was shown to be 
expressed in various tissues, and to be especially abundant in the brain. Human 
M19 (hM19) is present in mitochondria, and protease-protection experiment showed 
it to be sublocalized in the matrix space. Carboxy-terminally tagged hM19 
appeared as spotted signals within mitochondria and co-localized with signals 
arising from mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), suggesting the inclusion of M19 in the 
mtDNA-protein complex (mitochondrial nucleoids). Fractionation of mitochondrial 
nucleoids from HeLa cells revealed that hM19 has a similar distribution pattern 
like that of known nucleoid components, such as mtSSB and PHBs, and surely 
exists in the nucleoid fraction. Furthermore, expression of M19 is closely 
related to the amount of mtDNA, because it was down-regulated in mtDNA-depleted 
rho(0) HeLa cells. These results indicate that M19 associates with the nucleoid 
and likely regulates the organization and metabolism of mtDNA.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvp118
PMID: 19643811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
