---
pmid: '10801440'
title: Dimerisation of a chromo shadow domain and distinctions from the chromodomain
  as revealed by structural analysis.
authors:
- Cowieson NP
- Partridge JF
- Allshire RC
- McLaughlin PJ
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(00)00467-x
---

# Dimerisation of a chromo shadow domain and distinctions from the chromodomain as revealed by structural analysis.
**Authors:** Cowieson NP, Partridge JF, Allshire RC, McLaughlin PJ
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(00)00467-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(00)00467-x)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2000 May 4;10(9):517-25. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(00)00467-x.

Dimerisation of a chromo shadow domain and distinctions from the chromodomain as 
revealed by structural analysis.

Cowieson NP(1), Partridge JF, Allshire RC, McLaughlin PJ.

Author information:
(1)Swann Building, King's Buildings, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, 
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH9 3JR, Scotland.

BACKGROUND: Proteins such as HP1, found in fruit flies and mammals, and Swi6, 
its fission yeast homologue, carry a chromodomain (CD) and a chromo shadow 
domain (CSD). These proteins are required to form functional transcriptionally 
silent centromeric chromatin, and their mutation leads to chromosome segregation 
defects. CSDs have only been found in tandem in proteins containing the related 
CD. Most HP1-interacting proteins have been found to associate through the CSD 
and many of these ligands contain a conserved pentapeptide motif.
RESULTS: The 1.9 A crystal structure of the Swi6 CSD is presented here. This 
reveals a novel dimeric structure that is distinct from the previously reported 
monomeric nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structure of the CD from the mouse 
modifier 1 protein (MoMOD1, also known as HP1beta or M31). A prominent pit with 
a non-polar base is generated at the dimer interface, and is commensurate with 
binding an extended pentapeptide motif. Sequence alignments based on this 
structure highlight differences between CDs and CSDs that are superimposed on a 
common structural core. The analyses also revealed a previously unrecognised 
circumferential hydrophobic sash around the surface of the CD structure.
CONCLUSIONS: Dimerisation through the CSD of HP1-like proteins results in the 
simultaneous formation of a putative protein-protein interaction pit, providing 
a potential means of targeting CSD-containing proteins to particular chromatin 
sites.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(00)00467-x
PMID: 10801440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
