---
pmid: '26805589'
title: Structural Insights into the Quaternary Catalytic Mechanism of Hexameric Human
  Quinolinate Phosphoribosyltransferase, a Key Enzyme in de novo NAD Biosynthesis.
authors:
- Youn HS
- Kim TG
- Kim MK
- Kang GB
- Kang JY
- Lee JG
- An JY
- Park KR
- Lee Y
- Im YJ
- Lee JH
- Eom SH
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4726147
doi: 10.1038/srep19681
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural Insights into the Quaternary Catalytic Mechanism of Hexameric Human Quinolinate Phosphoribosyltransferase, a Key Enzyme in de novo NAD Biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Youn HS, Kim TG, Kim MK, Kang GB, Kang JY, Lee JG, An JY, Park KR, Lee Y, Im YJ, Lee JH, Eom SH
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep19681](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep19681)
**PMC:** [PMC4726147](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4726147/)

## Abstract

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 25;6:19681. doi: 10.1038/srep19681.

Structural Insights into the Quaternary Catalytic Mechanism of Hexameric Human 
Quinolinate Phosphoribosyltransferase, a Key Enzyme in de novo NAD Biosynthesis.

Youn HS(1)(2), Kim TG(1)(2), Kim MK(1), Kang GB(1), Kang JY(1)(2), Lee JG(1)(2), 
An JY(1)(2), Park KR(1)(2), Lee Y(1)(2), Im YJ(3), Lee JH(4)(5), Eom 
SH(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 
500-712, South Korea.
(2)Steitz Center for Structural Biology, Gwangju Institute of Science and 
Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea.
(3)College of Pharmacy, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, South 
Korea.
(4)Division of Polar Life Sciences, Korea Polar Research Institute, Incheon 
406-840, South Korea.
(5)Department of Polar Sciences, Korea University of Science and Technology, 
Incheon 406-840, South Korea.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 
500-712, South Korea.

Quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase (QPRT) catalyses the production of 
nicotinic acid mononucleotide, a precursor of de novo biosynthesis of the 
ubiquitous coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. QPRT is also essential 
for maintaining the homeostasis of quinolinic acid in the brain, a possible 
neurotoxin causing various neurodegenerative diseases. Although QPRT has been 
extensively analysed, the molecular basis of the reaction catalysed by human 
QPRT remains unclear. Here, we present the crystal structures of hexameric human 
QPRT in the apo form and its complexes with reactant or product. We found that 
the interaction between dimeric subunits was dramatically altered during the 
reaction process by conformational changes of two flexible loops in the active 
site at the dimer-dimer interface. In addition, the N-terminal short helix α1 
was identified as a critical hexamer stabilizer. The structural features, size 
distribution, heat aggregation and ITC studies of the full-length enzyme and the 
enzyme lacking helix α1 strongly suggest that human QPRT acts as a hexamer for 
cooperative reactant binding via three dimeric subunits and maintaining 
stability. Based on our comparison of human QPRT structures in the apo and 
complex forms, we propose a drug design strategy targeting malignant glioma.

DOI: 10.1038/srep19681
PMCID: PMC4726147
PMID: 26805589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), a ubiquitous coenzyme, exists in both oxidised
(NAD+, electron acceptor) and reduced (NADH, electron donor) forms.
NAD is essential for cell survival and plays a key role in oxidative phosphorylation in
the cellular respiratory chain. In addition to redox reactions such as oxidative
phosphorylation, NAD+ is involved in various cellular processes including
genomic repair and stability, chromatin modulation, calcium homeostasis, aging and
apoptosis12345. In particular, most cancer cells produce
NAD+ to sustain rapid growth and to tolerate DNA damage and genetic
instabilities caused by alkylating agent treatment by acting as a substrate of poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase567. Quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase
(QPRT, EC 2.4.2.19) belongs to the phosphoribosyltransferase (PRT) family and is
involved in de novo NAD biosynthesis using quinolinic acid (QA) as a precursor in
both prokaryotes and eukaryotes8. QPRT catalyses the transfer of QA
converted from tryptophan and 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP), yielding carbon
dioxide, pyrophosphate and nicotinic acid mononucleotide (NAMN), which is a precursor of
nicotinate adenine dinucleotide followed by the conversion to NAD (Supplementary Fig. S1). QA is the first intermediate
in the de novo synthesis of NAD, which is produced via the degradation of
tryptophan through the metabolic cascade in the brain known as the kynurenine
pathway9. In mammals, QA is a potent excitotoxic compound in the
central nervous system that causes neuronal damage via continuous activation of
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors10. QPRT plays a prominent role in
QA homeostasis in the brain, therefore, malfunction of QPRT increases QA levels, which
is strongly involved in a series of severe neurodegenerative disorders including
Huntington’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, Epilepsia and AIDS
dementia complex1112131415161718. Regulation of the QA
level by QPRT in vivo affects the kynurenine metabolic pathway in the brain,
liver and kidney, and contributes to the neuropathological conditions and
immune-activated diseases18. QPRT also inhibits the apoptotic inducer
active caspase-3, suppressing the spontaneous cell death pathway19.
Recently, QPRT has attracted attention as a target protein essential for the survival of
malignant glioma, a type of tumour consisting of glial cells in the central nervous
system2021.

QPRT structures from various organisms have been previously reported. All structures
exhibit typical features of the type II PRT structure including an N-terminal
four-stranded open-face β-sandwich domain and a C-terminal
α/β barrel domain, unlike the
α4/β5 folds of other members of PRT.
QPRTs have been shown to exist as dimers or hexamers2223242526272829. QPRTs from eukaryotes, including human
(HsQPRT), porcine (SsQPRT), rat and yeast (ScQPRT), are known
to be hexamers in solution22303132, which is consistent with the
results of structural studies of HsQPRT in complex with a tartrate, which mimics
part of QA and ScQPRT, demonstrating that these molecules form hexameric
structures. However, most prokaryotic QPRTs exist as dimers, although the enzymes from
Helicobacter pylori and Thermus thermophilus have a hexameric
structure that is identical to HsQPRT-tartrate and ScQPRT23242627. Based on its mechanical kinetics, the F181P mutant in the
dimer-dimer interface of QPRT from Helicobacter pylori (HpQPRT) changed
the oligomer from a hexamer to a dimer, which exhibited dramatically reduced enzyme
stability and non-functionality33. Although numerous structures of
HsQPRT have been determined in one apo form and two complexes with reactant
QA analogues (tartrate and phthalate), the molecular basis for the existence of
HsQPRT and the catalysis of the phosphoribosyl transfer reaction as a hexamer
remains unclear. Here, we report the crystal structures of HsQPRT in the apo form
with different conformations and the QA (HsQPRT-QA)- and NAMN
(HsQPRT-NAMN)-bound forms. Comparison of the apo enzyme structures reveal that,
the reactant (QA) and the reaction product (NAMN) complexes have a conformational change
that dramatically affected two distinctive flexible loops around the active site as well
as the interface forming the hexamer, indicating that the reaction mediated by hexameric
HsQPRT is regulated by the interaction between two dimeric subunits. We also
found that the N-terminal helix of HsQPRT was critical for hexamer formation. Our
results provide structural insight into the concerted mode of the reactant binding and
hexamer stabilisation of HsQPRT. In addition, analysis of the range of structural
diversity of QPRTs has clinical implications in the development of anticancer agents in
the treatment of malignant glioma.

ResultsOverall structure of human QPRTTo investigate the molecular basis of mammalian QPRT in the hexamer state upon
substrate binding, we determined the structures of HsQPRT in the apo form
and in complex with its reactant QA as well as the reaction product NAMN at 2.8,
3.1 and 2.6 Å, respectively. The data collection and
refinement statistics are summarised in Table 1. The
HsQPRT monomer consists of 12 α-helices and 12
β-strands arranged into two structural domains: an N-terminal
open-faced α/β-sandwich domain (residues
1–112 and 279–288; six-stranded antiparallel
β-sheets and five α-helices) and a C-terminal open TIM
α/β-barrel domain (residues 113–278; six
β-strands and seven α-helices) (Fig.
1a). The domain architecture and secondary structure elements were
nearly the same in both the apo form and the substrate complexes (Fig. 1b). The dimer of HsQPRT is formed by a head-to-tail
interaction of the N-terminal domain of one monomer and the C-terminal domain of
the other monomer (Fig. 1c). The active sites of the
twisted bow tie-shaped HsQPRT dimer are located at the interface between
the α/β-barrel of one subunit and the
β-sandwich of the other subunit. The active site consists of the
C-terminal α/β-barrel with one N-terminal
β-sheet for dimerisation, which is consistent with the dimeric
interfaces found in other type II PRTs2734. Each monomer
extensively connects to three other monomers, indicating that HsQPRT
forms intra- and inter-contacting arrangements in the hexameric assembly.Hexameric HsQPRT is formed by the trimerisation of dimers in a three-fold
axis, which is similar to other eukaryotic enzymes such as SsQPRT and
ScQPRT (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. S2). Size exclusion
chromatographic analysis revealed that HsQPRT forms a hexamer with an
estimated molecular weight of approximately 190 kDa. Based on
biochemical approaches, this hexamerisation is consistent with QPRTs from other
mammals such as rat and porcine28293031.Structural comparison of human and other eukaryotic QPRTsVarious structures of eukaryotic QPRTs have been reported, such as those from
human (apo and complexes with tartrate or phthalate, an analogue of QA with a
benzene ring rather than a pyridine ring)2629, porcine (NAMN
complex)28 and yeast (apo, complexes with QA, PRPP or
phthalate)27. The apo HsQPRT structure was compared
with previously reported HsQPRT and ScQPRT apo structures (PDB
codes 4KWV and 3C2E)2729. However, the apo structure of
HsQPRT described by Malik et al. is relatively similar to that
of ScQPRT. Moreover, our apo HsQPRT structure showed a different
conformation from other structures, particularly in loop L
(H160–L167) and loop O (A191–V198) (Fig.
1e,f). Two loops were located in not only the active site but also
the dimer-dimer interface. The orientations of these loops in our apo structure
resembled an open structure, whereas that in the other apo structure appeared as
a more closed dimer-dimer interface, referred to as HsQPRT-open and
HsQPRT-closed, respectively. Conformational changes in loops L and O
suggest that apo HsQPRT exists as a dynamically equilibrated structure
around six active sites located in three dimer-dimer interfaces, potentially
affecting substrate binding and enzyme turnover rate.In addition to analysing complex structures, we also compared the structures of
QPRT in complex with QA (reactant of HsQPRT), tartrate (PDB code 2JBM)
and phthalate (PDB code 4KWW) to investigate the differences in the binding mode
between the substrate and its mimic. Both loops L and O in the two structures of
HsQPRT in complex with QA analogues were more similar to
HsQPRT-closed than to HsQPRT-open. Tartrate has a hydroxyl ethyl
group rather than the pyridine ring of QA, which induces conformational changes
in H160 and R161 (Fig. 1g). Although R161 showed an ionic
interaction with a carboxylate in both QA and tartrate, R161 of the tartrate
complex protruded into the pyridine moiety of QA and created an additional
interaction with E246 and S268. Alternatively, R161 of HsQPRT-QA rotated
by approximately 50° to avoid the steric hindrance against the
pyridine moiety and resulted in a conformational change of the imidazole side
chain of H160 in addition to its interaction with the carboxylate moiety of QA.
Moreover, the ε-amino group of K171 was rotated by approximately
45° because of the difference in the position of the carboxylate
moiety of QA and tartrate molecules of 2.4 Å. Phthalate
showed a highly similar mode of binding to that of QA, making HsQPRT the
stable intermediate state that could not combine with PRPP to produce NAMN.In addition to in humans, the NAMN-bound QPRT structure from porcine
(SsQPRT-NAMN, PDB code 4I9A) showed structural and sequence conservation,
particularly near the active site. Although the NAMN binding site is similar
between human and porcine, residues near the dimer-dimer interface showed
different conformations (Supplementary
Fig. S3). In MolA, the residue corresponding to R190 of
SsQPRT-NAMN is glutamine in human and was rotated by approximately
180°. In addition, the human protein contains D193 rather than N193
from porcine, enabling higher ionic contacts with H133′ in MolF and
indicating that HsQPRT forms a more stable hexameric configuration
compared to the porcine enzyme.Changes in the dimer-dimer interaction upon substrate bindingAlthough the overall folds of hexameric HsQPRT-open and substrate
complexes were highly similar, specific regions of the structures differed,
particularly the dimer-dimer interfaces (Fig. 2a,b). In
the MolA of the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L and loop O located in the
dimer-dimer interface formed extensive hydrophobic interactions with loop O and
loop L in the subunit of the adjacent dimer (MolF). Two flexible loops showed
major differences upon substrate binding, which was not introduced in all QPRT
structures determined previously including apo structures (Fig.
3a). Both loops L and O were nearly the same in the two complex
structures (QA and NAMN) as well as in HsQPRT-closed (Fig.
3a,b). In the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L of MolA had a
compact interaction with MolF. In particular, L164 in loop L showed a
hydrophobic interaction with A192′, F194′ and
L196′ in loop O of the adjacent subunit. However, the ionic
interactions of H160 and R161 with the carboxyl moiety of both QA and NAMN
induced overall rearrangement of loop L and a break in the contact between the
two dimers that constituted the interaction between loop L of MolA and loop
O′ of MolF. In the structure of the HsQPRT-substrate complex,
the side chain of R161 in loop L was moved by approximately
9.5 Å outward relative to its position within
HsQPRT-open. G165 and G166 of loop L, which is only conserved in
mammalian QPRTs (Supplementary Fig.
S4), not only participates in the interaction but also provides
structural flexibility enabling loop L to move dynamically around the
dimer-dimer interface. Loop O of the HsQPRT-open structure eventually
opens the loop conformation, showing an approximately
5.3 Å difference compared to that of the substrate
complex. Loops L and O were stabilised in an open conformation through
hydrophobic loop-loop interactions with those of an adjacent subunit. Structural
comparison of the HsQPRT and substrate complex indicates that loop L
functions as a lid for substrate binding and that R161 is an allosteric residue
that not only functions as a key player in the active site in the presence of a
ligand but also as a mediator between the intermolecular interactions to release
the product and form a hexamer in the HsQPRT-open structure. This is
consistent with the kinetic analysis of the effects of various mutations around
the active sites, which showed that the R161A mutation could abolish substrate
binding and enzyme activity with a 20% capacity of wild-type26.
Consequently, substrate binding of one protomer in one dimer caused
conformational changes in the adjacent protomer in the other dimer via loops L
and O. In addition, changes in the interaction between the two dimers upon
substrate binding also supports that HsQPRT exists as a hexamer that
induces conformational change in the adjacent two dimers while the substrate
binds to one dimer to enable reactant binding. This was further explored and is
described in the next section.The mode of binding of the product NAMN molecule to human QPRT also showed a
distinctive structural difference near the dimer-dimer interface compared to
that of the reactant QA (Fig. 3c). Two hydroxyl groups of
D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-QA showed an ionic interaction with
H133′ of MolF. In contrast, D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-NAMN moved
by approximately 4.9 Å to form ionic contacts with R189
in MolA, which enabled only one hydroxyl group to interact with
H133′ of MolF. These changes in the dimer interactions caused the
product complex to have a more relaxed hexamer. The contact areas between the
two dimers in HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were 2127 and
2010 Å2, respectively. These results
suggest that QA-bound HsQPRT maintains a stable hexamer to mediate the
subsequent reaction, such as PRPP binding and phosphoribosyl transfer into QA to
generate NAMN. After the reaction, a weaker dimer-dimer interaction between
HsQPRT and NAMN compared to QA appeared to be favourable for release
of the reaction product. Changes in the interaction between two dimeric subunits
were found not only in reactant binding but also in the conversion from the
reactant to the product.Significance of the N-terminal alpha helix in hexamer formation in human
QPRTThe N-terminal region of eukaryotic QPRTs from yeast to human mainly consists of
highly conserved hydrophobic residues such as leucine and proline (Fig. 4a). Although some of the prokaryotic QPRTs such as
HpQPRT and TtQPRT appear to exist as hexamers, most exhibit a
dimeric configuration. This finding supports the hypothesis that eukaryotic
QPRTs maintain the stability of hexamer assembly by generating a hydrophobic
interaction with the adjacent dimer within the hexamer structure through their
N-terminus.Interestingly, structures of mammalian QPRTs have unique features compared with
that of the yeast enzyme, such as an α-helix of approximately two
turns at the N-terminus (helix α1), which is located in the
dimer-dimer interface such as loops L and O (Fig. 4b).
Consistent with this hypothesis, helix α1 of MolA
(A3–P11) in the HsQPRT structure interacts with helix
α3′ (Y32′–S37′) in
the adjacent dimer (Fig. 4c). The conformation of helix
α1 is very similar among apo and complex structures with substrates,
the root mean square deviations of which are less than
1.0 Å, as shown in Fig. 3b and
Supplementary Figure S5.
Irrespective of substrate binding, highly conserved N-terminal hydrophobic
residues L6–P11 in MolA form extensive hydrophobic contacts with
L30′–A39′ in another subunit of the adjacent
dimer, MolE. Because the interface between the dimers is mostly hydrophobic,
interactions mediated by hydrophobic residues in helix α1 are highly
conserved around mammalian QPRTs and contribute to the formation of the
dimer-dimer interface. Hydrophobic interactions in helix α1 in
HsQPRT occupy approximately 30% of the total contact area between the
two dimers. Thus, two intermolecular interactions, such as MolA-MolE (helix
α1-helix α3′) and MolA-MolF (loop L-loop
O′), possibly play an essential role in hexamerisation of the
HsQPRT structure with sustained dimeric interfaces. To examine the
role of hydrophobic residues in the N-terminus of HsQPRT involved in the
oligomeric state, we generated serial N-terminal deletion mutants
(NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and
NΔ12) (Fig. 4d). NΔ4 eluted as a
hexamer that was similar to wild-type, while NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12 were eluted as dimers, indicating that
HsQPRT hexamerisation may be dependent on three hydrophobic residues,
L8, L9 and P11. These residues are highly conserved throughout mammalian
enzymes, presuming that truncated HsQPRT at the N-terminus resembles the
dimer found in yeast enzyme. This finding is consistent with the result of the
same experiment using full-length ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated
mutant (NΔ10Sc) (Supplementary Fig. S6). The full-length enzyme
exists as a hexamer, but NΔ10Sc was found to be in
the dimeric state, which is consistent with the size distribution from hexameric
to dimeric HsQPRT. This indicates that the N-terminal hydrophobic
residues of eukaryotic QPRTs are important for hexamer formation.To determine how helix α1 is involved in hexamer stabilisation in
HsQPRT, we performed a heat aggregation test using the
spectrophotometric method. Interestingly, the half-aggregation temperature of
full-length HsQPRT (83.6 °C) was approximately
halved for the mutant missing helix α1, which included only nine
residues (NΔ9, 48.3 °C) (Fig.
4e). Combined with structural information, these results indicate
that elimination of the hydrophobic interaction by helix α1
sufficiently makes HsQPRT sufficiently unstable to maintain the hexameric
configuration. However, how conversion of hexameric HsQPRT to a dimeric
protein by eliminating helix α1 affects the enzyme function remains
unclear, although the NΔ9 mutant has residues forming the intact
active site. Additionally, Liu et al. reported that the reactant QA binds
to HsQPRT prior to PRPP binding26. Thus, we evaluated the
binding affinity of both the full-length protein (hexamer) and the
NΔ9 mutant (dimer) to the first-order reactant QA using isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) (Fig. 5). The
Kd value between QA and the NΔ9 mutant
(401 ± 56 μM) was
decreased by approximately 80-fold than that of the full-length protein
(4.8 ± 0.4 μM) and
was similar to the wild-type ScQPRT
(450 ± 30 μM)27. The QA binding into full-length HsQPRT is endothermic
and entropically driven, suggesting that the dynamicity between the open and
closed conformations of the hexameric HsQPRT is important for binding.
Such dynamicity is due to the flexible loops formed the dimer-dimer interface
conserved only in mammalian QPRT (Supplementary Fig. S4). The dimeric NΔ9 mutant may not
have structural flexibility because it lacks the dimer-dimer interaction, which
may affect formation of the closed conformation and make the reaction
exothermic. Although ScQPRT forms a hexamer, it showed only a closed
conformation even though the apo form, which may hinder QA accessibility. This
explains why the NΔ9 mutant showed similar binding affinity to
ScQPRT. In contrast, full-length HsQPRT stabilised the
hexamer, which could form an open conformation (Supplementary Fig. S7). Thus, hexameric
HsQPRT enhances QA accessibility, improving binding affinity. The
results of the ITC experiment indicated that HsQPRT exists as hexamer to
enhance the efficiency of reactant binding by stabilizing the three dynamic
dimer-dimer interfaces of hexameric HsQPRT to accommodate the reactant.
Moreover, we measured the binding affinity and calculated the Hill coefficient
to analyse the cooperativity of binding to the hexameric HsQPRT for QA,
phthalic acid, PRPP, phthalic acid with saturated PRPP and PRPP with saturated
phthalic acid. We used phthalic acid rather than QA for bi-substrate binding, as
the reaction interfered with the affinity measurement in the presence of the two
substrates. We calculated the Hill coefficient by analysing the Hill plot. The
Kd value of QA was
4.8 ± 0.4 μM with a
Hill coefficient of 1.28 ± 0.09, indicating
that QA binds to hexameric apo HsQPRT with positive cooperativity (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. S8). The binding property of phthalic acid to
HsQPRT was very similar to that of QA with a Kd
value and Hill coefficient of
5.2 ± 0.2 μM and
1.25 ± 0.02, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S9). Thus, phthalic acid is
a good analogue of QA for measuring bi-substrate binding and the cooperativity
of substrate binding. We could not measure the binding properties of PRPP likely
because of the low binding affinity of PRPP (Supplementary Fig. S10a). The
Kd value of PRPP for the yeast enzyme was reported to be
approximately 10 mM, which exceeds the limit of ITC measurement27. In order to investigate the binding affinity and cooperativity
for the binding of the second substrate, we titrated PRPP under saturated
conditions of phthalic acid and vice versa (Supplementary Fig. S10,S11). Under phthalic
acid saturated conditions, PRPP binding showed positive cooperativity, with a
Kd value and Hill coefficient of
124 ± 5 μM and
1.14 ± 0.01, respectively. These results
indicate that PRPP binding affinity increases in the presence of the first-order
substrate QA. Cooperativity of the second substrate (PRPP) binding was lower
than that of the first substrate (QA). In the reverse experiment, under PRPP
saturated conditions, phthalic acid binding affinity dramatically decreased by
approximately 6-fold
(Kd = 33.3 ± 3.7 μM)
and the positive cooperativity decreased to
1.11 ± 0.01. This result indicates that PRPP
inhibits first-order substrate (QA) binding. Based on structural and biochemical
evidence, mammalian QPRTs including the human enzyme may exist as a hexamer by
the trimerisation of dimers assisted by helix α1, consisting of only
nine residues in its N-terminus. Moreover, the hexameric configuration is
essential for not only stabilizing the hexameric enzyme through intermolecular
hydrophobic interactions between the two dimers independently of substrate
binding, but also contributes to cooperative reactant binding.

Overall structure of human QPRTTo investigate the molecular basis of mammalian QPRT in the hexamer state upon
substrate binding, we determined the structures of HsQPRT in the apo form
and in complex with its reactant QA as well as the reaction product NAMN at 2.8,
3.1 and 2.6 Å, respectively. The data collection and
refinement statistics are summarised in Table 1. The
HsQPRT monomer consists of 12 α-helices and 12
β-strands arranged into two structural domains: an N-terminal
open-faced α/β-sandwich domain (residues
1–112 and 279–288; six-stranded antiparallel
β-sheets and five α-helices) and a C-terminal open TIM
α/β-barrel domain (residues 113–278; six
β-strands and seven α-helices) (Fig.
1a). The domain architecture and secondary structure elements were
nearly the same in both the apo form and the substrate complexes (Fig. 1b). The dimer of HsQPRT is formed by a head-to-tail
interaction of the N-terminal domain of one monomer and the C-terminal domain of
the other monomer (Fig. 1c). The active sites of the
twisted bow tie-shaped HsQPRT dimer are located at the interface between
the α/β-barrel of one subunit and the
β-sandwich of the other subunit. The active site consists of the
C-terminal α/β-barrel with one N-terminal
β-sheet for dimerisation, which is consistent with the dimeric
interfaces found in other type II PRTs2734. Each monomer
extensively connects to three other monomers, indicating that HsQPRT
forms intra- and inter-contacting arrangements in the hexameric assembly.Hexameric HsQPRT is formed by the trimerisation of dimers in a three-fold
axis, which is similar to other eukaryotic enzymes such as SsQPRT and
ScQPRT (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. S2). Size exclusion
chromatographic analysis revealed that HsQPRT forms a hexamer with an
estimated molecular weight of approximately 190 kDa. Based on
biochemical approaches, this hexamerisation is consistent with QPRTs from other
mammals such as rat and porcine28293031.

Overall structure of human QPRT

To investigate the molecular basis of mammalian QPRT in the hexamer state upon
substrate binding, we determined the structures of HsQPRT in the apo form
and in complex with its reactant QA as well as the reaction product NAMN at 2.8,
3.1 and 2.6 Å, respectively. The data collection and
refinement statistics are summarised in Table 1. The
HsQPRT monomer consists of 12 α-helices and 12
β-strands arranged into two structural domains: an N-terminal
open-faced α/β-sandwich domain (residues
1–112 and 279–288; six-stranded antiparallel
β-sheets and five α-helices) and a C-terminal open TIM
α/β-barrel domain (residues 113–278; six
β-strands and seven α-helices) (Fig.
1a). The domain architecture and secondary structure elements were
nearly the same in both the apo form and the substrate complexes (Fig. 1b). The dimer of HsQPRT is formed by a head-to-tail
interaction of the N-terminal domain of one monomer and the C-terminal domain of
the other monomer (Fig. 1c). The active sites of the
twisted bow tie-shaped HsQPRT dimer are located at the interface between
the α/β-barrel of one subunit and the
β-sandwich of the other subunit. The active site consists of the
C-terminal α/β-barrel with one N-terminal
β-sheet for dimerisation, which is consistent with the dimeric
interfaces found in other type II PRTs2734. Each monomer
extensively connects to three other monomers, indicating that HsQPRT
forms intra- and inter-contacting arrangements in the hexameric assembly.

Hexameric HsQPRT is formed by the trimerisation of dimers in a three-fold
axis, which is similar to other eukaryotic enzymes such as SsQPRT and
ScQPRT (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. S2). Size exclusion
chromatographic analysis revealed that HsQPRT forms a hexamer with an
estimated molecular weight of approximately 190 kDa. Based on
biochemical approaches, this hexamerisation is consistent with QPRTs from other
mammals such as rat and porcine28293031.

Structural comparison of human and other eukaryotic QPRTsVarious structures of eukaryotic QPRTs have been reported, such as those from
human (apo and complexes with tartrate or phthalate, an analogue of QA with a
benzene ring rather than a pyridine ring)2629, porcine (NAMN
complex)28 and yeast (apo, complexes with QA, PRPP or
phthalate)27. The apo HsQPRT structure was compared
with previously reported HsQPRT and ScQPRT apo structures (PDB
codes 4KWV and 3C2E)2729. However, the apo structure of
HsQPRT described by Malik et al. is relatively similar to that
of ScQPRT. Moreover, our apo HsQPRT structure showed a different
conformation from other structures, particularly in loop L
(H160–L167) and loop O (A191–V198) (Fig.
1e,f). Two loops were located in not only the active site but also
the dimer-dimer interface. The orientations of these loops in our apo structure
resembled an open structure, whereas that in the other apo structure appeared as
a more closed dimer-dimer interface, referred to as HsQPRT-open and
HsQPRT-closed, respectively. Conformational changes in loops L and O
suggest that apo HsQPRT exists as a dynamically equilibrated structure
around six active sites located in three dimer-dimer interfaces, potentially
affecting substrate binding and enzyme turnover rate.In addition to analysing complex structures, we also compared the structures of
QPRT in complex with QA (reactant of HsQPRT), tartrate (PDB code 2JBM)
and phthalate (PDB code 4KWW) to investigate the differences in the binding mode
between the substrate and its mimic. Both loops L and O in the two structures of
HsQPRT in complex with QA analogues were more similar to
HsQPRT-closed than to HsQPRT-open. Tartrate has a hydroxyl ethyl
group rather than the pyridine ring of QA, which induces conformational changes
in H160 and R161 (Fig. 1g). Although R161 showed an ionic
interaction with a carboxylate in both QA and tartrate, R161 of the tartrate
complex protruded into the pyridine moiety of QA and created an additional
interaction with E246 and S268. Alternatively, R161 of HsQPRT-QA rotated
by approximately 50° to avoid the steric hindrance against the
pyridine moiety and resulted in a conformational change of the imidazole side
chain of H160 in addition to its interaction with the carboxylate moiety of QA.
Moreover, the ε-amino group of K171 was rotated by approximately
45° because of the difference in the position of the carboxylate
moiety of QA and tartrate molecules of 2.4 Å. Phthalate
showed a highly similar mode of binding to that of QA, making HsQPRT the
stable intermediate state that could not combine with PRPP to produce NAMN.In addition to in humans, the NAMN-bound QPRT structure from porcine
(SsQPRT-NAMN, PDB code 4I9A) showed structural and sequence conservation,
particularly near the active site. Although the NAMN binding site is similar
between human and porcine, residues near the dimer-dimer interface showed
different conformations (Supplementary
Fig. S3). In MolA, the residue corresponding to R190 of
SsQPRT-NAMN is glutamine in human and was rotated by approximately
180°. In addition, the human protein contains D193 rather than N193
from porcine, enabling higher ionic contacts with H133′ in MolF and
indicating that HsQPRT forms a more stable hexameric configuration
compared to the porcine enzyme.

Structural comparison of human and other eukaryotic QPRTs

Various structures of eukaryotic QPRTs have been reported, such as those from
human (apo and complexes with tartrate or phthalate, an analogue of QA with a
benzene ring rather than a pyridine ring)2629, porcine (NAMN
complex)28 and yeast (apo, complexes with QA, PRPP or
phthalate)27. The apo HsQPRT structure was compared
with previously reported HsQPRT and ScQPRT apo structures (PDB
codes 4KWV and 3C2E)2729. However, the apo structure of
HsQPRT described by Malik et al. is relatively similar to that
of ScQPRT. Moreover, our apo HsQPRT structure showed a different
conformation from other structures, particularly in loop L
(H160–L167) and loop O (A191–V198) (Fig.
1e,f). Two loops were located in not only the active site but also
the dimer-dimer interface. The orientations of these loops in our apo structure
resembled an open structure, whereas that in the other apo structure appeared as
a more closed dimer-dimer interface, referred to as HsQPRT-open and
HsQPRT-closed, respectively. Conformational changes in loops L and O
suggest that apo HsQPRT exists as a dynamically equilibrated structure
around six active sites located in three dimer-dimer interfaces, potentially
affecting substrate binding and enzyme turnover rate.

In addition to analysing complex structures, we also compared the structures of
QPRT in complex with QA (reactant of HsQPRT), tartrate (PDB code 2JBM)
and phthalate (PDB code 4KWW) to investigate the differences in the binding mode
between the substrate and its mimic. Both loops L and O in the two structures of
HsQPRT in complex with QA analogues were more similar to
HsQPRT-closed than to HsQPRT-open. Tartrate has a hydroxyl ethyl
group rather than the pyridine ring of QA, which induces conformational changes
in H160 and R161 (Fig. 1g). Although R161 showed an ionic
interaction with a carboxylate in both QA and tartrate, R161 of the tartrate
complex protruded into the pyridine moiety of QA and created an additional
interaction with E246 and S268. Alternatively, R161 of HsQPRT-QA rotated
by approximately 50° to avoid the steric hindrance against the
pyridine moiety and resulted in a conformational change of the imidazole side
chain of H160 in addition to its interaction with the carboxylate moiety of QA.
Moreover, the ε-amino group of K171 was rotated by approximately
45° because of the difference in the position of the carboxylate
moiety of QA and tartrate molecules of 2.4 Å. Phthalate
showed a highly similar mode of binding to that of QA, making HsQPRT the
stable intermediate state that could not combine with PRPP to produce NAMN.

In addition to in humans, the NAMN-bound QPRT structure from porcine
(SsQPRT-NAMN, PDB code 4I9A) showed structural and sequence conservation,
particularly near the active site. Although the NAMN binding site is similar
between human and porcine, residues near the dimer-dimer interface showed
different conformations (Supplementary
Fig. S3). In MolA, the residue corresponding to R190 of
SsQPRT-NAMN is glutamine in human and was rotated by approximately
180°. In addition, the human protein contains D193 rather than N193
from porcine, enabling higher ionic contacts with H133′ in MolF and
indicating that HsQPRT forms a more stable hexameric configuration
compared to the porcine enzyme.

Changes in the dimer-dimer interaction upon substrate bindingAlthough the overall folds of hexameric HsQPRT-open and substrate
complexes were highly similar, specific regions of the structures differed,
particularly the dimer-dimer interfaces (Fig. 2a,b). In
the MolA of the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L and loop O located in the
dimer-dimer interface formed extensive hydrophobic interactions with loop O and
loop L in the subunit of the adjacent dimer (MolF). Two flexible loops showed
major differences upon substrate binding, which was not introduced in all QPRT
structures determined previously including apo structures (Fig.
3a). Both loops L and O were nearly the same in the two complex
structures (QA and NAMN) as well as in HsQPRT-closed (Fig.
3a,b). In the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L of MolA had a
compact interaction with MolF. In particular, L164 in loop L showed a
hydrophobic interaction with A192′, F194′ and
L196′ in loop O of the adjacent subunit. However, the ionic
interactions of H160 and R161 with the carboxyl moiety of both QA and NAMN
induced overall rearrangement of loop L and a break in the contact between the
two dimers that constituted the interaction between loop L of MolA and loop
O′ of MolF. In the structure of the HsQPRT-substrate complex,
the side chain of R161 in loop L was moved by approximately
9.5 Å outward relative to its position within
HsQPRT-open. G165 and G166 of loop L, which is only conserved in
mammalian QPRTs (Supplementary Fig.
S4), not only participates in the interaction but also provides
structural flexibility enabling loop L to move dynamically around the
dimer-dimer interface. Loop O of the HsQPRT-open structure eventually
opens the loop conformation, showing an approximately
5.3 Å difference compared to that of the substrate
complex. Loops L and O were stabilised in an open conformation through
hydrophobic loop-loop interactions with those of an adjacent subunit. Structural
comparison of the HsQPRT and substrate complex indicates that loop L
functions as a lid for substrate binding and that R161 is an allosteric residue
that not only functions as a key player in the active site in the presence of a
ligand but also as a mediator between the intermolecular interactions to release
the product and form a hexamer in the HsQPRT-open structure. This is
consistent with the kinetic analysis of the effects of various mutations around
the active sites, which showed that the R161A mutation could abolish substrate
binding and enzyme activity with a 20% capacity of wild-type26.
Consequently, substrate binding of one protomer in one dimer caused
conformational changes in the adjacent protomer in the other dimer via loops L
and O. In addition, changes in the interaction between the two dimers upon
substrate binding also supports that HsQPRT exists as a hexamer that
induces conformational change in the adjacent two dimers while the substrate
binds to one dimer to enable reactant binding. This was further explored and is
described in the next section.The mode of binding of the product NAMN molecule to human QPRT also showed a
distinctive structural difference near the dimer-dimer interface compared to
that of the reactant QA (Fig. 3c). Two hydroxyl groups of
D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-QA showed an ionic interaction with
H133′ of MolF. In contrast, D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-NAMN moved
by approximately 4.9 Å to form ionic contacts with R189
in MolA, which enabled only one hydroxyl group to interact with
H133′ of MolF. These changes in the dimer interactions caused the
product complex to have a more relaxed hexamer. The contact areas between the
two dimers in HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were 2127 and
2010 Å2, respectively. These results
suggest that QA-bound HsQPRT maintains a stable hexamer to mediate the
subsequent reaction, such as PRPP binding and phosphoribosyl transfer into QA to
generate NAMN. After the reaction, a weaker dimer-dimer interaction between
HsQPRT and NAMN compared to QA appeared to be favourable for release
of the reaction product. Changes in the interaction between two dimeric subunits
were found not only in reactant binding but also in the conversion from the
reactant to the product.

Changes in the dimer-dimer interaction upon substrate binding

Although the overall folds of hexameric HsQPRT-open and substrate
complexes were highly similar, specific regions of the structures differed,
particularly the dimer-dimer interfaces (Fig. 2a,b). In
the MolA of the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L and loop O located in the
dimer-dimer interface formed extensive hydrophobic interactions with loop O and
loop L in the subunit of the adjacent dimer (MolF). Two flexible loops showed
major differences upon substrate binding, which was not introduced in all QPRT
structures determined previously including apo structures (Fig.
3a). Both loops L and O were nearly the same in the two complex
structures (QA and NAMN) as well as in HsQPRT-closed (Fig.
3a,b). In the HsQPRT-open structure, loop L of MolA had a
compact interaction with MolF. In particular, L164 in loop L showed a
hydrophobic interaction with A192′, F194′ and
L196′ in loop O of the adjacent subunit. However, the ionic
interactions of H160 and R161 with the carboxyl moiety of both QA and NAMN
induced overall rearrangement of loop L and a break in the contact between the
two dimers that constituted the interaction between loop L of MolA and loop
O′ of MolF. In the structure of the HsQPRT-substrate complex,
the side chain of R161 in loop L was moved by approximately
9.5 Å outward relative to its position within
HsQPRT-open. G165 and G166 of loop L, which is only conserved in
mammalian QPRTs (Supplementary Fig.
S4), not only participates in the interaction but also provides
structural flexibility enabling loop L to move dynamically around the
dimer-dimer interface. Loop O of the HsQPRT-open structure eventually
opens the loop conformation, showing an approximately
5.3 Å difference compared to that of the substrate
complex. Loops L and O were stabilised in an open conformation through
hydrophobic loop-loop interactions with those of an adjacent subunit. Structural
comparison of the HsQPRT and substrate complex indicates that loop L
functions as a lid for substrate binding and that R161 is an allosteric residue
that not only functions as a key player in the active site in the presence of a
ligand but also as a mediator between the intermolecular interactions to release
the product and form a hexamer in the HsQPRT-open structure. This is
consistent with the kinetic analysis of the effects of various mutations around
the active sites, which showed that the R161A mutation could abolish substrate
binding and enzyme activity with a 20% capacity of wild-type26.
Consequently, substrate binding of one protomer in one dimer caused
conformational changes in the adjacent protomer in the other dimer via loops L
and O. In addition, changes in the interaction between the two dimers upon
substrate binding also supports that HsQPRT exists as a hexamer that
induces conformational change in the adjacent two dimers while the substrate
binds to one dimer to enable reactant binding. This was further explored and is
described in the next section.

The mode of binding of the product NAMN molecule to human QPRT also showed a
distinctive structural difference near the dimer-dimer interface compared to
that of the reactant QA (Fig. 3c). Two hydroxyl groups of
D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-QA showed an ionic interaction with
H133′ of MolF. In contrast, D193 in MolA of HsQPRT-NAMN moved
by approximately 4.9 Å to form ionic contacts with R189
in MolA, which enabled only one hydroxyl group to interact with
H133′ of MolF. These changes in the dimer interactions caused the
product complex to have a more relaxed hexamer. The contact areas between the
two dimers in HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were 2127 and
2010 Å2, respectively. These results
suggest that QA-bound HsQPRT maintains a stable hexamer to mediate the
subsequent reaction, such as PRPP binding and phosphoribosyl transfer into QA to
generate NAMN. After the reaction, a weaker dimer-dimer interaction between
HsQPRT and NAMN compared to QA appeared to be favourable for release
of the reaction product. Changes in the interaction between two dimeric subunits
were found not only in reactant binding but also in the conversion from the
reactant to the product.

Significance of the N-terminal alpha helix in hexamer formation in human
QPRTThe N-terminal region of eukaryotic QPRTs from yeast to human mainly consists of
highly conserved hydrophobic residues such as leucine and proline (Fig. 4a). Although some of the prokaryotic QPRTs such as
HpQPRT and TtQPRT appear to exist as hexamers, most exhibit a
dimeric configuration. This finding supports the hypothesis that eukaryotic
QPRTs maintain the stability of hexamer assembly by generating a hydrophobic
interaction with the adjacent dimer within the hexamer structure through their
N-terminus.Interestingly, structures of mammalian QPRTs have unique features compared with
that of the yeast enzyme, such as an α-helix of approximately two
turns at the N-terminus (helix α1), which is located in the
dimer-dimer interface such as loops L and O (Fig. 4b).
Consistent with this hypothesis, helix α1 of MolA
(A3–P11) in the HsQPRT structure interacts with helix
α3′ (Y32′–S37′) in
the adjacent dimer (Fig. 4c). The conformation of helix
α1 is very similar among apo and complex structures with substrates,
the root mean square deviations of which are less than
1.0 Å, as shown in Fig. 3b and
Supplementary Figure S5.
Irrespective of substrate binding, highly conserved N-terminal hydrophobic
residues L6–P11 in MolA form extensive hydrophobic contacts with
L30′–A39′ in another subunit of the adjacent
dimer, MolE. Because the interface between the dimers is mostly hydrophobic,
interactions mediated by hydrophobic residues in helix α1 are highly
conserved around mammalian QPRTs and contribute to the formation of the
dimer-dimer interface. Hydrophobic interactions in helix α1 in
HsQPRT occupy approximately 30% of the total contact area between the
two dimers. Thus, two intermolecular interactions, such as MolA-MolE (helix
α1-helix α3′) and MolA-MolF (loop L-loop
O′), possibly play an essential role in hexamerisation of the
HsQPRT structure with sustained dimeric interfaces. To examine the
role of hydrophobic residues in the N-terminus of HsQPRT involved in the
oligomeric state, we generated serial N-terminal deletion mutants
(NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and
NΔ12) (Fig. 4d). NΔ4 eluted as a
hexamer that was similar to wild-type, while NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12 were eluted as dimers, indicating that
HsQPRT hexamerisation may be dependent on three hydrophobic residues,
L8, L9 and P11. These residues are highly conserved throughout mammalian
enzymes, presuming that truncated HsQPRT at the N-terminus resembles the
dimer found in yeast enzyme. This finding is consistent with the result of the
same experiment using full-length ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated
mutant (NΔ10Sc) (Supplementary Fig. S6). The full-length enzyme
exists as a hexamer, but NΔ10Sc was found to be in
the dimeric state, which is consistent with the size distribution from hexameric
to dimeric HsQPRT. This indicates that the N-terminal hydrophobic
residues of eukaryotic QPRTs are important for hexamer formation.To determine how helix α1 is involved in hexamer stabilisation in
HsQPRT, we performed a heat aggregation test using the
spectrophotometric method. Interestingly, the half-aggregation temperature of
full-length HsQPRT (83.6 °C) was approximately
halved for the mutant missing helix α1, which included only nine
residues (NΔ9, 48.3 °C) (Fig.
4e). Combined with structural information, these results indicate
that elimination of the hydrophobic interaction by helix α1
sufficiently makes HsQPRT sufficiently unstable to maintain the hexameric
configuration. However, how conversion of hexameric HsQPRT to a dimeric
protein by eliminating helix α1 affects the enzyme function remains
unclear, although the NΔ9 mutant has residues forming the intact
active site. Additionally, Liu et al. reported that the reactant QA binds
to HsQPRT prior to PRPP binding26. Thus, we evaluated the
binding affinity of both the full-length protein (hexamer) and the
NΔ9 mutant (dimer) to the first-order reactant QA using isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) (Fig. 5). The
Kd value between QA and the NΔ9 mutant
(401 ± 56 μM) was
decreased by approximately 80-fold than that of the full-length protein
(4.8 ± 0.4 μM) and
was similar to the wild-type ScQPRT
(450 ± 30 μM)27. The QA binding into full-length HsQPRT is endothermic
and entropically driven, suggesting that the dynamicity between the open and
closed conformations of the hexameric HsQPRT is important for binding.
Such dynamicity is due to the flexible loops formed the dimer-dimer interface
conserved only in mammalian QPRT (Supplementary Fig. S4). The dimeric NΔ9 mutant may not
have structural flexibility because it lacks the dimer-dimer interaction, which
may affect formation of the closed conformation and make the reaction
exothermic. Although ScQPRT forms a hexamer, it showed only a closed
conformation even though the apo form, which may hinder QA accessibility. This
explains why the NΔ9 mutant showed similar binding affinity to
ScQPRT. In contrast, full-length HsQPRT stabilised the
hexamer, which could form an open conformation (Supplementary Fig. S7). Thus, hexameric
HsQPRT enhances QA accessibility, improving binding affinity. The
results of the ITC experiment indicated that HsQPRT exists as hexamer to
enhance the efficiency of reactant binding by stabilizing the three dynamic
dimer-dimer interfaces of hexameric HsQPRT to accommodate the reactant.
Moreover, we measured the binding affinity and calculated the Hill coefficient
to analyse the cooperativity of binding to the hexameric HsQPRT for QA,
phthalic acid, PRPP, phthalic acid with saturated PRPP and PRPP with saturated
phthalic acid. We used phthalic acid rather than QA for bi-substrate binding, as
the reaction interfered with the affinity measurement in the presence of the two
substrates. We calculated the Hill coefficient by analysing the Hill plot. The
Kd value of QA was
4.8 ± 0.4 μM with a
Hill coefficient of 1.28 ± 0.09, indicating
that QA binds to hexameric apo HsQPRT with positive cooperativity (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. S8). The binding property of phthalic acid to
HsQPRT was very similar to that of QA with a Kd
value and Hill coefficient of
5.2 ± 0.2 μM and
1.25 ± 0.02, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S9). Thus, phthalic acid is
a good analogue of QA for measuring bi-substrate binding and the cooperativity
of substrate binding. We could not measure the binding properties of PRPP likely
because of the low binding affinity of PRPP (Supplementary Fig. S10a). The
Kd value of PRPP for the yeast enzyme was reported to be
approximately 10 mM, which exceeds the limit of ITC measurement27. In order to investigate the binding affinity and cooperativity
for the binding of the second substrate, we titrated PRPP under saturated
conditions of phthalic acid and vice versa (Supplementary Fig. S10,S11). Under phthalic
acid saturated conditions, PRPP binding showed positive cooperativity, with a
Kd value and Hill coefficient of
124 ± 5 μM and
1.14 ± 0.01, respectively. These results
indicate that PRPP binding affinity increases in the presence of the first-order
substrate QA. Cooperativity of the second substrate (PRPP) binding was lower
than that of the first substrate (QA). In the reverse experiment, under PRPP
saturated conditions, phthalic acid binding affinity dramatically decreased by
approximately 6-fold
(Kd = 33.3 ± 3.7 μM)
and the positive cooperativity decreased to
1.11 ± 0.01. This result indicates that PRPP
inhibits first-order substrate (QA) binding. Based on structural and biochemical
evidence, mammalian QPRTs including the human enzyme may exist as a hexamer by
the trimerisation of dimers assisted by helix α1, consisting of only
nine residues in its N-terminus. Moreover, the hexameric configuration is
essential for not only stabilizing the hexameric enzyme through intermolecular
hydrophobic interactions between the two dimers independently of substrate
binding, but also contributes to cooperative reactant binding.

Significance of the N-terminal alpha helix in hexamer formation in human
QPRT

The N-terminal region of eukaryotic QPRTs from yeast to human mainly consists of
highly conserved hydrophobic residues such as leucine and proline (Fig. 4a). Although some of the prokaryotic QPRTs such as
HpQPRT and TtQPRT appear to exist as hexamers, most exhibit a
dimeric configuration. This finding supports the hypothesis that eukaryotic
QPRTs maintain the stability of hexamer assembly by generating a hydrophobic
interaction with the adjacent dimer within the hexamer structure through their
N-terminus.

Interestingly, structures of mammalian QPRTs have unique features compared with
that of the yeast enzyme, such as an α-helix of approximately two
turns at the N-terminus (helix α1), which is located in the
dimer-dimer interface such as loops L and O (Fig. 4b).
Consistent with this hypothesis, helix α1 of MolA
(A3–P11) in the HsQPRT structure interacts with helix
α3′ (Y32′–S37′) in
the adjacent dimer (Fig. 4c). The conformation of helix
α1 is very similar among apo and complex structures with substrates,
the root mean square deviations of which are less than
1.0 Å, as shown in Fig. 3b and
Supplementary Figure S5.
Irrespective of substrate binding, highly conserved N-terminal hydrophobic
residues L6–P11 in MolA form extensive hydrophobic contacts with
L30′–A39′ in another subunit of the adjacent
dimer, MolE. Because the interface between the dimers is mostly hydrophobic,
interactions mediated by hydrophobic residues in helix α1 are highly
conserved around mammalian QPRTs and contribute to the formation of the
dimer-dimer interface. Hydrophobic interactions in helix α1 in
HsQPRT occupy approximately 30% of the total contact area between the
two dimers. Thus, two intermolecular interactions, such as MolA-MolE (helix
α1-helix α3′) and MolA-MolF (loop L-loop
O′), possibly play an essential role in hexamerisation of the
HsQPRT structure with sustained dimeric interfaces. To examine the
role of hydrophobic residues in the N-terminus of HsQPRT involved in the
oligomeric state, we generated serial N-terminal deletion mutants
(NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and
NΔ12) (Fig. 4d). NΔ4 eluted as a
hexamer that was similar to wild-type, while NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12 were eluted as dimers, indicating that
HsQPRT hexamerisation may be dependent on three hydrophobic residues,
L8, L9 and P11. These residues are highly conserved throughout mammalian
enzymes, presuming that truncated HsQPRT at the N-terminus resembles the
dimer found in yeast enzyme. This finding is consistent with the result of the
same experiment using full-length ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated
mutant (NΔ10Sc) (Supplementary Fig. S6). The full-length enzyme
exists as a hexamer, but NΔ10Sc was found to be in
the dimeric state, which is consistent with the size distribution from hexameric
to dimeric HsQPRT. This indicates that the N-terminal hydrophobic
residues of eukaryotic QPRTs are important for hexamer formation.

To determine how helix α1 is involved in hexamer stabilisation in
HsQPRT, we performed a heat aggregation test using the
spectrophotometric method. Interestingly, the half-aggregation temperature of
full-length HsQPRT (83.6 °C) was approximately
halved for the mutant missing helix α1, which included only nine
residues (NΔ9, 48.3 °C) (Fig.
4e). Combined with structural information, these results indicate
that elimination of the hydrophobic interaction by helix α1
sufficiently makes HsQPRT sufficiently unstable to maintain the hexameric
configuration. However, how conversion of hexameric HsQPRT to a dimeric
protein by eliminating helix α1 affects the enzyme function remains
unclear, although the NΔ9 mutant has residues forming the intact
active site. Additionally, Liu et al. reported that the reactant QA binds
to HsQPRT prior to PRPP binding26. Thus, we evaluated the
binding affinity of both the full-length protein (hexamer) and the
NΔ9 mutant (dimer) to the first-order reactant QA using isothermal
titration calorimetry (ITC) (Fig. 5). The
Kd value between QA and the NΔ9 mutant
(401 ± 56 μM) was
decreased by approximately 80-fold than that of the full-length protein
(4.8 ± 0.4 μM) and
was similar to the wild-type ScQPRT
(450 ± 30 μM)27. The QA binding into full-length HsQPRT is endothermic
and entropically driven, suggesting that the dynamicity between the open and
closed conformations of the hexameric HsQPRT is important for binding.
Such dynamicity is due to the flexible loops formed the dimer-dimer interface
conserved only in mammalian QPRT (Supplementary Fig. S4). The dimeric NΔ9 mutant may not
have structural flexibility because it lacks the dimer-dimer interaction, which
may affect formation of the closed conformation and make the reaction
exothermic. Although ScQPRT forms a hexamer, it showed only a closed
conformation even though the apo form, which may hinder QA accessibility. This
explains why the NΔ9 mutant showed similar binding affinity to
ScQPRT. In contrast, full-length HsQPRT stabilised the
hexamer, which could form an open conformation (Supplementary Fig. S7). Thus, hexameric
HsQPRT enhances QA accessibility, improving binding affinity. The
results of the ITC experiment indicated that HsQPRT exists as hexamer to
enhance the efficiency of reactant binding by stabilizing the three dynamic
dimer-dimer interfaces of hexameric HsQPRT to accommodate the reactant.
Moreover, we measured the binding affinity and calculated the Hill coefficient
to analyse the cooperativity of binding to the hexameric HsQPRT for QA,
phthalic acid, PRPP, phthalic acid with saturated PRPP and PRPP with saturated
phthalic acid. We used phthalic acid rather than QA for bi-substrate binding, as
the reaction interfered with the affinity measurement in the presence of the two
substrates. We calculated the Hill coefficient by analysing the Hill plot. The
Kd value of QA was
4.8 ± 0.4 μM with a
Hill coefficient of 1.28 ± 0.09, indicating
that QA binds to hexameric apo HsQPRT with positive cooperativity (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Fig. S8). The binding property of phthalic acid to
HsQPRT was very similar to that of QA with a Kd
value and Hill coefficient of
5.2 ± 0.2 μM and
1.25 ± 0.02, respectively (Supplementary Fig. S9). Thus, phthalic acid is
a good analogue of QA for measuring bi-substrate binding and the cooperativity
of substrate binding. We could not measure the binding properties of PRPP likely
because of the low binding affinity of PRPP (Supplementary Fig. S10a). The
Kd value of PRPP for the yeast enzyme was reported to be
approximately 10 mM, which exceeds the limit of ITC measurement27. In order to investigate the binding affinity and cooperativity
for the binding of the second substrate, we titrated PRPP under saturated
conditions of phthalic acid and vice versa (Supplementary Fig. S10,S11). Under phthalic
acid saturated conditions, PRPP binding showed positive cooperativity, with a
Kd value and Hill coefficient of
124 ± 5 μM and
1.14 ± 0.01, respectively. These results
indicate that PRPP binding affinity increases in the presence of the first-order
substrate QA. Cooperativity of the second substrate (PRPP) binding was lower
than that of the first substrate (QA). In the reverse experiment, under PRPP
saturated conditions, phthalic acid binding affinity dramatically decreased by
approximately 6-fold
(Kd = 33.3 ± 3.7 μM)
and the positive cooperativity decreased to
1.11 ± 0.01. This result indicates that PRPP
inhibits first-order substrate (QA) binding. Based on structural and biochemical
evidence, mammalian QPRTs including the human enzyme may exist as a hexamer by
the trimerisation of dimers assisted by helix α1, consisting of only
nine residues in its N-terminus. Moreover, the hexameric configuration is
essential for not only stabilizing the hexameric enzyme through intermolecular
hydrophobic interactions between the two dimers independently of substrate
binding, but also contributes to cooperative reactant binding.

DiscussionIn this study, we examined the molecular basis of the unexpected rearrangement of
hexamer assembly caused by conformational changes in three dimer-dimer interfaces
during the reaction process, as well as hexamer stabilisation of HsQPRT by
the N-terminal short helix α1. Thus, we propose a reaction model for
HsQPRT (Fig. 6). Although the apo structure of
HsQPRT showed dynamic movement between the open and closed conformations
in its active site and its dimer-dimer interface, it can exist as a hexamer through
extensive hydrophobic contacts with helix α1. Some pentosyltransferases
(EC 2.4.2) adopt a hexameric configuration through the trimerisation of dimers, such
as nucleoside phosphorylases (PDB codes 4E1V, 4D8Y and 4R2X)353637; however, it is unusual for the short α helix of HsQPRT to
contribute to hexamer stability while its flexible loops show dynamic conformational
changes. First, loops L and O of HsQPRT were closed upon QA binding. Next,
PRPP bound to the carboxylate moiety of QA to produce NAMN. Because PRPP is less
stable than QA because of its highly reactive pyrophosphate group and therefore
cannot remain in the active site for a long period of time, it is rational that QA
can occupy the active site before PRPP enters. This is also consistent with the
results of a previously reported kinetic analysis performed by Liu et
al.26. As the reaction progresses, HsQPRT changes the
conformation of loop O in the dimer-dimer interface, making the hexamer slightly
less stable. Once an NAMN molecule is generated after the phosphoribosyl transfer
reaction, HsQPRT fully unfastens its active site and regains the apo form,
which can adopt open and closed states. The dynamicity of these dual conformations
may provide the driving force to release NAMN.NAD+ plays a key role in cell survival and growth, particularly by
maintaining redox homeostasis and cellular energy generation. Given the necessity of
excessive NAD+ levels in tumour cells to maintain their rapid growth,
inhibiting NAD+ biosynthesis is an attractive target for the
development of anticancer agents. In this context, extensive efforts have been
exerted to design compounds that induce apoptosis of tumour cells with
NAD+ depletion by inhibiting enzymes associated with
NAD+ synthesis. However, the design of anticancer agents that
inhibit NAD+ biosynthesis has only focused on the salvage pathway, in
which nicotinamide is a precursor. For instance, FK866 (APO866), a
low-molecular-weight compound, has been reported to exhibit potent efficacy in a
series of cancers such as breast, gastric and liver cancer, inhibiting nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the salvage pathway of
NAD+ synthesis, and is currently being examined phase II clinical
trials. Importantly, a recent study suggested that QPRT is highly involved in de
novo NAD+ synthesis in glioma in which approximately 30% of
tumours are derived from the brain and central nervous system and 80% from all
malignant brain tumours20. Interestingly, QPRT is exclusively
expressed in the World Health Organization high-grade (WHO grade III–IV)
glioma and produces NAD+ using QA taken from normal microglial cells.
This enables glioma to survive under conditions of oxidative stress and
NAD+ depletion caused by therapeutic approaches, including
irradiation and alkylating agent treatment21. In this study, we
determined that HsQPRT structures are present in apo and substrate-bound
forms. In particular, the novel open conformation first observed in our apo
structure provides information that can be used in the development of anticancer
agents for treating high-grade glioma. Thus, agents targeting QPRT in glioma should
be developed using information from the structures. Despite the substitution of QA
with phthalate, which has an inhibitory effect in response to HsQPRT, the low
selectivity related to its simple structure makes NAMN more useful as a starting
point for developing a novel anti-glioma agent.To design an NAMN-based QPRT inhibitor with higher specificity compared to substrates
with extra moieties, NAMN was placed in the HsQPRT-open structure,
demonstrating novel conformational changes in the NAMN binding site compared with
the HsQPRT-NAMN structure (Fig. 7). No hindrance was
observed when NAMN was placed in the HsQPRT-open structure. The orientations
of the residues interacting with the ribose and phosphate groups were nearly the
same in both HsQPRT-open and HsQPRT-NAMN structures such that the
structures did not have to be further optimised. However, there was a difference in
the interaction with the nicotinate moiety between the two QPRT structures of both
structures. In HsQPRT-NAMN, nicotinate interacted with H160, R161, M169 and
K171 to form a cavity that blocked another interaction with nicotinate, specifically
through the close ionic contact of the R161 in loop L and K171 with 3-caboxylate in
nicotinate. In contrast, the ligand binding cavity remained open in the
HsQPRT-open structure because of the conformational changes in both R161 and
K171. This cavity consisted of two positively charged patches wrapped around
3-carboxylate and one negatively charged patch. Modification of the carboxylate
group in the NAMN molecule with polar moieties connected in the aliphatic chain
generated an additional hydrogen bond with the cavities in the HsQPRT-open
structure. These findings suggest that the scaffolds are promising for developing a
novel anti-glioma agent that selectively targets the first structure of
HsQPRT-open with unique conformational properties of loops in the substrate
binding site around the dimer-dimer interface.In summary, we reported the structures of HsQPRT associated with de
novo NAD biosynthesis in the apo form with a novel open conformation and in
complex with QA or NAMN as a reactant or product. We determined the physiological
relevance of HsQPRT-QA compared with tartrate as a QA mimic. Apo and complex
structures bound to substrate revealed that loops L and O, located in the
dimer-dimer interface of hexameric HsQPRT, altered their conformations upon
substrate binding and played a key role in reactant binding by changing the
interaction between the two dimers. Moreover, to investigate the function of
N-terminal hydrophobic residues in eukaryotic QPRTs, we performed structural
comparisons and several biochemical studies, including size exclusion
chromatography, a heat aggregation test and ITC measurements. We propose that
conserved hydrophobic residues in helix α1 stabilise the hexameric
configuration of eukaryotic QPRTs by reinforcing the dimer-dimer interaction. Based
on structural and biochemical studies, we determined that HsQPRT exists and
functions as a hexamer to bind the reactant cooperatively and to maintain its
stability. Based on the extra cavity of HsQPRT-open compared with
HsQPRT-NAMN, we also suggest a strategy for drug development targeting
HsQPRT to treat malignant glioma with high specificity. The results of
this study provide biological information related to the functional insights of
HsQPRT and anticancer agent design.

In this study, we examined the molecular basis of the unexpected rearrangement of
hexamer assembly caused by conformational changes in three dimer-dimer interfaces
during the reaction process, as well as hexamer stabilisation of HsQPRT by
the N-terminal short helix α1. Thus, we propose a reaction model for
HsQPRT (Fig. 6). Although the apo structure of
HsQPRT showed dynamic movement between the open and closed conformations
in its active site and its dimer-dimer interface, it can exist as a hexamer through
extensive hydrophobic contacts with helix α1. Some pentosyltransferases
(EC 2.4.2) adopt a hexameric configuration through the trimerisation of dimers, such
as nucleoside phosphorylases (PDB codes 4E1V, 4D8Y and 4R2X)353637; however, it is unusual for the short α helix of HsQPRT to
contribute to hexamer stability while its flexible loops show dynamic conformational
changes. First, loops L and O of HsQPRT were closed upon QA binding. Next,
PRPP bound to the carboxylate moiety of QA to produce NAMN. Because PRPP is less
stable than QA because of its highly reactive pyrophosphate group and therefore
cannot remain in the active site for a long period of time, it is rational that QA
can occupy the active site before PRPP enters. This is also consistent with the
results of a previously reported kinetic analysis performed by Liu et
al.26. As the reaction progresses, HsQPRT changes the
conformation of loop O in the dimer-dimer interface, making the hexamer slightly
less stable. Once an NAMN molecule is generated after the phosphoribosyl transfer
reaction, HsQPRT fully unfastens its active site and regains the apo form,
which can adopt open and closed states. The dynamicity of these dual conformations
may provide the driving force to release NAMN.

NAD+ plays a key role in cell survival and growth, particularly by
maintaining redox homeostasis and cellular energy generation. Given the necessity of
excessive NAD+ levels in tumour cells to maintain their rapid growth,
inhibiting NAD+ biosynthesis is an attractive target for the
development of anticancer agents. In this context, extensive efforts have been
exerted to design compounds that induce apoptosis of tumour cells with
NAD+ depletion by inhibiting enzymes associated with
NAD+ synthesis. However, the design of anticancer agents that
inhibit NAD+ biosynthesis has only focused on the salvage pathway, in
which nicotinamide is a precursor. For instance, FK866 (APO866), a
low-molecular-weight compound, has been reported to exhibit potent efficacy in a
series of cancers such as breast, gastric and liver cancer, inhibiting nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the salvage pathway of
NAD+ synthesis, and is currently being examined phase II clinical
trials. Importantly, a recent study suggested that QPRT is highly involved in de
novo NAD+ synthesis in glioma in which approximately 30% of
tumours are derived from the brain and central nervous system and 80% from all
malignant brain tumours20. Interestingly, QPRT is exclusively
expressed in the World Health Organization high-grade (WHO grade III–IV)
glioma and produces NAD+ using QA taken from normal microglial cells.
This enables glioma to survive under conditions of oxidative stress and
NAD+ depletion caused by therapeutic approaches, including
irradiation and alkylating agent treatment21. In this study, we
determined that HsQPRT structures are present in apo and substrate-bound
forms. In particular, the novel open conformation first observed in our apo
structure provides information that can be used in the development of anticancer
agents for treating high-grade glioma. Thus, agents targeting QPRT in glioma should
be developed using information from the structures. Despite the substitution of QA
with phthalate, which has an inhibitory effect in response to HsQPRT, the low
selectivity related to its simple structure makes NAMN more useful as a starting
point for developing a novel anti-glioma agent.

To design an NAMN-based QPRT inhibitor with higher specificity compared to substrates
with extra moieties, NAMN was placed in the HsQPRT-open structure,
demonstrating novel conformational changes in the NAMN binding site compared with
the HsQPRT-NAMN structure (Fig. 7). No hindrance was
observed when NAMN was placed in the HsQPRT-open structure. The orientations
of the residues interacting with the ribose and phosphate groups were nearly the
same in both HsQPRT-open and HsQPRT-NAMN structures such that the
structures did not have to be further optimised. However, there was a difference in
the interaction with the nicotinate moiety between the two QPRT structures of both
structures. In HsQPRT-NAMN, nicotinate interacted with H160, R161, M169 and
K171 to form a cavity that blocked another interaction with nicotinate, specifically
through the close ionic contact of the R161 in loop L and K171 with 3-caboxylate in
nicotinate. In contrast, the ligand binding cavity remained open in the
HsQPRT-open structure because of the conformational changes in both R161 and
K171. This cavity consisted of two positively charged patches wrapped around
3-carboxylate and one negatively charged patch. Modification of the carboxylate
group in the NAMN molecule with polar moieties connected in the aliphatic chain
generated an additional hydrogen bond with the cavities in the HsQPRT-open
structure. These findings suggest that the scaffolds are promising for developing a
novel anti-glioma agent that selectively targets the first structure of
HsQPRT-open with unique conformational properties of loops in the substrate
binding site around the dimer-dimer interface.

In summary, we reported the structures of HsQPRT associated with de
novo NAD biosynthesis in the apo form with a novel open conformation and in
complex with QA or NAMN as a reactant or product. We determined the physiological
relevance of HsQPRT-QA compared with tartrate as a QA mimic. Apo and complex
structures bound to substrate revealed that loops L and O, located in the
dimer-dimer interface of hexameric HsQPRT, altered their conformations upon
substrate binding and played a key role in reactant binding by changing the
interaction between the two dimers. Moreover, to investigate the function of
N-terminal hydrophobic residues in eukaryotic QPRTs, we performed structural
comparisons and several biochemical studies, including size exclusion
chromatography, a heat aggregation test and ITC measurements. We propose that
conserved hydrophobic residues in helix α1 stabilise the hexameric
configuration of eukaryotic QPRTs by reinforcing the dimer-dimer interaction. Based
on structural and biochemical studies, we determined that HsQPRT exists and
functions as a hexamer to bind the reactant cooperatively and to maintain its
stability. Based on the extra cavity of HsQPRT-open compared with
HsQPRT-NAMN, we also suggest a strategy for drug development targeting
HsQPRT to treat malignant glioma with high specificity. The results of
this study provide biological information related to the functional insights of
HsQPRT and anticancer agent design.

MethodsProtein expression and purificationDNA encoding full-length HsQPRT (residues 1–297) was amplified
from human cDNA (GenBank code 30583300) by polymerase chain reaction using a PCR
system 2720 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and
subcloned into the NdeI and XhoI sites of the pET21a (Novagen,
Madison, WI, USA) expression vector. To scale up the over-expressed cells,
HsQPRT protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21
(CodonPlus) strain at 37 °C with 1 mM
isopropyl-D-thiogalactoside (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) for 6 h
after induction. After disrupting the cells by sonication, the cell lysate was
harvested by low-speed centrifugation at 4 °C and loaded
onto a gravity-flow column (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), which was packed with
nickel-nitriloacetic acid agarose resin (Peptron, Daejeon, Korea) and
pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer (50 mM
NaH2PO4, pH 7.5 and 300 mM NaCl). After
washing with lysis buffer, the HsQPRT protein was eluted using lysis
buffer additionally containing 250 mM imidazole. The protein was
concentrated using a Centriprep YM-3 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and then
subjected to Hiload 16/60 Superdex 200 prep grade (GE Healthcare, Little
Chalfont, UK) size exclusion chromatography equilibrated with 20 mM
HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and 100 mM KCl. The fractions containing the
recombinant protein were confirmed using SDS-PAGE and subsequently pooled and
concentrated to 15 mg/mL for initial crystallisation. The N-terminal
truncated HsQPRTs (NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12) were prepared using the same procedures
as used for the full-length protein. All proteins were obtained
in > 98% purity as confirmed by SDS-PAGE.
Concentrations for HsQPRT were determined using the following theoretical
extinction coefficients (26470 M−1
cm−1) with PROTPARAM38 and were
calculated with an additional leucine, glutamate and hexahistidine tag in the
C-terminus.Crystallisation and data collectionThe crystallisation of apo HsQPRT has been previously described39. Briefly, plate-like crystals of apo HsQPRT were grown at
21 °C in 2 μL hanging drops consisting of
equal volumes of protein solution (15 mg/mL) and mother liquor
consisting of 100 mM MES-NaOH, pH 5.0, 7–15% (w/v) PEG
MME 2K and 10 mM potassium thiocyanate. The crystals of
HsQPRT-QA were grown under mother liquor consisting of 100 mM
TRIS-HCl, pH 8.0, 6–10% (w/v) PEG 8K, 100 mM magnesium
acetate and 6 mM PRPP (1:10 molar ratio). Next, the crystal was
soaked with 6 mM QA for 15 h. Although we performed
co-crystallisation of QA only, this crystal diffracted poorly. In addition, we
also collected datasets of the co-crystal of HsQPRT-PRPP and obtained the
electron density, but we could not find electron density corresponding to PRPP.
PRPP may contribute in maintaining the crystal packing, although PRPP was not
detected in the electron density map. During the process of soaking in QA, it is
likely that PRPP was exhausted by hydrolysis and the reaction observed was QA
binding at the active site. HsQPRT-NAMN was co-crystallised under a
reservoir solution under the same conditions for crystallisation of the apo
enzyme except 100 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.0, rather than MES-NaOH
was used with protein-NAMN (1:10 molar ratio) pre-incubated at
4 °C for 15 h. The crystals grew to a
maximum size of
0.3 × 0.3 × 0.1 mm
over one week. The crystals were cryoprotected in the reservoir solution
supplemented with 25% (v/v) glycerol and flash-frozen under N2 gas at
95 K. Native datasets of apo crystals were collected using an ADSC
Quantum 210 CCD detector at beamline NW12A in PF-AR of the Photon Factory, Japan
at a wavelength of 1.0000 Å. Datasets of
HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were collected using an ADSC Quantum 315
CCD detector at beamline 5C in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Korea at a
wavelength of 0.9795 Å.Structure determinationThe apo crystal belonged to the space group P21 with unit cell
dimensions of a = 76.2,
b = 137.1,
c = 92.7 Å and
β = 103.8°. All
datasets were processed and scaled using HKL200040. The
asymmetric unit contained one hexamer (MolA–MolF) with a Matthews
coefficient of 2.46 Å Da-1 and solvent
content of 49.8%, as calculated using the Matthews coefficient41
in the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. The apo HsQPRT structure was
determined at 2.8 Å resolution using the molecular
replacement method with the Phaser43 program using the structure
of the HsQPRT-tartrate complex (PDB code 2JBM) as a search model. Next,
refinement cycles were performed using the REFMAC544 program in
the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. No electron density was observed in
some regions of each molecule (residues 159–165 and
192–197 in MolD and 159–166 in MolE). Phases of
HsQPRT-QA or HsQPRT-NAMN were obtained by molecular
replacement with Phaser43 using the HsQPRT-tartrate
complex as a template. Coordinates of nine QA and twelve NAMN molecules were
obtained from RCSB Ligand Expo (http://ligand-expo.rcsb.org) and placed into the density
corresponds to them. Multiple rounds of refinement were performed using
REFMAC544 to final 2.8 (apo), 3.1 (HsQPRT-QA) and 2.6
(HsQPRT-NAMN) Å resolutions, respectively. The models
were rebuilt manually using COOT45. Final crystallographic
Rwork and Rfree values were 20.1 and
25.9% (HsQPRT-open), 18.5 and 23.9% (HsQPRT-QA) and 21.2 and 21.3%
(HsQPRT-NAMN). The electron density map of HsQPRT-open and the
simulated annealing omit map of HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN showed
clear density for two loops (loops L and O) and the substrate molecules (QA and
NAMN) bound to the protein (Supplementary
Fig. S12,S13). The Ramachandran plots, which were calculated using the
program PROCHECK46, showed nearly no residues with torsion angles
in forbidden areas. Detailed refinement statistics are provided in Table 1. All molecular graphics were generated using PyMOL
(The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, USA).Size distribution analysisTo determine the sizes of the various constructs, we measured the oligomeric
state of HsQPRT and its N-terminal truncated forms (NΔ4,
NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and NΔ12) using
Superdex 200 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare) size exclusion
chromatography, which was calibrated using standard proteins, including ferritin
(440 kDa), catalase (232 kDa) and bovine serum albumin
(66 kDa) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and
100 mM KCl. To compare the size distribution between
HsQPRT and its mutants to other eukaryotic QPRT proteins, we prepared
ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated form (NΔ10) using the
same procedures as HsQPRT and then analysed the purification patterns of
ScQPRT and NΔ10 using Superdex 200 10/300 GL
(GE Healthcare) size exclusion chromatography.Heat aggregation testTo evaluate the stability of HsQPRT, the half aggregation temperature was
determined spectrophotometrically using a previously described method33. The reaction mixture contained 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH
7.5, 100 mM KCl and 0.2 mg/mL of HsQPRT
(full-length and NΔ9). To measure the aggregation profile, the
A470 of the protein solution was monitored while increasing the
temperature at a rate of approximately 1 °C per
2 min. For each sample, experiments were performed in
triplicate.Isothermal titration calorimetryITC measurements were carried out on a VP-ITC Microcalorimeter (Microcal,
Northampton, MA, USA). Full-length and NΔ9 HsQPRT and QA were
dissolved in 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl and were degassed
for 10 min using a ThermoVac (Microcal). To investigate the QA
binding properties of the hexamer and dimer, HsQPRT was used as a titrant
in the sample cell at a concentration of 30 μM
(full-length) or 3 μM (NΔ9), while QA of
500 μM was loaded into the syringe. To investigate
cooperativity, full-length HsQPRT at a concentration of
20–30 μM was used as a titrant in the sample
cell, while 800 μM phthalic acid or 2 mM
PRPP was loaded into the syringe. To generate the saturated condition,
additional phthalic acid or 200–300 μM of
PRPP (1:10 molar ratio) was added to the sample cell. Experiments were performed
at least in duplicate using the following parameters: temperature,
25 °C; reference power,
5 μcal/s; injection volume, 2 μL
first injection followed by 15 μL for the remaining 19
injections; spacing between injections, 200 s. Data were analysed by
Origin 7 software provided by the manufacturer with curves fitted with a one set
of site models. The Hill Plot was constructed using previously described method
by Dam et al.47.

Protein expression and purificationDNA encoding full-length HsQPRT (residues 1–297) was amplified
from human cDNA (GenBank code 30583300) by polymerase chain reaction using a PCR
system 2720 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and
subcloned into the NdeI and XhoI sites of the pET21a (Novagen,
Madison, WI, USA) expression vector. To scale up the over-expressed cells,
HsQPRT protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21
(CodonPlus) strain at 37 °C with 1 mM
isopropyl-D-thiogalactoside (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) for 6 h
after induction. After disrupting the cells by sonication, the cell lysate was
harvested by low-speed centrifugation at 4 °C and loaded
onto a gravity-flow column (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), which was packed with
nickel-nitriloacetic acid agarose resin (Peptron, Daejeon, Korea) and
pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer (50 mM
NaH2PO4, pH 7.5 and 300 mM NaCl). After
washing with lysis buffer, the HsQPRT protein was eluted using lysis
buffer additionally containing 250 mM imidazole. The protein was
concentrated using a Centriprep YM-3 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and then
subjected to Hiload 16/60 Superdex 200 prep grade (GE Healthcare, Little
Chalfont, UK) size exclusion chromatography equilibrated with 20 mM
HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and 100 mM KCl. The fractions containing the
recombinant protein were confirmed using SDS-PAGE and subsequently pooled and
concentrated to 15 mg/mL for initial crystallisation. The N-terminal
truncated HsQPRTs (NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12) were prepared using the same procedures
as used for the full-length protein. All proteins were obtained
in > 98% purity as confirmed by SDS-PAGE.
Concentrations for HsQPRT were determined using the following theoretical
extinction coefficients (26470 M−1
cm−1) with PROTPARAM38 and were
calculated with an additional leucine, glutamate and hexahistidine tag in the
C-terminus.

Protein expression and purification

DNA encoding full-length HsQPRT (residues 1–297) was amplified
from human cDNA (GenBank code 30583300) by polymerase chain reaction using a PCR
system 2720 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and
subcloned into the NdeI and XhoI sites of the pET21a (Novagen,
Madison, WI, USA) expression vector. To scale up the over-expressed cells,
HsQPRT protein was expressed in Escherichia coli BL21
(CodonPlus) strain at 37 °C with 1 mM
isopropyl-D-thiogalactoside (Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden) for 6 h
after induction. After disrupting the cells by sonication, the cell lysate was
harvested by low-speed centrifugation at 4 °C and loaded
onto a gravity-flow column (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), which was packed with
nickel-nitriloacetic acid agarose resin (Peptron, Daejeon, Korea) and
pre-equilibrated with lysis buffer (50 mM
NaH2PO4, pH 7.5 and 300 mM NaCl). After
washing with lysis buffer, the HsQPRT protein was eluted using lysis
buffer additionally containing 250 mM imidazole. The protein was
concentrated using a Centriprep YM-3 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and then
subjected to Hiload 16/60 Superdex 200 prep grade (GE Healthcare, Little
Chalfont, UK) size exclusion chromatography equilibrated with 20 mM
HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and 100 mM KCl. The fractions containing the
recombinant protein were confirmed using SDS-PAGE and subsequently pooled and
concentrated to 15 mg/mL for initial crystallisation. The N-terminal
truncated HsQPRTs (NΔ4, NΔ8, NΔ9,
NΔ10 and NΔ12) were prepared using the same procedures
as used for the full-length protein. All proteins were obtained
in > 98% purity as confirmed by SDS-PAGE.
Concentrations for HsQPRT were determined using the following theoretical
extinction coefficients (26470 M−1
cm−1) with PROTPARAM38 and were
calculated with an additional leucine, glutamate and hexahistidine tag in the
C-terminus.

Crystallisation and data collectionThe crystallisation of apo HsQPRT has been previously described39. Briefly, plate-like crystals of apo HsQPRT were grown at
21 °C in 2 μL hanging drops consisting of
equal volumes of protein solution (15 mg/mL) and mother liquor
consisting of 100 mM MES-NaOH, pH 5.0, 7–15% (w/v) PEG
MME 2K and 10 mM potassium thiocyanate. The crystals of
HsQPRT-QA were grown under mother liquor consisting of 100 mM
TRIS-HCl, pH 8.0, 6–10% (w/v) PEG 8K, 100 mM magnesium
acetate and 6 mM PRPP (1:10 molar ratio). Next, the crystal was
soaked with 6 mM QA for 15 h. Although we performed
co-crystallisation of QA only, this crystal diffracted poorly. In addition, we
also collected datasets of the co-crystal of HsQPRT-PRPP and obtained the
electron density, but we could not find electron density corresponding to PRPP.
PRPP may contribute in maintaining the crystal packing, although PRPP was not
detected in the electron density map. During the process of soaking in QA, it is
likely that PRPP was exhausted by hydrolysis and the reaction observed was QA
binding at the active site. HsQPRT-NAMN was co-crystallised under a
reservoir solution under the same conditions for crystallisation of the apo
enzyme except 100 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.0, rather than MES-NaOH
was used with protein-NAMN (1:10 molar ratio) pre-incubated at
4 °C for 15 h. The crystals grew to a
maximum size of
0.3 × 0.3 × 0.1 mm
over one week. The crystals were cryoprotected in the reservoir solution
supplemented with 25% (v/v) glycerol and flash-frozen under N2 gas at
95 K. Native datasets of apo crystals were collected using an ADSC
Quantum 210 CCD detector at beamline NW12A in PF-AR of the Photon Factory, Japan
at a wavelength of 1.0000 Å. Datasets of
HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were collected using an ADSC Quantum 315
CCD detector at beamline 5C in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Korea at a
wavelength of 0.9795 Å.

Crystallisation and data collection

The crystallisation of apo HsQPRT has been previously described39. Briefly, plate-like crystals of apo HsQPRT were grown at
21 °C in 2 μL hanging drops consisting of
equal volumes of protein solution (15 mg/mL) and mother liquor
consisting of 100 mM MES-NaOH, pH 5.0, 7–15% (w/v) PEG
MME 2K and 10 mM potassium thiocyanate. The crystals of
HsQPRT-QA were grown under mother liquor consisting of 100 mM
TRIS-HCl, pH 8.0, 6–10% (w/v) PEG 8K, 100 mM magnesium
acetate and 6 mM PRPP (1:10 molar ratio). Next, the crystal was
soaked with 6 mM QA for 15 h. Although we performed
co-crystallisation of QA only, this crystal diffracted poorly. In addition, we
also collected datasets of the co-crystal of HsQPRT-PRPP and obtained the
electron density, but we could not find electron density corresponding to PRPP.
PRPP may contribute in maintaining the crystal packing, although PRPP was not
detected in the electron density map. During the process of soaking in QA, it is
likely that PRPP was exhausted by hydrolysis and the reaction observed was QA
binding at the active site. HsQPRT-NAMN was co-crystallised under a
reservoir solution under the same conditions for crystallisation of the apo
enzyme except 100 mM sodium acetate, pH 5.0, rather than MES-NaOH
was used with protein-NAMN (1:10 molar ratio) pre-incubated at
4 °C for 15 h. The crystals grew to a
maximum size of
0.3 × 0.3 × 0.1 mm
over one week. The crystals were cryoprotected in the reservoir solution
supplemented with 25% (v/v) glycerol and flash-frozen under N2 gas at
95 K. Native datasets of apo crystals were collected using an ADSC
Quantum 210 CCD detector at beamline NW12A in PF-AR of the Photon Factory, Japan
at a wavelength of 1.0000 Å. Datasets of
HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN were collected using an ADSC Quantum 315
CCD detector at beamline 5C in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Korea at a
wavelength of 0.9795 Å.

Structure determinationThe apo crystal belonged to the space group P21 with unit cell
dimensions of a = 76.2,
b = 137.1,
c = 92.7 Å and
β = 103.8°. All
datasets were processed and scaled using HKL200040. The
asymmetric unit contained one hexamer (MolA–MolF) with a Matthews
coefficient of 2.46 Å Da-1 and solvent
content of 49.8%, as calculated using the Matthews coefficient41
in the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. The apo HsQPRT structure was
determined at 2.8 Å resolution using the molecular
replacement method with the Phaser43 program using the structure
of the HsQPRT-tartrate complex (PDB code 2JBM) as a search model. Next,
refinement cycles were performed using the REFMAC544 program in
the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. No electron density was observed in
some regions of each molecule (residues 159–165 and
192–197 in MolD and 159–166 in MolE). Phases of
HsQPRT-QA or HsQPRT-NAMN were obtained by molecular
replacement with Phaser43 using the HsQPRT-tartrate
complex as a template. Coordinates of nine QA and twelve NAMN molecules were
obtained from RCSB Ligand Expo (http://ligand-expo.rcsb.org) and placed into the density
corresponds to them. Multiple rounds of refinement were performed using
REFMAC544 to final 2.8 (apo), 3.1 (HsQPRT-QA) and 2.6
(HsQPRT-NAMN) Å resolutions, respectively. The models
were rebuilt manually using COOT45. Final crystallographic
Rwork and Rfree values were 20.1 and
25.9% (HsQPRT-open), 18.5 and 23.9% (HsQPRT-QA) and 21.2 and 21.3%
(HsQPRT-NAMN). The electron density map of HsQPRT-open and the
simulated annealing omit map of HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN showed
clear density for two loops (loops L and O) and the substrate molecules (QA and
NAMN) bound to the protein (Supplementary
Fig. S12,S13). The Ramachandran plots, which were calculated using the
program PROCHECK46, showed nearly no residues with torsion angles
in forbidden areas. Detailed refinement statistics are provided in Table 1. All molecular graphics were generated using PyMOL
(The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, USA).

Structure determination

The apo crystal belonged to the space group P21 with unit cell
dimensions of a = 76.2,
b = 137.1,
c = 92.7 Å and
β = 103.8°. All
datasets were processed and scaled using HKL200040. The
asymmetric unit contained one hexamer (MolA–MolF) with a Matthews
coefficient of 2.46 Å Da-1 and solvent
content of 49.8%, as calculated using the Matthews coefficient41
in the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. The apo HsQPRT structure was
determined at 2.8 Å resolution using the molecular
replacement method with the Phaser43 program using the structure
of the HsQPRT-tartrate complex (PDB code 2JBM) as a search model. Next,
refinement cycles were performed using the REFMAC544 program in
the CCP4i 6.5.0. suite42. No electron density was observed in
some regions of each molecule (residues 159–165 and
192–197 in MolD and 159–166 in MolE). Phases of
HsQPRT-QA or HsQPRT-NAMN were obtained by molecular
replacement with Phaser43 using the HsQPRT-tartrate
complex as a template. Coordinates of nine QA and twelve NAMN molecules were
obtained from RCSB Ligand Expo (http://ligand-expo.rcsb.org) and placed into the density
corresponds to them. Multiple rounds of refinement were performed using
REFMAC544 to final 2.8 (apo), 3.1 (HsQPRT-QA) and 2.6
(HsQPRT-NAMN) Å resolutions, respectively. The models
were rebuilt manually using COOT45. Final crystallographic
Rwork and Rfree values were 20.1 and
25.9% (HsQPRT-open), 18.5 and 23.9% (HsQPRT-QA) and 21.2 and 21.3%
(HsQPRT-NAMN). The electron density map of HsQPRT-open and the
simulated annealing omit map of HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN showed
clear density for two loops (loops L and O) and the substrate molecules (QA and
NAMN) bound to the protein (Supplementary
Fig. S12,S13). The Ramachandran plots, which were calculated using the
program PROCHECK46, showed nearly no residues with torsion angles
in forbidden areas. Detailed refinement statistics are provided in Table 1. All molecular graphics were generated using PyMOL
(The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3, Schrödinger,
LLC, New York, NY, USA).

Size distribution analysisTo determine the sizes of the various constructs, we measured the oligomeric
state of HsQPRT and its N-terminal truncated forms (NΔ4,
NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and NΔ12) using
Superdex 200 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare) size exclusion
chromatography, which was calibrated using standard proteins, including ferritin
(440 kDa), catalase (232 kDa) and bovine serum albumin
(66 kDa) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and
100 mM KCl. To compare the size distribution between
HsQPRT and its mutants to other eukaryotic QPRT proteins, we prepared
ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated form (NΔ10) using the
same procedures as HsQPRT and then analysed the purification patterns of
ScQPRT and NΔ10 using Superdex 200 10/300 GL
(GE Healthcare) size exclusion chromatography.

Size distribution analysis

To determine the sizes of the various constructs, we measured the oligomeric
state of HsQPRT and its N-terminal truncated forms (NΔ4,
NΔ8, NΔ9, NΔ10 and NΔ12) using
Superdex 200 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare) size exclusion
chromatography, which was calibrated using standard proteins, including ferritin
(440 kDa), catalase (232 kDa) and bovine serum albumin
(66 kDa) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5 and
100 mM KCl. To compare the size distribution between
HsQPRT and its mutants to other eukaryotic QPRT proteins, we prepared
ScQPRT and its N-terminal truncated form (NΔ10) using the
same procedures as HsQPRT and then analysed the purification patterns of
ScQPRT and NΔ10 using Superdex 200 10/300 GL
(GE Healthcare) size exclusion chromatography.

Heat aggregation testTo evaluate the stability of HsQPRT, the half aggregation temperature was
determined spectrophotometrically using a previously described method33. The reaction mixture contained 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH
7.5, 100 mM KCl and 0.2 mg/mL of HsQPRT
(full-length and NΔ9). To measure the aggregation profile, the
A470 of the protein solution was monitored while increasing the
temperature at a rate of approximately 1 °C per
2 min. For each sample, experiments were performed in
triplicate.

Heat aggregation test

To evaluate the stability of HsQPRT, the half aggregation temperature was
determined spectrophotometrically using a previously described method33. The reaction mixture contained 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH
7.5, 100 mM KCl and 0.2 mg/mL of HsQPRT
(full-length and NΔ9). To measure the aggregation profile, the
A470 of the protein solution was monitored while increasing the
temperature at a rate of approximately 1 °C per
2 min. For each sample, experiments were performed in
triplicate.

Isothermal titration calorimetryITC measurements were carried out on a VP-ITC Microcalorimeter (Microcal,
Northampton, MA, USA). Full-length and NΔ9 HsQPRT and QA were
dissolved in 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl and were degassed
for 10 min using a ThermoVac (Microcal). To investigate the QA
binding properties of the hexamer and dimer, HsQPRT was used as a titrant
in the sample cell at a concentration of 30 μM
(full-length) or 3 μM (NΔ9), while QA of
500 μM was loaded into the syringe. To investigate
cooperativity, full-length HsQPRT at a concentration of
20–30 μM was used as a titrant in the sample
cell, while 800 μM phthalic acid or 2 mM
PRPP was loaded into the syringe. To generate the saturated condition,
additional phthalic acid or 200–300 μM of
PRPP (1:10 molar ratio) was added to the sample cell. Experiments were performed
at least in duplicate using the following parameters: temperature,
25 °C; reference power,
5 μcal/s; injection volume, 2 μL
first injection followed by 15 μL for the remaining 19
injections; spacing between injections, 200 s. Data were analysed by
Origin 7 software provided by the manufacturer with curves fitted with a one set
of site models. The Hill Plot was constructed using previously described method
by Dam et al.47.

Isothermal titration calorimetry

ITC measurements were carried out on a VP-ITC Microcalorimeter (Microcal,
Northampton, MA, USA). Full-length and NΔ9 HsQPRT and QA were
dissolved in 25 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl and were degassed
for 10 min using a ThermoVac (Microcal). To investigate the QA
binding properties of the hexamer and dimer, HsQPRT was used as a titrant
in the sample cell at a concentration of 30 μM
(full-length) or 3 μM (NΔ9), while QA of
500 μM was loaded into the syringe. To investigate
cooperativity, full-length HsQPRT at a concentration of
20–30 μM was used as a titrant in the sample
cell, while 800 μM phthalic acid or 2 mM
PRPP was loaded into the syringe. To generate the saturated condition,
additional phthalic acid or 200–300 μM of
PRPP (1:10 molar ratio) was added to the sample cell. Experiments were performed
at least in duplicate using the following parameters: temperature,
25 °C; reference power,
5 μcal/s; injection volume, 2 μL
first injection followed by 15 μL for the remaining 19
injections; spacing between injections, 200 s. Data were analysed by
Origin 7 software provided by the manufacturer with curves fitted with a one set
of site models. The Hill Plot was constructed using previously described method
by Dam et al.47.

Additional InformationAccession codes: The coordinates and structure factors for HsQPRT-open,
HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank with the
accession codes 5AYX, 5AYY and 5AYZ.How to cite this article: Youn, H.-S. et al. Structural Insights into
the Quaternary Catalytic Mechanism of Hexameric Human Quinolinate
Phosphoribosyltransferase, a Key Enzyme in de novo NAD Biosynthesis. Sci.
Rep.
6, 19681; doi: 10.1038/srep19681 (2016).

Additional Information

Accession codes: The coordinates and structure factors for HsQPRT-open,
HsQPRT-QA and HsQPRT-NAMN have been deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank with the
accession codes 5AYX, 5AYY and 5AYZ.

How to cite this article: Youn, H.-S. et al. Structural Insights into
the Quaternary Catalytic Mechanism of Hexameric Human Quinolinate
Phosphoribosyltransferase, a Key Enzyme in de novo NAD Biosynthesis. Sci.
Rep.
6, 19681; doi: 10.1038/srep19681 (2016).

Supplementary MaterialSupplementary Information

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Information
