---
pmid: '28375145'
title: Crystal structures of human 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase with native
  and non-native metals bound in the active site.
authors:
- Pidugu LS
- Neu H
- Wong TL
- Pozharski E
- Molloy JL
- Michel SL
- Toth EA
journal: Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8493610
doi: 10.1107/S2059798317002029
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structures of human 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase with native and non-native metals bound in the active site.
**Authors:** Pidugu LS, Neu H, Wong TL, Pozharski E, Molloy JL, Michel SL, Toth EA
**Journal:** Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1107/S2059798317002029](https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798317002029)
**PMC:** [PMC8493610](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8493610/)

## Abstract

1. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol. 2017 Apr 1;73(Pt 4):340-348. doi: 
10.1107/S2059798317002029. Epub 2017 Mar 31.

Crystal structures of human 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase with native 
and non-native metals bound in the active site.

Pidugu LS(1), Neu H(2), Wong TL(1), Pozharski E(1), Molloy JL(3), Michel SL(2), 
Toth EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Maryland School of 
Pharmacy, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Chemical Sciences Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 8391, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8391, USA.

3-Hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase (3HAO) is an enzyme in the microglial 
branch of the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan degradation. 3HAO is a non-heme 
iron-containing, ring-cleaving extradiol dioxygenase that catalyzes the addition 
of both atoms of O2 to the kynurenine pathway metabolite 3-hydroxyanthranilic 
acid (3-HANA) to form quinolinic acid (QUIN). QUIN is a highly potent 
excitotoxin that has been implicated in a number of neurodegenerative 
conditions, making 3HAO a target for pharmacological downregulation. Here, the 
first crystal structure of human 3HAO with the native iron bound in its active 
site is presented, together with an additional structure with zinc (a known 
inhibitor of human 3HAO) bound in the active site. The metal-binding environment 
is examined both structurally and via inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP-MS), X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) and electron 
paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR). The studies identified Met35 as the 
source of potential new interactions with substrates and inhibitors, which may 
prove useful in future therapeutic efforts.

DOI: 10.1107/S2059798317002029
PMCID: PMC8493610
PMID: 28375145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
