---
pmid: '10740217'
title: 'Batten''s disease: clues to neuronal protein catabolism in lysosomes.'
authors:
- Dawson G
- Cho S
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000415)60:2<133::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-3
---

# Batten's disease: clues to neuronal protein catabolism in lysosomes.
**Authors:** Dawson G, Cho S
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000415)60:2<133::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-3](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000415)60:2<133::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-3)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 2000 Apr 15;60(2):133-40. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000415)60:2<133::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-3.

Batten's disease: clues to neuronal protein catabolism in lysosomes.

Dawson G(1), Cho S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA. 
dawg@midway.uchicago.edu

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease) encompasses a group of 8 or more 
inherited lysosomal storage diseases, with an overall frequency of 1 in 12,500 
births. All are characterized by progressive blindness and dementia and were 
initially classified on the basis of age of onset, clinical phenotype and 
ultrastructural characterization of the storage material as granular osmiophilic 
deposits, curvilinear bodies or fingerprint bodies. Recent research has shown 
that the various forms of Batten disease result from mutations in at least 8 
genes which code for proteins involved in different aspects of lysosomal protein 
catabolism. These include palmitoyl:protein thioesterase 1 (CLN1), 
tripeptidylpeptidase 1 (CLN2), cathepsin D (CLN8), and two membrane proteins of 
unknown function (CLN3 and CLN5). Biochemically, Batten disease is characterized 
by the accumulation in neurons and other cells of an autofluorescent pigment 
which has resisted many attempts at analysis. In this review we attempt to 
relate our current understanding of the nature of the storage material in Batten 
disease with this genetic information. We conclude that the 8 genes probably 
code for proteins which facilitate the degradation of post-translationally 
modified proteins in lysosomes, suggesting that the turnover of these proteins 
is highest in cortical neurons.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000415)60:2<133::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-3
PMID: 10740217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
