---
pmid: '12371743'
title: Identification and expression of mammalian long-chain PUFA elongation enzymes.
authors:
- Leonard AE
- Kelder B
- Bobik EG
- Chuang LT
- Lewis CJ
- Kopchick JJ
- Mukerji P
- Huang YS
journal: Lipids
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11745-002-0955-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification and expression of mammalian long-chain PUFA elongation enzymes.
**Authors:** Leonard AE, Kelder B, Bobik EG, Chuang LT, Lewis CJ, Kopchick JJ, Mukerji P, Huang YS
**Journal:** Lipids (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11745-002-0955-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11745-002-0955-6)

## Abstract

1. Lipids. 2002 Aug;37(8):733-40. doi: 10.1007/s11745-002-0955-6.

Identification and expression of mammalian long-chain PUFA elongation enzymes.

Leonard AE(1), Kelder B, Bobik EG, Chuang LT, Lewis CJ, Kopchick JJ, Mukerji P, 
Huang YS.

Author information:
(1)Ross Products Division, Abbott Laboratories, Columbus, Ohio 43215, USA.

In mammalian cells, Sprecher has proposed that the synthesis of long-chain PUFA 
from the 20-carbon substrates involves two consecutive elongation steps, a 
delta6-desaturation step followed by retroconversion (Sprecher, H., Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1486, 219-231, 2000). We searched the database using the 
translated sequence of human elongase ELOVL5, whose encoded enzyme elongates 
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated FA, as a query to identify the enzyme(s) 
involved in elongation of very long chain PUFA. The database search led to the 
isolation of two cDNA clones from human and mouse. These clones displayed 
deduced amino acid sequences that had 56.4 and 58% identity, respectively, to 
that of ELOVL5. The open reading frame of the human clone (ELOVL2) encodes a 
296-amino acid peptide, whereas the mouse clone (Elovl2) encodes a 292-amino 
acid peptide. Expression of these open reading frames in baker's yeast, 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, demonstrated that the encoded proteins were involved 
in the elongation of both 20- and 22-carbon long-chain PUFA, as determined by 
the conversion of 20:4n-6 to 22:4n-6, 22:4n-6 to 24:4n-6, 20:5n-3 to 22:5n-3, 
and 22:5n-3 to 24:5n-3. The elongation activity of the mouse Elovl2 was further 
demonstrated in the transformed mouse L cells incubated with long-chain (C20- 
and C22-carbon) n-6 and n-3 PUFA substrates by the significant increase in the 
levels of 24:4n-6 and 24:5n-3, respectively. This report demonstrates the 
isolation and identification of two mammalian genes that encode very long chain 
PUFA specific elongation enzymes in the Sprecher pathway for DHA synthesis.

DOI: 10.1007/s11745-002-0955-6
PMID: 12371743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
