---
pmid: '15765404'
title: Interleukin-21 enhances T-helper cell type I signaling and interferon-gamma
  production in Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Monteleone G
- Monteleone I
- Fina D
- Vavassori P
- Del Vecchio Blanco G
- Caruso R
- Tersigni R
- Alessandroni L
- Biancone L
- Naccari GC
- MacDonald TT
- Pallone F
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.042
---

# Interleukin-21 enhances T-helper cell type I signaling and interferon-gamma production in Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Monteleone G, Monteleone I, Fina D, Vavassori P, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Caruso R, Tersigni R, Alessandroni L, Biancone L, Naccari GC, MacDonald TT, Pallone F
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.042](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.042)

## Abstract

1. Gastroenterology. 2005 Mar;128(3):687-94. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.042.

Interleukin-21 enhances T-helper cell type I signaling and interferon-gamma 
production in Crohn's disease.

Monteleone G(1), Monteleone I, Fina D, Vavassori P, Del Vecchio Blanco G, Caruso 
R, Tersigni R, Alessandroni L, Biancone L, Naccari GC, MacDonald TT, Pallone F.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Centro di Eccellenza per lo studio delle 
malattie complesse e multifattoriali, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
Gi.Monteleone@Med.uniroma2.it

BACKGROUND & AIMS: T-helper (Th)1 cells play a central role in the pathogenesis 
of tissue damage in Crohn's disease (CD). Interleukin (IL)-12/STAT4 signaling 
promotes Th1 cell commitment in CD, but other cytokines are needed to maintain 
activated Th1 cells in the mucosa. In this study, we examined the expression and 
role of IL-21, a T-cell-derived cytokine of the IL-2 family; in tissues and 
cells isolated from patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
METHODS: IL-21 was examined by Western blotting in whole mucosa and lamina 
propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) from patients with CD, ulcerative colitis 
(UC), and controls. We also examined the effects of exogenous IL-12 on IL-21 
production, as well as the effects of blocking IL-21 with an IL-21-receptor Ig 
fusion protein. Interferon (IFN)-gamma was measured in the culture supernatants 
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet were 
examined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: IL-21 was detected in all samples, but its expression was higher at the 
site of disease in CD in comparison with UC and controls. Enhanced IL-21 was 
seen in both ileal and colonic CD and in fibrostenosing and nonfibrostenosing 
disease. IL-12 enhanced IL-21 in normal lamina propria lymphocytes through an 
IFN-gamma-independent mechanism, and blocking IL-12 in CD LPMCs decreased 
anti-CD3-stimulated IL-21 expression. Neutralization of IL-21 in CD LPMC 
cultures decreased phosphorylated STAT4 and T-bet expression, thereby inhibiting 
IFN-gamma production.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that IL-21 contributes to the ongoing Th1 mucosal 
response in CD.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.12.042
PMID: 15765404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
