---
pmid: '14710184'
title: 'Chemotaxis: signalling modules join hands at front and tail.'
authors:
- Postma M
- Bosgraaf L
- Loovers HM
- Van Haastert PJ
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1298962
doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400051
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# Chemotaxis: signalling modules join hands at front and tail.
**Authors:** Postma M, Bosgraaf L, Loovers HM, Van Haastert PJ
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.embor.7400051](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.embor.7400051)
**PMC:** [PMC1298962](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1298962/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2004 Jan;5(1):35-40. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400051.

Chemotaxis: signalling modules join hands at front and tail.

Postma M(1), Bosgraaf L, Loovers HM, Van Haastert PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG 
Groningen, The Netherlands.

Chemotaxis is the result of a refined interplay among various intracellular 
molecules that process spatial and temporal information. Here we present a 
modular scheme of the complex interactions between the front and the back of 
cells that allows them to navigate. First, at the front of the cell, activated 
Rho-type GTPases induce actin polymerization and pseudopod formation. Second, 
phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3)) is produced in a 
patch at the leading edge, where it binds pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing 
proteins, which enhance actin polymerization and translocation of the pseudopod. 
Third, in Dictyostelium amoebae, a cyclic-GMP-signalling cascade has been 
identified that regulates myosin filament formation in the posterior of the 
cell, thereby inhibiting the formation of lateral pseudopodia that could 
misdirect the cell.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400051
PMCID: PMC1298962
PMID: 14710184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Chemotaxis is the result of a refined interplay among various intracellular molecules that process spatial and temporal information. Here we present a modular scheme of the complex interactions between the front and the back of cells that allows them to navigate. First, at the front of the cell, activated Rho-type GTPases induce actin polymerization and pseudopod formation. Second, phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P 3 ) is produced in a patch at the leading edge, where it binds pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing proteins, which enhance actin polymerization and translocation of the pseudopod. Third, in Dictyostelium amoebae, a cyclic-GMP-signalling cascade has been identified that regulates myosin filament formation in the posterior of the cell, thereby inhibiting the formation of lateral pseudopodia that could misdirect the cell.

Introduction

Many cells sense the presence of extracellular chemical signals and guide their movement in the direction of the concentration gradient. This process, called chemotaxis, has a role in various functions such as finding food in prokaryotes, forming multicellular structures in protozoans, tracing bacterial infections by leukocytes and embryogenesis in metazoans ( Baggiolini, 1998 ; Campbell & Butcher, 2000 ; Crone & Lee, 2002 ; Iijima et al , 2002 ). Cells that are exposed to chemoattractants can use temporal and spatial aspects of the chemoattractant gradient to orientate their movement. Prokaryotes use only the temporal component of the chemoattractant gradient, probably because, at 1–2 μm, they are too small to process spatial information. These cells exhibit a random walk, with movement steps in all directions. Cells frequently tumble and move in a new random direction. Tumbling frequency is decreased and movement in one direction is prolonged when cells experience an increase in chemoattractant concentration, that is, when moving up the gradient ( Berg, 1988 ; Bourret & Stock, 2002 ). Eukaryotic chemotactic cells are about 10–20 μm in diameter, which allows them to process both spatial and temporal information: they measure the difference in chemoattractant concentration between the ends of the cell, and then move up the gradient of chemoattractant ( Zigmond, 1977 ). Under starvation conditions, Dictyostelium cells emit the chemoattractant cyclic AMP, which causes them to aggregate and eventually form fruiting bodies. Dictyostelium cells are able to respond to a 2% difference in cAMP concentration between the front and the back of the cell, at a mean cAMP concentration that occupies only about 1% of its 40,000 cAMP receptors ( Mato et al , 1975 ). The ability to sense and respond to shallow gradients of extracellular signals is remarkably similar in simple amoebae such as Dictyostelium and in mammalian leukocytes.

Here, we present data suggesting that chemotaxis is regulated by the interplay of at least three signalling pathways. These signalling pathways are presumably intricately connected to the basal mechanism of pseudopod formation ( Pollard & Borisy, 2003 ). In the absence of chemoattractants, cells extend pseudopodia in a more or less random direction, probably as self-organizing structures ( Bourne & Weiner, 2002 ). In the presence of a chemotactic gradient, this basic mechanism of pseudopod formation is biased to produce more pseudopodia at the front of the cell, as defined by the site of the highest chemoattractant concentration. This means that, during chemotaxis, cells become functionally polarized. In Dictyostelium cells that have been starved for 4 h, polarity is a rather transient state, because cells quickly extend a pseudopod at the back of the cell on gradient reversal ( Swanson & Taylor, 1982 ; Chen et al , 2003 ; Kriebel et al , 2003 ). The polarity of neutrophils is more persistent, because gradient reversal usually leads to the formation of additional pseudopodia at the front by which cells make U-turns ( Zigmond, 1977 ). Such a rigid polarization might improve chemotaxis by enhancing the persistence of movement in the gradient, but it also makes the cells less able to respond to changes in gradient direction. Interestingly, Dictyostelium cells starved for 7 h are more polar than those starved for a shorter period. At the onset of Dictyostelium cell aggregation, many potential aggregation centres emit cAMP waves, and cells experience successive cAMP gradients from different directions. After 7 h, the aggregation centres are fixed and the chemoattractant gradients become stable.
