---
pmid: '9819435'
title: Identification and characterization of pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor
  2 alpha-subunit kinase, PEK, involved in translational control.
authors:
- Shi Y
- Vattem KM
- Sood R
- An J
- Liang J
- Stramm L
- Wek RC
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC109330
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7499
---

# Identification and characterization of pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha-subunit kinase, PEK, involved in translational control.
**Authors:** Shi Y, Vattem KM, Sood R, An J, Liang J, Stramm L, Wek RC
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.12.7499](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.12.7499)
**PMC:** [PMC109330](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC109330/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):7499-509. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7499.

Identification and characterization of pancreatic eukaryotic initiation factor 2 
alpha-subunit kinase, PEK, involved in translational control.

Shi Y(1), Vattem KM, Sood R, An J, Liang J, Stramm L, Wek RC.

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research, Endocrine Division, Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly 
and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA. Shi_Yuguang@Lilly.com

In response to various environmental stresses, eukaryotic cells down-regulate 
protein synthesis by phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor 2 (eIF-2alpha). In mammals, the phosphorylation 
was shown to be carried out by eIF-2alpha kinases PKR and HRI. We report the 
identification and characterization of a cDNA from rat pancreatic islet cells 
that encodes a new related kinase, which we term pancreatic eIF-2alpha kinase, 
or PEK. In addition to a catalytic domain with sequence and structural features 
conserved among eIF-2alpha kinases, PEK contains a distinctive amino-terminal 
region 550 residues in length. Using recombinant PEK produced in Escherichia 
coli or Sf-9 insect cells, we demonstrate that PEK is autophosphorylated on both 
serine and threonine residues and that the recombinant enzyme can specifically 
phosphorylate eIF-2alpha on serine-51. Northern blot analyses indicate that PEK 
mRNA is expressed in all tissues examined, with highest levels in pancreas 
cells. Consistent with our mRNA assays, PEK activity was predominantly detected 
in pancreas and pancreatic islet cells. The regulatory role of PEK in protein 
synthesis was demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. The addition of 
recombinant PEK to reticulocyte lysates caused a dose-dependent inhibition of 
translation. In the Saccharomyces model system, PEK functionally substituted for 
the endogenous yeast eIF-2alpha kinase, GCN2, by a process requiring the 
serine-51 phosphorylation site in eIF-2alpha. We also identified PEK homologs 
from both Caenorhabditis elegans and the puffer fish Fugu rubripes, suggesting 
that this eIF-2alpha kinase plays an important role in translational control 
from nematodes to mammals.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.12.7499
PMCID: PMC109330
PMID: 9819435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
