---
pmid: '17928169'
title: FBXO40, a gene encoding a novel muscle-specific F-box protein, is upregulated
  in denervation-related muscle atrophy.
authors:
- Ye J
- Zhang Y
- Xu J
- Zhang Q
- Zhu D
journal: Gene
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2007.08.020
---

# FBXO40, a gene encoding a novel muscle-specific F-box protein, is upregulated in denervation-related muscle atrophy.
**Authors:** Ye J, Zhang Y, Xu J, Zhang Q, Zhu D
**Journal:** Gene (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2007.08.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2007.08.020)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 2007 Dec 1;404(1-2):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2007.08.020. Epub 2007
Sep  7.

FBXO40, a gene encoding a novel muscle-specific F-box protein, is upregulated in 
denervation-related muscle atrophy.

Ye J(1), Zhang Y, Xu J, Zhang Q, Zhu D.

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, PR China.

F-box proteins are key components of SCF (Skp1-Cullin1-F-box protein) complexes, 
which exert E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and participate in cell cycle and 
signal transduction. F-box proteins interact with Skp1 through the F-box domain 
and with proteins to be ubiquitinated through other interaction domains. We have 
characterized a novel muscle-specific F-box protein, FBXO40, the expression of 
which decreases in the dystrophic muscle of Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 
(LGMD) patient. During the development of skeletal muscle, FBXO40 can only be 
detected at postnatal stage from about 2 weeks after birth. By overexpressing in 
C2C12 cells, FBXO40 localized in cytoplasm. Most importantly, the expression of 
FBXO40 can be upregulated in skeletal muscle from denervation- but not 
starvation-related muscle atrophy. All our data suggest that FBXO40 may function 
as a regulator involved in the postnatal myogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2007.08.020
PMID: 17928169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
