---
pmid: '16234328'
title: NOSTRIN functions as a homotrimeric adaptor protein facilitating internalization
  of eNOS.
authors:
- Icking A
- Matt S
- Opitz N
- Wiesenthal A
- Müller-Esterl W
- Schilling K
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02620
---

# NOSTRIN functions as a homotrimeric adaptor protein facilitating internalization of eNOS.
**Authors:** Icking A, Matt S, Opitz N, Wiesenthal A, Müller-Esterl W, Schilling K
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02620](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02620)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Nov 1;118(Pt 21):5059-69. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02620. Epub 2005
Oct  18.

NOSTRIN functions as a homotrimeric adaptor protein facilitating internalization 
of eNOS.

Icking A(1), Matt S, Opitz N, Wiesenthal A, Müller-Esterl W, Schilling K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry II, University of Frankfurt Medical School, 
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

Intracellular trafficking of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) between 
different compartments is incompletely understood. Recently, we described a 
novel eNOS-interacting protein, NOSTRIN, which upon overexpression drives eNOS 
away from the plasma membrane towards intracellular compartments. Sequence 
similarity of NOSTRIN and pacsins/syndapins suggested a role for NOSTRIN in 
endocytosis. Accordingly, we show here that NOSTRIN interacts with the large 
GTPase dynamin and the actin nucleation promoting factor N-WASP by means of its 
SH3 domain, which also represents the docking site for eNOS. Via a coiled-coil 
region in the C-terminal portion of the protein, NOSTRIN oligomerizes, mainly 
forming trimers, which would allow simultaneous interaction with multiple 
binding partners of the SH3 domain. Consistent with this notion, expression of 
dynamin-2-GFP in CHO cells stably expressing eNOS (CHO-eNOS) results in 
recruitment of eNOS to dynamin-positive structures, only when NOSTRIN is present 
as well. Similarly, when N-WASP-GFP and NOSTRIN are co-expressed in CHO-eNOS 
cells, both proteins strongly co-localize with eNOS and are recruited to 
structures running along actin filaments. If, however, the actin cytoskeleton is 
depolymerized by cytochalasin D, NOSTRIN and eNOS are associated with extended 
structures in the cell periphery, possibly being unable to leave the plasma 
membrane. Together, these results indicate that NOSTRIN may facilitate 
endocytosis of eNOS by coordinating the function of dynamin and N-WASP.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02620
PMID: 16234328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
