---
pmid: '12764132'
title: The reverse activity of human acid ceramidase.
authors:
- Okino N
- He X
- Gatt S
- Sandhoff K
- Ito M
- Schuchman EH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303310200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The reverse activity of human acid ceramidase.
**Authors:** Okino N, He X, Gatt S, Sandhoff K, Ito M, Schuchman EH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M303310200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M303310200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 8;278(32):29948-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303310200. Epub
2003  May 22.

The reverse activity of human acid ceramidase.

Okino N(1), He X, Gatt S, Sandhoff K, Ito M, Schuchman EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York 10029, USA.

An overexpression system was recently developed to produce and purify 
recombinant, human acid ceramidase. In addition to ceramide hydrolysis, the 
purified enzyme was able to catalyze ceramide synthesis using [14C]lauric acid 
and sphingosine as substrates. Herein we report detailed characterization of 
this acid ceramidase-associated "reverse activity" and provide evidence that 
this reaction occurs in situ as well as in vitro. The pH optimum of the reverse 
reaction was approximately 5.5, as compared with approximately 4.5 for the 
hydrolysis reaction. Non-ionic detergents and zinc cations inhibited the 
activity, whereas most other cations were stimulatory. Of note, sphingomyelin 
also was very inhibitory toward this reaction, whereas the anionic lipids, 
phosphatidic acid and phosphatidylserine, were stimulatory. Of various 
sphingosine stereoisomers tested in the reverse reaction, only the natural, 
D-erythro form could efficiently serve as a substrate. Using 
D-erythro-sphingosine and lauric acid as substrates, the reaction followed 
normal Michaelis-Menten kinetics. The Km and Vmax values toward sphingosine were 
23.75 microM and 208.3 pmol/microg/h, respectively, whereas for lauric acid they 
were 73.76 microM and 232.5 pmol/microg/h, respectively. Importantly, the 
reverse activity was reduced in cell lysates from a Farber disease patient to 
the same extent as the acid ceramidase activity. Furthermore, when 
12-(N-methyl-N-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)) (NBD)-conjugated lauric acid 
and sphingosine were added to cultured lymphoblasts from a Farber disease 
patient in the presence of fumonisin B (1), the conversion to NBD-ceramide was 
reduced approximately 30% when compared with normal cells. These data provide 
important new information on human acid ceramidase and further document its 
central role in sphingolipid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303310200
PMID: 12764132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
