---
pmid: '20654576'
title: Distinct functions of human MVB12A and MVB12B in the ESCRT-I dependent on their
  posttranslational modifications.
authors:
- Tsunematsu T
- Yamauchi E
- Shibata H
- Maki M
- Ohta T
- Konishi H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.060
---

# Distinct functions of human MVB12A and MVB12B in the ESCRT-I dependent on their posttranslational modifications.
**Authors:** Tsunematsu T, Yamauchi E, Shibata H, Maki M, Ohta T, Konishi H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.060)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Aug 20;399(2):232-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.060. Epub 2010 Jul 21.

Distinct functions of human MVB12A and MVB12B in the ESCRT-I dependent on their 
posttranslational modifications.

Tsunematsu T(1), Yamauchi E, Shibata H, Maki M, Ohta T, Konishi H.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, Prefectural University of 
Hiroshima, Shobara, Hiroshima 727-0023, Japan.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Mar 4;406(1):158-9.

ESCRT-I, which mediates the sorting of ubiquitinated cargo protein from the 
plasma membrane to the endosomal vesicle, comprises a heterotetramer of TSG101 
(Vps23), Vps28, Vps37 and MVB12 protein. In humans, the structurally similar 
subtypes MVB12A and MVB12B are subunits of ESCRT-I. However, no functional 
description of these proteins has been described. Here we show the differing 
effects of tyrosine phosphorylation and ubiquitination of both MVB12 proteins on 
their respective functions. As noted in our previous study, Tyr204 
phosphorylation of MVB12A in response to epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
stimulation affects binding to CD2AP, which regulates the amounts of EGF 
receptor bound to ESCRT-I. Strikingly, ubiquitination of Lys264 and Lys290 of 
MVB12B was induced and led to the instability and inclusion of MVB12B in COS-7 
cells. These ubiquitinations increased upon EGF stimulation, which was regulated 
by the phosphorylations of Tyr241 and Tyr243 of MVB12B. Furthermore, MVB12A was 
also involved in the aggregation-prone proteins of MVB12B. These results suggest 
that the expression of MVB12B may be normally suppressed through the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway that simultaneously regulates the fate of MVB12A 
and the functions of ESCRT-I.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.060
PMID: 20654576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
