---
pmid: '21303910'
title: 'Subunit organization of the human INO80 chromatin remodeling complex: an evolutionarily
  conserved core complex catalyzes ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling.'
authors:
- Chen L
- Cai Y
- Jin J
- Florens L
- Swanson SK
- Washburn MP
- Conaway JW
- Conaway RC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3064184
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.222505
---

# Subunit organization of the human INO80 chromatin remodeling complex: an evolutionarily conserved core complex catalyzes ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling.
**Authors:** Chen L, Cai Y, Jin J, Florens L, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Conaway JW, Conaway RC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.222505](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.222505)
**PMC:** [PMC3064184](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3064184/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):11283-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.222505. Epub
2011  Feb 8.

Subunit organization of the human INO80 chromatin remodeling complex: an 
evolutionarily conserved core complex catalyzes ATP-dependent nucleosome 
remodeling.

Chen L(1), Cai Y, Jin J, Florens L, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Conaway JW, Conaway 
RC.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

We previously identified and purified a human ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling 
complex with similarity to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae INO80 complex (Jin, J., 
Cai, Y., Yao, T., Gottschalk, A. J., Florens, L., Swanson, S. K., Gutierrez, J. 
L., Coleman, M. K., Workman, J. L., Mushegian, A., Washburn, M. P., Conaway, R. 
C., and Conaway, J. W. (2005) J. Biol. Chem. 280, 41207-41212) and demonstrated 
that it is composed of (i) a Snf2 family ATPase (hIno80) related in sequence to 
the S. cerevisiae Ino80 ATPase; (ii) seven additional evolutionarily conserved 
subunits orthologous to yeast INO80 complex subunits; and (iii) six apparently 
metazoan-specific subunits. In this report, we present evidence that the human 
INO80 complex is composed of three modules that assemble with three distinct 
domains of the hIno80 ATPase. These modules include (i) one that is composed of 
the N terminus of the hIno80 protein and all of the metazoan-specific subunits 
and is not required for ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling; (ii) a second that 
is composed of the hIno80 Snf2-like ATPase/helicase and 
helicase-SANT-associated/post-HSA (HSA/PTH) domain, the actin-related proteins 
Arp4 and Arp8, and the GLI-Kruppel family transcription factor YY1; and (iii) a 
third that is composed of the hIno80 Snf2 ATPase domain, the Ies2 and Ies6 
proteins, the AAA(+) ATPases Tip49a and Tip49b, and the actin-related protein 
Arp5. Through purification and characterization of hINO80 complex subassemblies, 
we demonstrate that ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling by the hINO80 complex is 
catalyzed by a core complex comprising the hIno80 protein HSA/PTH and Snf2 
ATPase domains acting in concert with YY1 and the complete set of its 
evolutionarily conserved subunits. Taken together, our findings shed new light 
on the structure and function of the INO80 chromatin-remodeling complex.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.222505
PMCID: PMC3064184
PMID: 21303910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
