---
pmid: '1400414'
title: Functional analysis of nucleosome assembly protein, NAP-1. The negatively charged
  COOH-terminal region is not necessary for the intrinsic assembly activity.
authors:
- Fujii-Nakata T
- Ishimi Y
- Okuda A
- Kikuchi A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
---

# Functional analysis of nucleosome assembly protein, NAP-1. The negatively charged COOH-terminal region is not necessary for the intrinsic assembly activity.
**Authors:** Fujii-Nakata T, Ishimi Y, Okuda A, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Oct 15;267(29):20980-6.

Functional analysis of nucleosome assembly protein, NAP-1. The negatively 
charged COOH-terminal region is not necessary for the intrinsic assembly 
activity.

Fujii-Nakata T(1), Ishimi Y, Okuda A, Kikuchi A.

Author information:
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

A nucleosome assembly protein (NAP-1) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae facilitates 
the association of histones with DNA to form nucleosomes in vitro at 
physiological ionic conditions. The cloned gene was expressed in Escherichia 
coli using a T7 expression system, and the protein (417 amino acid residues) was 
purified by Mono Q column chromatography. Various deletion fragments of NAP-1 
protein were also produced, and their nucleosome assembly activity was examined 
by supercoiling assay. The internal fragment containing the residues 43-365 was 
necessary and sufficient for the activity, and a long stretch of negatively 
charged region near the carboxyl terminus was dispensable. This minimal size 
fragment could form the 12 S NAP-1-histone complex as the whole protein could, 
whereas deleted fragments on either side could bind with core histones only to 
form aggregates.

PMID: 1400414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
