---
pmid: '25417112'
title: Target-selective protein S-nitrosylation by sequence motif recognition.
authors:
- Jia J
- Arif A
- Terenzi F
- Willard B
- Plow EF
- Hazen SL
- Fox PL
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4243042
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.032
---

# Target-selective protein S-nitrosylation by sequence motif recognition.
**Authors:** Jia J, Arif A, Terenzi F, Willard B, Plow EF, Hazen SL, Fox PL
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.032)
**PMC:** [PMC4243042](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4243042/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2014 Oct 23;159(3):623-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.032. Epub 2014
Oct  16.

Target-selective protein S-nitrosylation by sequence motif recognition.

Jia J(1), Arif A(1), Terenzi F(1), Willard B(2), Plow EF(3), Hazen SL(1), Fox 
PL(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory for Protein Sequencing, The Lerner Research 
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Cardiology, The Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, The Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Electronic address: foxp@ccf.org.

S-nitrosylation is a ubiquitous protein modification emerging as a principal 
mechanism of nitric oxide (NO)-mediated signal transduction and cell function. 
S-nitrosylases can use NO synthase (NOS)-derived NO to modify selected cysteines 
in target proteins. Despite proteomic identification of over a thousand 
S-nitrosylated proteins, few S-nitrosylases have been identified. Moreover, 
mechanisms underlying site-selective S-nitrosylation and the potential role of 
specific sequence motifs remain largely unknown. Here, we describe a 
stimulus-inducible, heterotrimeric S-nitrosylase complex consisting of inducible 
NOS (iNOS), S100A8, and S100A9. S100A9 exhibits transnitrosylase activity, 
shuttling NO from iNOS to the target protein, whereas S100A8 and S100A9 
coordinately direct site selection. A family of proteins S-nitrosylated by 
iNOS-S100A8/A9 were revealed by proteomic analysis. A conserved I/L-X-C-X2-D/E 
motif was necessary and sufficient for iNOS-S100A8/A9-mediated S-nitrosylation. 
These results reveal an elusive parallel between protein S-nitrosylation and 
phosphorylation, namely, stimulus-dependent posttranslational modification of 
selected targets by primary sequence motif recognition.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.09.032
PMCID: PMC4243042
PMID: 25417112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any financial conflict 
of interest with the information in this manuscript.

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Protein S -nitrosylation is a nitric oxide (NO)-dependent post-translational modification of cysteine that regulates protein structure and function in bacteria, plants, and mammals ( Nakamura et al., 2013 ; Seth et al., 2012 ; Yun et al., 2011 ). An activated NO moiety is covalently added to the free thiol group on cysteine, generating an S -nitrosothiol. High-throughput proteomic approaches have identified more than a thousand S -nitrosylated (SNO−) proteins and linked to diverse cellular functions ( Doulias et al., 2010 ; Seth and Stamler, 2011 ). Physiological S -nitrosylation contributes to cellular homeostasis, whereas, dysregulation can lead to severe pathological consequences ( Haldar and Stamler, 2013 ; Lim et al., 2008a ; Nakamura et al., 2013 ).

Like phosphorylation and ubiquitination, protein S -nitrosylation is regulatable, reversible, and target- and site-selective. However, the mechanism underlying selectivity has remained elusive. The eukaryotic nitric oxide synthase (NOS) family has three cell-selective isoforms, neuronal NOS (nNOS), inducible NOS (iNOS), and endothelial NOS (eNOS). There is limited evidence that NOS can mediate selective S -nitrosylation via direct NOS-substrate interactions ( Fang et al., 2000 ; Garcia-Cardena et al., 1998 ; Kim et al., 2005 ); however, this mechanism is unlikely to account for selective targeting of Cys residues in a multitude of distinct protein substrates by only three NOS isoforms. An alternative adaptor mechanism is supported by reports that certain SNO-proteins have S -nitrosylase activity and can transfer NO from its own S-nitrosothiol group to a free thiol on a target protein via direct protein-protein interaction. Fewer than ten S -nitrosylases have been identified to date ( Nakamura and Lipton, 2013 ), and the primary sequences and structures that establish the rules governing specificity of substrate recognition and cysteine transnitrosylation are largely unknown. Recent global analyses of S -nitrosocysteine sites revealed information on specific determinants of S-nitrosylation, but failed to identify a primary sequence motif for site-selective S-nitrosylation ( Doulias et al., 2010 ; Hao et al., 2006 ; Marino and Gladyshev, 2010 ). Together, these findings suggest that additional S -nitrosylases, mechanisms, and motifs are yet to be revealed.

Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is a key glycolytic enzyme and a well-studied S -nitrosylation target. S -nitrosylation of GAPDH regulates enzymatic activity ( Padgett and Whorton, 1995 ), but also mediates several “moonlighting” functions ( Jia et al., 2012 ; Kornberg et al., 2010 ). Recently, we reported that selective, inducible S -nitrosylation of GAPDH dysregulates translational control of gene expression by the interferon-gamma (IFN-γ)-activated inhibitor of translation (GAIT) complex ( Jia et al., 2012 ). GAPDH, along with ribosomal protein L13a, Glu-Pro tRNA synthetase (EPRS), and NS1-associated protein are induced by IFN-γ to form the GAIT complex ( Sampath et al., 2004 ) that inhibits translation of vascular endothelial growth factor-A ( VEGF-A ) and other inflammation-related mRNAs ( Ray et al., 2009 ; Vyas et al., 2009 ). Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) that is oxidatively-modified (LDL ox ) by the physiological myeloperoxidase (MPO) system suppresses GAIT system activity by selective S-nitrosylation of GAPDH Cys 247 , a residue distant from the catalytic domain. S -nitrosylated GAPDH fails to bind and protect L13a, leading to ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of L13a, and consequent GAIT system inactivation. Here we elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying stimulus-dependent, site-selective S -nitrosylation of GAPDH, revealing an inducible heterotrimeric S -nitrosylase complex, and a consensus motif that directs specific S-nitrosylation on multiple target proteins.

DISCUSSION

S -nitrosylation has emerged as a dominant regulatory mechanism in NO-associated signal transduction and cell function ( Gould et al., 2013 ; Smith and Marletta, 2012 ). More than 3,000 S -nitrosocysteine sites have been identified by proteomic analysis of in vitro and in vivo S -nitrosylated proteins ( Chen et al., 2010 ). Despite the extreme diversity, the apparent fidelity and site-selective nature of the modification suggests precise regulation of the S -nitrosylation process ( Seth and Stamler, 2011 ). Using biochemical and genetic approaches, we have identified a stimulus-activated S -nitrosylase complex that directs motif-dependent protein S-nitrosylation in human myeloid cells ( Figure 7 ). IFN-γ and LDL ox synergistically induce iNOS expression, and initiate the assembly of a S -nitrosylase complex consisting of iNOS and S100A8/A9. LDL ox -inducible interaction of iNOS to S100A8 and S100A9, both calcium-binding proteins, is accompanied by induction of intracellular Ca 2+ , which may be mediated by the CD36 receptor and the Lyn/Fyn-Vav signaling pathway ( Rahaman et al., 2011 ). Although S100A8 S -nitrosylated in vitro by GSNO can slowly transfer the NO group to hemoglobin ( Lim et al., 2008b ), the function of intracellualr S100A8/A9 in S-nitrosylation has not been investigated. In our studies, we show that S100A9 acts both as an adaptor linking iNOS to its target via protein-protein interaction, and as a transnitrosylase that transfers the NO moiety from iNOS to its target, via its own S -nitrosylated Cys 3 . S100A8 interacts with the target and dictates site-specificity of the S -nitrosylase complex by motif recognition. S100A8 binding induces a conformational change in the target protein and restricts transfer of NO from S100A9 to the motif-associated cysteine.

All three NOS isoforms act as NO donors for target-selective S -nitrosylation in vivo ( Seth and Stamler, 2011 ). Importantly, individual NOS isoforms can direct selective S -nitrosylation of distinct cysteine residues in the same protein. In one well-studied example, iNOS induces GAPDH S -nitrosylation at either Cys 152 ( Hara et al., 2005 ) or Cys 247 ( Figure 1 ) in distinct cell types and in response to distinct stimuli, most clearly illustrating both high-level specificity as well as the utilization of multiple mechanisms. The recognition of a multitude of targets by just three NOS isoforms distinguishes S -nitrosylation from phosphorylation, a site-specific post-translational modification mediated by about 950 human kinases ( Buzko and Shokat, 2002 ). Multiple adaptor proteins might contribute to the specificity problem of substrate recognition by NOS isoforms. Supporting this mechanism, PSD-95 ( Lipton et al., 2002 ) and CAPON ( Fang et al., 2000 ) act as scaffolds that direct nNOS binding to its S -nitrosylation targets. This mechanism is analogous to the polyubiquitination system in which one of about 520 E3 ubiquitin ligases act as adaptors to direct binding of the catalytic E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes that transfer ubiquitin to the target lysine residue ( Li et al., 2008 ). The adaptor mechanism in site-selective S -nitrosylation is supported by our finding that S100A8/A9 directs the binding of iNOS to GAPDH. However, S100A8/A9 also exhibits transnitrosylase activity, transferring the NO group from the iNOS donor to GAPDH, as well as to four other validated targets and about 90 other candidates. Interestingly, nNOS S -nitrosylates PSD-95 at Cys 3 and Cys 5 ( Ho et al., 2011 ), but their role in NMDAR S -nitrosylation, and the possible function of PSD-95 as an nNOS-associated S -nitrosylase, has not been determined.

Despite considerable effort, a specific consensus sequence or motif that directs S -nitrosylation globally or in an ensemble of proteins has not been identified ( Doulias et al., 2010 ; Marino and Gladyshev, 2010 ; Seth and Stamler, 2011 ). The difficulty of deconvolving the signal of a dominant motif from a multitude of sequences targeted by diverse S -nitrosylases and adaptors has rendered this problem nearly insoluble. The complexity of the problem is multiplied further by the diminished specificity of S -nitrosylation by chemical NO donors that that can generate up to 1000 SNO - proteins. We took advantage of an analysis of a select family of SNO-proteins, revealed by proteomic analysis and experimentally validated to be specifically S -nitrosylated by the iNOS-S100A8/A9 complex. A consensus I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif was observed in five S -nitrosylated proteins. Disruption of conserved residues I/L and/or D/E in the motif blocked S-nitrosylation in both proteins tested at the predicted sites, Cys 247 of GAPDH and Cys 117 of moesin. Mutation of amino acids in the consensus motif did not inhibit S -nitrosylation of GAPDH Cys 247 by GSNO, consistent with previous reports of lack of specificity of GAPDH S -nitrosylation by GSNO ( Paige et al., 2008 ; Wu et al., 2011 ). Exogenous, non-enzymatic donors induce high, non-physiological intracellular NO concentrations, that can direct non-selective S -nitrosylation of free, surface-accessible cysteine residues. The dissimilar, site-specific S -nitrosylation of GAPDH at Cys 152 by apoptotic agonists suggests the activity of a distinct S -nitrosylase and cognate motif ( Hara et al., 2005 ). Certainly, the I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif is not required for all, or even most site-selective protein nitrosylations, as exemplified by apoptosis-driven stimulation of S -nitrosylation of GAPDH Cys 152 , which is not located within the consensus motif. More interestingly, HSPA5 is subject to LDL ox /IFN-γ-stimulated S -nitrosylation but neither of the two cysteine residues are contained within the consensus motif, and the modification requires iNOS, but not S100A8/A9. This result indicates that a single stimulatory condition, i.e., LDL ox /IFN-γ, can activate site-selective S -nitrosylation by multiple mechanisms.

Several structural factors have been suggested to contribute to protein S -nitrosylation, including acid-base sequences in residues within 6–8 angstroms ( Marino and Gladyshev, 2010 ), nearby hydrophobic residues ( Seth and Stamler, 2011 ), high nucleophilicity ( Hess et al., 2005 ), helical structure, and solvent accessibility ( Doulias et al., 2010 ). Interestingly, the I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif described here exhibits most, if not all, of these characteristics. The Cys residue is surrounded by a nearby acidic residue, D/E, and a hydrophobic residue, I/L, which can increase cysteine nucleophilicity. In addition, according to X-ray crystal structures, the S -nitrosylated cysteine in each of the validated SNO-proteins is solvent-accessible, and located within or adjacent to α-helical domains ( Edwards and Keep, 2001 ; Huber et al., 1992 ; Nicolet et al., 2010 ; Smith et al., 2003 ). The I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif is present in 19 additional candidate SNO-proteins revealed by our proteomic analysis ( Table S2 ), suggesting a wide-ranging role in S -nitrosylation. Ontologic analysis of motif-bearing candidates suggests linkage to cytoskeleton organization, cell movement, catabolic processes, inflammation, and protein localization ( Huang da et al., 2009 ). Analysis of a SNO-protein database that includes 810 SNO-peptides in 445 human proteins ( Lee et al., 2012 ) revealed only 15 peptides in 15 proteins contain the I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif. This result is consistent with a relatively high specificity and low occurrence of nitrosylation by the iNOS-S100A8/A9 complex compared to chemical NO donors. S100A9, in the absence of S100A8, has the potential to increase the target range by recognition of a less stringent CX 2 D/E motif ( Figure 6B, 6H ). However, this situation may not be physiologically relevant because S100A9 by itself is unstable ( Riva et al., 2013 ). Likewise, rapid turnover of S100A8 in S100A9-null mice suggests heterodimer formation is important to maintain expression and function of the complex ( Hobbs et al., 2003 ).

S100A8 and S100A9 are constitutively expressed in myeloid cells and predominantly found as a heterodimeric complex in vivo . S100A8/A9 comprises about 1% of total protein in monocytes attesting to its potential pathophysiological significance ( Edgeworth et al., 1991 ). S100A8/A9 is generally considered to be a pro-inflammatory agent, however, the specific cellular functions of S100A8/A9 are incompletely understood ( Goyette and Geczy, 2011 ; Roth et al., 2003 ). Release of S100A8/A9 by activated neutrophils, monocytes, and platelets has led to a primary focus on the extracellular functions. Its plasma level in humans is associated with increased risk for CVD ( Ma et al., 2012 ; Nagareddy et al., 2013 ), possibly by contributing to both innate and adaptive immune responses. The complex is particularly abundant in inflammatory sites, including atherosclerotic lesions of mice and humans, and its level correlates with characteristics or rupture-prone plaques ( Croce et al., 2009 ; Ionita et al., 2009 ; McCormick et al., 2005 ). Genetic deletion of S100A9 decreases atherosclerotic lesion formation in apoE −/− mice ( Croce et al., 2009 ). Possibly, S100A9 depletion restores GAIT system activity by blocking GAPDH Cys 247 S-nitrosylation and L13a degradation thereby suppressing expression of inflammation-related proteins. However, the stimulatory role of S100A8/A9 in atherosclerotic lesion formation has not been uniformly observed in other mouse models ( Averill et al., 2011 ; Croce et al., 2009 ). Interestingly, both S100A9 and iNOS are enriched in macrophage-rich regions in the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain, and depletion of either provides significant clinical benefits in animal models of AD ( Ha et al., 2010 ; Nathan et al., 2005 ). Recent studies of differential protein S -nitrosylation revealed 45 AD-associated SNO-proteins in humans and 33 in mouse models of AD ( Zahid et al., 2014 ; Zareba-Koziol et al., 2014 ). Interestingly, 6 human and 6 mouse AD-associated SNO-proteins contain the I/L-X-C-X 2 -D/E motif.

The intracellular activities of S100A8/A9, and particularly their potential contributions to cellular inflammation remain largely unexplored. S100A8/A9 may contribute to myeloid cell inflammation via S-nitrosylation of inflammatory mediators in addition to GAPDH. Several candidate or validated SNO-proteins revealed by our analysis are linked to myeloid cell inflammatory processes, such as CAP1 ( Lee et al., 2014 ), SAMHD1 ( Laguette et al., 2011 ). Moreover, S100A8/A9 has been implicated in additional intracellular functions, including cytoskeleton organization ( Vogl et al., 2004 ) and gene regulation ( Schonthaler et al., 2013 ). Our discovery of an inflammatory stimulus-dependent S -nitrosylase complex, and its recognition motif, opens a new avenue of thought in deciphering the role of S -nitrosylation in inflammation, the specific participants, and the underlying molecular mechanisms.
