---
pmid: '23696645'
title: Redox proteomics uncovers peroxynitrite-sensitive proteins that help Escherichia
  coli to overcome nitrosative stress.
authors:
- Lindemann C
- Lupilova N
- M체ller A
- Warscheid B
- Meyer HE
- Kuhlmann K
- Eisenacher M
- Leichert LI
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3707675
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457556
---

# Redox proteomics uncovers peroxynitrite-sensitive proteins that help Escherichia coli to overcome nitrosative stress.
**Authors:** Lindemann C, Lupilova N, M체ller A, Warscheid B, Meyer HE, Kuhlmann K, Eisenacher M, Leichert LI
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.457556](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.457556)
**PMC:** [PMC3707675](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3707675/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 5;288(27):19698-714. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457556. Epub 
2013 May 21.

Redox proteomics uncovers peroxynitrite-sensitive proteins that help Escherichia 
coli to overcome nitrosative stress.

Lindemann C(1), Lupilova N, M체ller A, Warscheid B, Meyer HE, Kuhlmann K, 
Eisenacher M, Leichert LI.

Author information:
(1)Medical Proteome Center, Ruhr University Bochum, Universit채tsstrasse 150, 
44780 Bochum, Germany.

Peroxynitrite is a highly reactive chemical species with antibacterial 
properties that are synthesized in immune cells. In a proteomic approach, we 
identified specific target proteins of peroxynitrite-induced modifications in 
Escherichia coli. Although peroxynitrite caused a fairly indiscriminate 
nitration of tyrosine residues, reversible modifications of protein thiols were 
highly specific. We used a quantitative redox proteomic method based on 
isotope-coded affinity tag chemistry and identified four proteins consistently 
thiol-modified in cells treated with peroxynitrite as follows: AsnB, FrmA, MaeB, 
and RidA. All four were required for peroxynitrite stress tolerance in vivo. 
Three of the identified proteins were modified at highly conserved cysteines, 
and MaeB and FrmA are known to be directly involved in the oxidative and 
nitrosative stress response in E. coli. In in vitro studies, we could show that 
the activity of RidA, a recently discovered enamine/imine deaminase, is 
regulated in a specific manner by the modification of its single conserved 
cysteine. Mutation of this cysteine 107 to serine generated a constitutively 
active protein that was not susceptible to peroxynitrite.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.457556
PMCID: PMC3707675
PMID: 23696645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
