---
reference_id: PMID:8534977
title: "Cloning of a lignostilbene-alpha,beta-dioxygenase isozyme gene from Pseudomonas paucimobilis TMY1009."
authors:
- Kamoda S
- Saburi Y
journal: Biosci Biotechnol Biochem
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1271/bbb.59.1866
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Dioxygenases
- "Genes, Bacterial"
- Isoenzymes/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Oligonucleotide Probes
- Oxygenases/genetics
- Pseudomonas/enzymology
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Cloning of a lignostilbene-alpha,beta-dioxygenase isozyme gene from Pseudomonas paucimobilis TMY1009.
**Authors:** Kamoda S, Saburi Y
**Journal:** Biosci Biotechnol Biochem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1271/bbb.59.1866](https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.59.1866)

## Content

1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1995 Oct;59(10):1866-8. doi: 10.1271/bbb.59.1866.

Cloning of a lignostilbene-alpha,beta-dioxygenase isozyme gene from Pseudomonas 
paucimobilis TMY1009.

Kamoda S(1), Saburi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Forest Products, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Tokyo, 
Japan.

A genomic DNA library of Pseudomonas paucimobilis TMY1009 was constructed using 
a cosmid vector pWE15. Screening of the library for 
lignostilbene-alpha,beta-dioxygenase (LSD) isozyme genes was done with a common 
probe for the alpha, beta, and gamma subunits, which composed LSD isozymes. The 
positive clones obtained by colony hybridization were further confirmed by 
Southern hybridization. A 4.2-kb BamHI-HindIII fragment hybridized with the 
probe was subcloned into pUC118 to yield the plasmid pKHE1700. Escherichia coli 
MV1184 carrying pKHE1700 produced one of the LSD isozymes. The cloned LSD was 
purified and compared with LSD isozymes from P. paucimobilis TMY1009. The 
behavior on column chromatographies through all purification steps accorded with 
that of LSD-III. Furthermore, the mobility on polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis, the elution profile on reversed-phase HPLC, and the partial 
amino acid sequence were common to the cloned LSD and the native LSD-III. Thus 
the cloned LSD could be identified as LSD-III. It was found that the gene of 
LSD-III (lsdB) was composed of 489 codons.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.59.1866
PMID: 8534977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]