---
pmid: '19300440'
title: Redox-switch modulation of human SSADH by dynamic catalytic loop.
authors:
- Kim YG
- Lee S
- Kwon OS
- Park SY
- Lee SJ
- Park BJ
- Kim KJ
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2670868
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.40
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Redox-switch modulation of human SSADH by dynamic catalytic loop.
**Authors:** Kim YG, Lee S, Kwon OS, Park SY, Lee SJ, Park BJ, Kim KJ
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.40](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.40)
**PMC:** [PMC2670868](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2670868/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Apr 8;28(7):959-68. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.40. Epub 2009 Mar 19.

Redox-switch modulation of human SSADH by dynamic catalytic loop.

Kim YG(1), Lee S, Kwon OS, Park SY, Lee SJ, Park BJ, Kim KJ.

Author information:
(1)Pohang Accelerator Laboratory, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 
Pohang, Kyungbuk, Republic of Korea.

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) is involved in the final degradation 
step of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid by converting 
succinic semialdehyde to succinic acid in the mitochondrial matrix. SSADH 
deficiency, a rare autosomal recessive disease, exhibits variable clinical 
phenotypes, including psychomotor retardation, language delay, behaviour 
disturbance and convulsions. Here, we present crystal structures of both the 
oxidized and reduced forms of human SSADH. Interestingly, the structures show 
that the catalytic loop of the enzyme undergoes large structural changes 
depending on the redox status of the environment, which is mediated by a 
reversible disulphide bond formation between a catalytic Cys340 and an adjacent 
Cys342 residues located on the loop. Subsequent in vivo and in vitro studies 
reveal that the 'dynamic catalytic loop' confers a response to reactive oxygen 
species and changes in redox status, indicating that the redox-switch modulation 
could be a physiological control mechanism of human SSADH. Structural basis for 
the substrate specificity of the enzyme and the impact of known missense point 
mutations associated with the disease pathogenesis are presented as well.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.40
PMCID: PMC2670868
PMID: 19300440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
