---
pmid: '18818696'
title: Structural and functional coupling of Hsp90- and Sgt1-centred multi-protein
  complexes.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Botër M
- Li K
- Kadota Y
- Panaretou B
- Prodromou C
- Shirasu K
- Pearl LH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2556094
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.190
---

# Structural and functional coupling of Hsp90- and Sgt1-centred multi-protein complexes.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Botër M, Li K, Kadota Y, Panaretou B, Prodromou C, Shirasu K, Pearl LH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.190](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.190)
**PMC:** [PMC2556094](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2556094/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Oct 22;27(20):2789-98. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.190. Epub 2008 Sep
 25.

Structural and functional coupling of Hsp90- and Sgt1-centred multi-protein 
complexes.

Zhang M(1), Botër M, Li K, Kadota Y, Panaretou B, Prodromou C, Shirasu K, Pearl 
LH.

Author information:
(1)Section of Structural Biology, The Institute of Cancer Research, Chester 
Beatty Laboratories, London, UK.

Sgt1 is an adaptor protein implicated in a variety of processes, including 
formation of the kinetochore complex in yeast, and regulation of innate immunity 
systems in plants and animals. Sgt1 has been found to associate with SCF E3 
ubiquitin ligases, the CBF3 kinetochore complex, plant R proteins and related 
animal Nod-like receptors, and with the Hsp90 molecular chaperone. We have 
determined the crystal structure of the core Hsp90-Sgt1 complex, revealing a 
distinct site of interaction on the Hsp90 N-terminal domain. Using the 
structure, we developed mutations in Sgt1 interfacial residues, which 
specifically abrogate interaction with Hsp90, and disrupt Sgt1-dependent 
functions in vivo, in plants and yeast. We show that Sgt1 bridges the Hsp90 
molecular chaperone system to the substrate-specific arm of SCF ubiquitin ligase 
complexes, suggesting a role in SCF assembly and regulation, and providing 
multiple complementary routes for ubiquitination of Hsp90 client proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.190
PMCID: PMC2556094
PMID: 18818696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
