---
pmid: '16407074'
title: Multipurpose MRG domain involved in cell senescence and proliferation exhibits
  structural homology to a DNA-interacting domain.
authors:
- Bowman BR
- Moure CM
- Kirtane BM
- Welschhans RL
- Tominaga K
- Pereira-Smith OM
- Quiocho FA
journal: Structure
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.08.019
---

# Multipurpose MRG domain involved in cell senescence and proliferation exhibits structural homology to a DNA-interacting domain.
**Authors:** Bowman BR, Moure CM, Kirtane BM, Welschhans RL, Tominaga K, Pereira-Smith OM, Quiocho FA
**Journal:** Structure (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2005.08.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2005.08.019)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2006 Jan;14(1):151-8. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.08.019.

Multipurpose MRG domain involved in cell senescence and proliferation exhibits 
structural homology to a DNA-interacting domain.

Bowman BR(1), Moure CM, Kirtane BM, Welschhans RL, Tominaga K, Pereira-Smith OM, 
Quiocho FA.

Author information:
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The ubiquitous MRG/MORF family of proteins is involved in cell senescence, or 
the terminal loss of proliferative potential, a model for aging and tumor 
suppression at the cellular level. These proteins are defined by the 
approximately 20 kDa MRG domain that binds a plethora of transcriptional 
regulators and chromatin-remodeling factors, including the histone deacetylase 
transcriptional corepressor mSin3A and the novel nuclear protein PAM14, and they 
are also known components of the Tip60/NuA4 complex via interactions with the 
MRG binding protein (MRGBP). We present here the crystal structure of a 
prototypic MRG domain from human MRG15 whose core consists of two orthogonal 
helix hairpins. Despite the lack of sequence similarity, the core structure has 
surprisingly striking homology to a DNA-interacting domain of the tyrosine 
site-specific recombinases XerD, lambda integrase, and Cre. Site-directed 
mutagenesis studies based on the X-ray structure and bioinformatics identified 
key residues involved in the binding of PAM14 and MRGBP.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2005.08.019
PMID: 16407074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
