---
pmid: '12805363'
title: Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia protein interacts with and regulates
  the cell surface level of Alzheimer's amyloid beta precursor protein.
authors:
- Noviello C
- Vito P
- Lopez P
- Abdallah M
- D'Adamio L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304133200
---

# Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia protein interacts with and regulates the cell surface level of Alzheimer's amyloid beta precursor protein.
**Authors:** Noviello C, Vito P, Lopez P, Abdallah M, D'Adamio L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304133200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304133200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 22;278(34):31843-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304133200. Epub
2003  Jun 12.

Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia protein interacts with and regulates 
the cell surface level of Alzheimer's amyloid beta precursor protein.

Noviello C(1), Vito P, Lopez P, Abdallah M, D'Adamio L.

Author information:
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, 
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The familial Alzheimer's disease gene product amyloid beta protein precursor (A 
beta PP) is sequentially processed by beta- and gamma-secretases to generate the 
A beta peptide. Although much is known about the biochemical pathway leading to 
A beta formation, because extracellular aggregates of A beta peptides are 
considered the cause of Alzheimer's disease, the biological role of A beta PP 
processing is only recently being investigated. Cleavage of A beta PP by 
gamma-secretase releases, together with A beta, a COOH-terminal A beta PP 
intracellular domain, termed AID. Hoping to gain clues about proteins that 
regulates A beta PP processing and function, we used the yeast two-hybrid system 
to identify proteins that interact with the AID region of A beta PP. One of the 
interactors isolated is the autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) 
adapter protein. This molecular interaction is confirmed in vitro and in vivo by 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer and in cell lysates. Moreover, we show 
that reduction of ARH expression by RNA interference results in increased levels 
of cell membrane A beta PP. These data assert a physiological role for ARH in A 
beta PP internalization, transport, and/or processing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304133200
PMID: 12805363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
