---
pmid: '34515398'
title: FBXO2/SCF ubiquitin ligase complex directs xenophagy through recognizing bacterial
  surface glycan.
authors:
- Yamada A
- Hikichi M
- Nozawa T
- Nakagawa I
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC8567282
doi: 10.15252/embr.202152584
---

# FBXO2/SCF ubiquitin ligase complex directs xenophagy through recognizing bacterial surface glycan.
**Authors:** Yamada A, Hikichi M, Nozawa T, Nakagawa I
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.202152584](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.202152584)
**PMC:** [PMC8567282](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8567282/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2021 Nov 4;22(11):e52584. doi: 10.15252/embr.202152584. Epub 2021
Sep  13.

FBXO2/SCF ubiquitin ligase complex directs xenophagy through recognizing 
bacterial surface glycan.

Yamada A(1), Hikichi M(1), Nozawa T(1), Nakagawa I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.

Xenophagy, also known as antibacterial selective autophagy, degrades invading 
bacterial pathogens such as group A Streptococcus (GAS) to defend cells. 
Although invading bacteria are known to be marked with ubiquitin and selectively 
targeted by xenophagy, how ubiquitin ligases recognize invading bacteria is 
poorly understood. Here, we show that FBXO2, a glycoprotein-specific receptor 
for substrate in the SKP1/CUL1/F-box protein (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex, 
mediates recognition of GlcNAc side chains of the GAS surface carbohydrate 
structure and promotes ubiquitin-mediated xenophagy against GAS. FBXO2 targets 
cytosolic GAS through its sugar-binding motif and GlcNAc expression on the GAS 
surface. FBXO2 knockout resulted in decreased ubiquitin accumulation on 
intracellular GAS and xenophagic degradation of bacteria. Furthermore, SCF 
components such as SKP1, CUL1, and ROC1 are required for ubiquitin-mediated 
xenophagy against GAS. Thus, SCFFBXO2 recognizes GlcNAc residues of GAS surface 
carbohydrates and functions in ubiquitination during xenophagy.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.202152584
PMCID: PMC8567282
PMID: 34515398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Xenophagy, also known as antibacterial selective autophagy, degrades invading bacterial pathogens such as group A Streptococcus (GAS) to defend cells. Although invading bacteria are known to be marked with ubiquitin and selectively targeted by xenophagy, how ubiquitin ligases recognize invading bacteria is poorly understood. Here, we show that FBXO2, a glycoprotein‐specific receptor for substrate in the SKP1/CUL1/F‐box protein (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex, mediates recognition of GlcNAc side chains of the GAS surface carbohydrate structure and promotes ubiquitin‐mediated xenophagy against GAS. FBXO2 targets cytosolic GAS through its sugar‐binding motif and GlcNAc expression on the GAS surface. FBXO2 knockout resulted in decreased ubiquitin accumulation on intracellular GAS and xenophagic degradation of bacteria. Furthermore, SCF components such as SKP1, CUL1, and ROC1 are required for ubiquitin‐mediated xenophagy against GAS. Thus, SCF FBXO2 recognizes GlcNAc residues of GAS surface carbohydrates and functions in ubiquitination during xenophagy.

Introduction

Autophagy is a membrane trafficking process in which double‐membrane spherical structures known as autophagosomes deliver cytosolic contents to lysosomes for degradation. Autophagy not only degrades its components but also selectively targets invading microbes and plays a key role in innate immune defense. Autophagy against microbes is named xenophagy and has been reported to degrade various intracellular bacterial pathogens such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, and group A Streptococcus (GAS) (Levine & Deretic, 2007 ; Campoy & Colombo, 2009 ). Intracellular bacteria are marked with ubiquitin and ubiquitin‐binding autophagy receptors such as p62 and NDP52 and are recruited for linking to LC3 on autophagosomes (Boyle & Randow, 2013 ). Ubiquitin is also involved in recruiting ATG16L1 for xenophagy (Fujita et al , 2013 ). Although ubiquitin ligases such as LRSAM1, Parkin, Smurf1, Nedd4‐1, and RNF213 have been identified as crucial factors in xenophagy against various bacterial pathogens (Huett et al , 2012 ; Manzanillo et al , 2013 ; Franco et al , 2017 ; Ogawa et al , 2018 ; Otten et al , 2021 ), how these ligases selectively recognize invading pathogens is poorly understood.

Group A Streptococcus , also known as Streptococcus pyogenes , is a group of gram‐positive bacteria that cause a variety of illnesses, including pharyngitis, impetigo, and severe systemic infections such as necrotizing fasciitis and streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (Cole et al , 2011 ). GAS invades non‐phagocytic human cells via endocytosis and escapes from endosomes into the cytosol through the activity of streptolysin O (SLO), a pore‐forming toxin secreted by GAS. GAS exposed to the cytoplasm is selectively targeted by xenophagy (Nakagawa et al , 2004 ). Some GAS strains avoid xenophagic degradation by secreting toxins (Barnett et al , 2013 ; O'Seaghdha & Wessels, 2013 ; Toh et al , 2020 ). We previously reported that GAS invasion through SLO triggers the recruitment of ubiquitin‐binding autophagy receptors to ubiquitin‐marked GAS through TBC1D9 and RAB35 (Minowa‐Nozawa et al , 2017 ; Nozawa et al , 2020 ), suggesting that ubiquitination is essential for xenophagy against GAS infection. However, the substrate(s) and ligase(s) responsible for ubiquitin‐coating GAS have not been identified.

In addition to ubiquitin‐mediated recognition, glycan binding proteins such as galectin‐3 and galectin‐8 have been reported to direct xenophagy by binding host glycans exposed on damaged endosomes and lysosomes. Galectin‐8, a cytosolic β‐galactoside‐binding lectin, activates xenophagy by recruiting the autophagy receptor NDP52 during Salmonella Typhimurium infection (Thurston et al , 2012 ). Galectin‐3 recruits TRIM16, a RING‐type ubiquitin ligase, to add K63‐linked ubiquitin to damaged endomembranes (Chauhan et al , 2016 ). In addition, although not involved in xenophagy, the SCF FBXO27 ubiquitin ligase complex has been reported to ubiquitinate lysosomal glycoprotein exposed following membrane damage for lysophagy (Yoshida et al , 2017 ). Therefore, recent advances have revealed that glycan recognition is important for xenophagy and lysophagy. The recognized glycan substrate is thought to be a host membrane component. However, despite the abundance of glycans and glycoproteins on the bacteria surface, whether bacterial glycans are also recognized in xenophagy is unknown.

Group A carbohydrate (GAC) is a bacterial surface rhamnose polysaccharide that constitutes half of the cell wall of GAS, is essential for bacterial growth, and contributes to infection ability (McCarty, 1952 ). The N ‐acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) side chain, present in GAC, is a virulence factor (Henningham et al , 2018 ). Recent studies showed that mutants defective in GlcNAc side chain addition improve intracellular viability by increasing the sensitivity to neutrophils and serum killing, attenuating virulence, and suppressing host immune responses (van Sorge et al , 2014 ). However, it is unclear how the GAS surface carbohydrate structure and its GlcNAc side chains contribute to the intracellular dynamics of GAS in host cells.

In this study, we investigated the involvement of GlcNAc residues of GAS surface carbohydrate and FBXO2, a glycoprotein‐specific F‐box protein, in xenophagy. Our findings reveal that the bacterial sugar chain is among the markers of xenophagy recognition, providing insight into the pathway linking bacterial surface components and ubiquitin ligase in xenophagy.

Discussion

Ubiquitination is a critical step in xenophagy, but the underlying mechanism by which ubiquitin ligase selectively targets the substrate is poorly understood. Furthermore, ubiquitin ligases that directly recognize bacterial components have not been reported. In this study, we found that the bacterial surface glycan is one of the SCF ubiquitin ligase complex targets through the glycoprotein‐specific receptor FBXO2 (Fig 6G ).

Because glycan recognition is an important event in the xenophagy process, we used GAS GAC mutants to show that mutants defective in GlcNAc addition to the rhamnose backbone were recognized less effectively by xenophagy. Notably, despite Δ gacL showing GlcNAc expression at a level comparable to WT GAS, recognition of this mutant by xenophagy was lower (Fig 1B–D ). Because GacL is a GT‐C glycosyltransferase that transfers GlcNAc from GlcNAc‐P‐Und to polyrhamnose, the Δ gacI mutant binds to sWGA via GlcNAc exposed on the cell surface (Rush et al , 2017 ), and therefore, the GlcNAc‐attached rhamnose backbone may be necessary for recognition by FBXO2. This result is consistent with previous results showing that FBXO2 recognizes N ‐glycan rather than GlcNAc residues (Yoshida et al , 2002 ; Mizushima et al , 2004 ; Glenn et al , 2008 ). Importantly, although lower recruitment of FBXO2, ubiquitin, and LC3 occurred in the Δ gacI mutant than in the WT GAS, more than 20% of cells showed FBXO2‐, ubiquitin‐, and LC3‐positive Δ gacI GAS (Figs 1D , 2E , and 3F ). Thus, despite the fact that GlcNAc may not be completely absent from the GAS surface after deletion of gacI , the host GlcNAc residues may have been recognized by FBXO2 because GlcNAc is abundant in the cell membrane and FBXO2 binds to the lysosomal glycoprotein LAMP1 (Yoshida et al , 2017 ; Liu et al , 2020 ). Therefore, the FBXO2‐mediated SCF ubiquitin ligase complex is involved in xenophagy during GAS infection through bacterial glycan recognition, but this ubiquitination machinery may also function in xenophagy against other pathogenic bacteria via host glycan sensing.

FBXO2, FBXO6, and FBXO27 are F‐box‐associated (FBA) families of F‐box proteins, which contain a domain that mediates carbohydrate substrate binding. This domain is structurally homologous to the glycan binding domains of two other mammalian lectins, galectin (Mizushima et al , 2004 ) and PNGase F (Zhou et al , 2006 ). FBXO2, FBXO6, and FBXO27 bind high‐mannose N ‐linked glycoproteins and function as ubiquitin ligase subunits for endoplasmic reticulum‐associated degradation (Yoshida et al , 2002 ). Of these FBA family proteins, FBXO2 was most frequently recruited to intracellular GAS in HeLa cells (Fig 3A and B ). We also investigated effects of FBXO6 knockdown in xenophagy of GAS, but the involvement of FBXO6 was modest compared with that of FBXO2. Although FBXO2 and FBXO6 show a homologous motif arrangement, it has been reported that FBXO6 binds glycoproteins less tightly compared with FBXO2 because the total length of SBD is slightly shorter in FBXO6 and the hydrophobic pocket required for binding to glycoproteins differs from that of FBXO2 (Glenn et al , 2008 ). Therefore, FBXO6 may be involved in an unrecognized target other than GAS. Previous reports showed that the FBXO27‐containing SCF complex ubiquitinates lysosomal glycoprotein for lysophagy (Yoshida et al , 2017 ). However, FBXO27 expression is restricted to several tissues such as the brain, and its expression has not been detected in some human epithelial cells, including HeLa cells (Yoshida et al , 2017 ). FBXO2 is broadly expressed in systemic cells and is expressed at high levels in the nervous system. Liu et al ( 2020 ) recently reported that FBXO2 mediates lysophagy in the central nervous system. Therefore, the FBA‐containing SCF complex is suggested to mediate lysophagy and xenophagy in various tissues, and functional differences between FBA families may be related to FBA protein expression patterns. Here, we show that FBXO2 was expressed in human epithelial cells such as HeLa and A549 cells but not in endothelial cells (HUVECs and HMEC‐1 cells). Because GAS can survive in endothelial cells because of the ubiquitination deficiency (Lu et al , 2017 ), reduced FBXO2 expression may be one reason for intrinsically defective xenophagy in endothelial cells.

We showed that bacterial surface glycan is recognized by the FBXO2‐mediated SCF complex for ubiquitination in xenophagy during GAS infection because recognition of GlcNAc‐deficient mutants or GlcNAc‐masked GAS by FBXO2 and the autophagy machinery was reduced. However, which bacterial and/or host protein(s) are ubiquitinated remains unknown. FBXO2 is involved in clearing damaged lysosomes and binds to LAMP1, and SCF FBXO27 ubiquitinates VAMP3, VAMP7, LAMP1, LAMP2, GNS, PSAP, and TMEM192 during lysophagy (Yoshida et al , 2017 ). Although ubiquitin‐binding bacterial proteins that promote xenophagy have been identified in M. tuberculosis (Chai et al , 2019 ), the bacterial proteins ubiquitinated by ubiquitin ligase during xenophagy have not been identified. Notably, Otten et al ( 2021 ) reported that non‐proteinaceous lipopolysaccharide of Salmonella is ubiquitinated, which directs ubiquitin‐dependent xenophagy.

Given that our results were showing that isolated bacteria from host cells carried multiple ubiquitinated products and that the band pattern differed among WT and Δ gacI mutants, the surface components of gram‐positive GAS may be ubiquitinated. Further studies to explore ubiquitinated bacterial components would reveal the molecular mechanism of xenophagy. In addition, FBXO proteins play physiological roles other than as substrate receptors for the SCF complex, and identifying the functions of FBXO2 in xenophagy other than ubiquitination may lead to the detection of a novel xenophagy induction pathway.

In conclusion, we demonstrated the involvement of the GAC side chain and SCF ubiquitin ligase complex in bacterial infection. Observation of the interactions between GAS and host cells provides insights into the mechanisms by which host defense systems sense GAS, which may improve the understanding of the pathogenesis of various diseases and lead to the identification of therapeutic targets.
