---
pmid: '25525260'
title: Structural and inhibitory effects of hinge loop mutagenesis in serpin-2 from
  the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Meekins DA
- An C
- Zolkiewski M
- Battaile KP
- Kanost MR
- Lovell S
- Michel K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4317006
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.625665
---

# Structural and inhibitory effects of hinge loop mutagenesis in serpin-2 from the malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Meekins DA, An C, Zolkiewski M, Battaile KP, Kanost MR, Lovell S, Michel K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.625665](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.625665)
**PMC:** [PMC4317006](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4317006/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 30;290(5):2946-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.625665. Epub
2014  Dec 17.

Structural and inhibitory effects of hinge loop mutagenesis in serpin-2 from the 
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae.

Zhang X(1), Meekins DA(1), An C(2), Zolkiewski M(3), Battaile KP(4), Kanost 
MR(3), Lovell S(5), Michel K(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 
66506.
(2)From the Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 
66506, the Department of Entomology, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506.
(4)Industrial Macromolecular Crystallography Association Collaborative Access 
Team, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute, Advanced Photon Source 
Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, and.
(5)the Protein Structure Laboratory, Del Shankel Structural Biology Center, 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas 66407.
(6)From the Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 
66506, kmichel@ksu.edu.

Serpin-2 (SRPN2) is a key negative regulator of the melanization response in the 
malaria vector Anopheles gambiae. SRPN2 irreversibly inhibits clip domain serine 
proteinase 9 (CLIPB9), which functions in a serine proteinase cascade 
culminating in the activation of prophenoloxidase and melanization. Silencing of 
SRPN2 in A. gambiae results in spontaneous melanization and decreased life span 
and is therefore a promising target for vector control. The previously 
determined structure of SRPN2 revealed a partial insertion of the hinge region 
of the reactive center loop (RCL) into β sheet A. This partial hinge insertion 
participates in heparin-linked activation in other serpins, notably antithrombin 
III. SRPN2 does not contain a heparin binding site, and any possible mechanistic 
function of the hinge insertion was previously unknown. To investigate the 
function of the SRPN2 hinge insertion, we developed three SRPN2 variants in 
which the hinge regions are either constitutively expelled or inserted and 
analyzed their structure, thermostability, and inhibitory activity. We 
determined that constitutive hinge expulsion resulted in a 2.7-fold increase in 
the rate of CLIPB9Xa inhibition, which is significantly lower than previous 
observations of allosteric serpin activation. Furthermore, we determined that 
stable insertion of the hinge region did not appreciably decrease the 
accessibility of the RCL to CLIPB9. Together, these results indicate that the 
partial hinge insertion in SRPN2 does not participate in the allosteric 
activation observed in other serpins and instead represents a molecular 
trade-off between RCL accessibility and efficient formation of an inhibitory 
complex with the cognate proteinase.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.625665
PMCID: PMC4317006
PMID: 25525260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
