---
pmid: '36758104'
title: Structures of BIRC6-client complexes provide a mechanism of SMAC-mediated release
  of caspases.
authors:
- Hunkeler M
- Jin CY
- Fischer ES
journal: Science
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.ade5750
---

# Structures of BIRC6-client complexes provide a mechanism of SMAC-mediated release of caspases.
**Authors:** Hunkeler M, Jin CY, Fischer ES
**Journal:** Science (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.ade5750](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ade5750)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2023 Mar 17;379(6637):1105-1111. doi: 10.1126/science.ade5750. Epub 
2023 Feb 9.

Structures of BIRC6-client complexes provide a mechanism of SMAC-mediated 
release of caspases.

Hunkeler M(1)(2), Jin CY(1)(2), Fischer ES(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tight regulation of apoptosis is essential for metazoan development and prevents 
diseases such as cancer and neurodegeneration. Caspase activation is central to 
apoptosis, and inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) are the principal actors 
that restrain caspase activity and are therefore attractive therapeutic targets. 
IAPs, in turn, are regulated by mitochondria-derived proapoptotic factors such 
as SMAC and HTRA2. Through a series of cryo-electron microscopy structures of 
full-length human baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 6 (BIRC6) bound to 
SMAC, caspases, and HTRA2, we provide a molecular understanding for 
BIRC6-mediated caspase inhibition and its release by SMAC. The architecture of 
BIRC6, together with near-irreversible binding of SMAC, elucidates how the IAP 
inhibitor SMAC can effectively control a processive ubiquitin ligase to respond 
to apoptotic stimuli.

DOI: 10.1126/science.ade5750
PMID: 36758104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
