---
pmid: '11950833'
title: Delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related receptor, a novel EGF-like
  repeat-containing protein targeted to dendrites of developing and adult central
  nervous system neurons.
authors:
- Eiraku M
- Hirata Y
- Takeshima H
- Hirano T
- Kengaku M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110793200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related receptor, a novel EGF-like repeat-containing protein targeted to dendrites of developing and adult central nervous system neurons.
**Authors:** Eiraku M, Hirata Y, Takeshima H, Hirano T, Kengaku M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110793200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110793200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25400-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110793200. Epub
2002  Apr 11.

Delta/notch-like epidermal growth factor (EGF)-related receptor, a novel 
EGF-like repeat-containing protein targeted to dendrites of developing and adult 
central nervous system neurons.

Eiraku M(1), Hirata Y, Takeshima H, Hirano T, Kengaku M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Japan.

We have identified a novel epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeat-containing 
single-pass transmembrane protein that is specifically expressed in the 
developing and mature central nervous system. Sequence analysis revealed that 
the 10 EGF-like repeats in the extracellular domain are closely related to those 
of the developmentally important receptor Notch and its ligand Delta. We thus 
named the molecule Delta/Notch-like EGF-related receptor (DNER). DNER protein is 
strongly expressed in several types of post-mitotic neurons, including cortical 
and hippocampal pyramidal neurons, cerebellar granule cells, and Purkinje cells. 
DNER protein is localized to the dendritic plasma membrane and endosomes and is 
excluded from the axons, even when overexpressed. The tyrosine-based sorting 
motif in the cytoplasmic domain is required for dendritic targeting of DNER. 
Direct in vivo binding of DNER to the coat-associated protein complex AP-1 
strongly suggests that DNER undergoes AP-1-dependent sorting to the 
somatodendritic compartments from the trans-Golgi network and subsequent passage 
through the endosomal system.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110793200
PMID: 11950833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
