---
pmid: '12390249'
title: Densin-180, a synaptic protein, links to PSD-95 through its direct interaction
  with MAGUIN-1.
authors:
- Ohtakara K
- Nishizawa M
- Izawa I
- Hata Y
- Matsushima S
- Taki W
- Inada H
- Takai Y
- Inagaki M
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2002.00589.x
---

# Densin-180, a synaptic protein, links to PSD-95 through its direct interaction with MAGUIN-1.
**Authors:** Ohtakara K, Nishizawa M, Izawa I, Hata Y, Matsushima S, Taki W, Inada H, Takai Y, Inagaki M
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2443.2002.00589.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2443.2002.00589.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2002 Nov;7(11):1149-60. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2002.00589.x.

Densin-180, a synaptic protein, links to PSD-95 through its direct interaction 
with MAGUIN-1.

Ohtakara K(1), Nishizawa M, Izawa I, Hata Y, Matsushima S, Taki W, Inada H, 
Takai Y, Inagaki M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku, 
Nagoya, Aichi 464-8681, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Densin-180, a brain-specific protein highly concentrated at the 
postsynaptic density (PSD), belongs to the LAP [leucine-rich repeats and 
PSD-95/Dlg-A/ZO-1 (PDZ) domains] family of proteins, some of which play 
fundamental roles in the establishment of cell polarity.
RESULTS: To identify new Densin-180-interacting proteins, we screened a yeast 
two-hybrid library using the COOH-terminal fragment of Densin-180 containing the 
PDZ domain as bait, and we isolated MAGUIN-1 as a Densin-180-binding protein. 
MAGUIN-1, a mammalian homologue of Drosophila connector enhancer of KSR (CNK), 
is known to interact with PSD-95 and has a short isoform, MAGUIN-2. The 
Densin-180 PDZ domain bound to the COOH-terminal PDZ domain-binding motif of 
MAGUIN-1. Densin-180 co-immunoprecipitated with MAGUIN-1 as well as with PSD-95 
from the rat brain. In dissociated hippocampal neurones Densin-180 co-localized 
with MAGUINs and PSD-95, mainly at neuritic spines. In transfected cells, 
Densin-180 formed a ternary complex with MAGUIN-1 and PSD-95, whereas no 
association was detected between Densin-180 and PSD-95 in the absence of 
MAGUIN-1. MAGUIN-1 formed a dimer or multimer via the COOH-terminal leucine-rich 
region which is present in MAGUIN-1 but not in -2. Among the PDZ domains of 
PSD-95, the first was sufficient for interaction with MAGUIN-1.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the potential to dimerize or multimerize 
allows MAGUIN-1 to bind simultaneously to both Densin-180 and PSD-95, leading to 
the ternary complex assembly of these proteins at the postsynaptic membrane.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2443.2002.00589.x
PMID: 12390249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
