---
pmid: '21444916'
title: H-ras and N-ras are dispensable for T-cell development and activation but critical
  for protective Th1 immunity.
authors:
- Iborra S
- Soto M
- Stark-Aroeira L
- Castellano E
- Alarcón B
- Alonso C
- Santos E
- Fernández-Malavé E
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-315770
---

# H-ras and N-ras are dispensable for T-cell development and activation but critical for protective Th1 immunity.
**Authors:** Iborra S, Soto M, Stark-Aroeira L, Castellano E, Alarcón B, Alonso C, Santos E, Fernández-Malavé E
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-10-315770](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-10-315770)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2011 May 12;117(19):5102-11. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-315770. Epub
2011  Mar 28.

H-ras and N-ras are dispensable for T-cell development and activation but 
critical for protective Th1 immunity.

Iborra S(1), Soto M, Stark-Aroeira L, Castellano E, Alarcón B, Alonso C, Santos 
E, Fernández-Malavé E.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas, Departamento de Biología Molecular, Universidad 
Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

The small guanine nucleotide binding proteins of the Ras family, including in 
mammals the highly homologous H-ras, N-ras, and K-ras isoforms, are rapidly 
activated on ligation of the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR), but whether each 
isoform plays specific roles in T cells is largely unknown. Here, we show, with 
the use of mice specifically lacking H-ras or N-ras, that these isoforms are 
dispensable for thymocyte development and mature T-cell activation. By contrast, 
CD4⁺ T cells from Ras-deficient mice exhibited markedly decreased production of 
the Th1 signature cytokine IFN-γ early after TCR stimulation, concomitantly with 
impaired induction of the Th1-specific transcription factor T-bet. Accordingly, 
Ras-deficient mice failed to mount a protective Th1 response in vivo against the 
intracellular parasite Leishmania major, although they could be rendered 
resistant to infection if a Th1-biased milieu was provided during parasite 
challenge. Collectively, our data indicate that the TCR recruits distinct Ras 
isoforms for signal transduction in developing and mature T cells, thus 
providing a mechanism for differential signaling from the same surface receptor. 
Furthermore, we demonstrate for the first time that H-ras and N-ras act as 
critical controllers of Th1 responses, mostly by transmitting TCR signals for 
Th1 priming of CD4⁺ T cells.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-315770
PMID: 21444916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
