---
pmid: '9712828'
title: Biochemical characterization of the human arsenite-stimulated ATPase (hASNA-I).
authors:
- Kurdi-Haidar B
- Heath D
- Aebi S
- Howell SB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.35.22173
---

# Biochemical characterization of the human arsenite-stimulated ATPase (hASNA-I).
**Authors:** Kurdi-Haidar B, Heath D, Aebi S, Howell SB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.35.22173](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.35.22173)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 28;273(35):22173-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.35.22173.

Biochemical characterization of the human arsenite-stimulated ATPase (hASNA-I).

Kurdi-Haidar B(1), Heath D, Aebi S, Howell SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and the University of California, San Diego Cancer 
Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0058, 
USA. bhaidar@ucsd.edu

Arsenic is a potent toxin and carcinogen. In prokaryotes, arsenic detoxification 
is accomplished by chromosomal and plasmid-borne operon-encoded efflux systems. 
We have previously reported the cloning of hASNA-I, a human homologue of arsA 
encoding the ATPase component of the Escherichia coli arsenite transporter. 
Purified glutathione S-transferase (GST)-hASNA-I fusion protein was 
biochemically characterized, and its properties were compared with those of 
ArsA. The GST-hASNA-I exhibited a basal level of ATPase activity of 18.5 +/- 8 
nmol/min/mg in the absence of arsenite. Arsenite produced a 1.6 +/- 0.1-fold 
stimulation of activity (p = 0. 0044), which was related to an increase in Vmax; 
antimonite did not stimulate activity. Two lines of evidence suggest that an 
oligomer is the most likely native form of hASNA-I. First, lysates of human 
embryo kidney 293 cells overproducing recombinant hASNA-I produced a single 
monomeric 37-kDa band on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and two 
distinct species when analyzed using nondenaturing PAGE. Second, chemical 
cross-linking of the 63-kDa GST-hASNA-I resulted in the formation of dimeric and 
tetrameric protein forms. The results indicate that hASNA-I is a distinct human 
arsenite-stimulated ATPase belonging to the same superfamily of ATPases 
represented by the E. coli ArsA protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.35.22173
PMID: 9712828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
