---
pmid: '3446585'
title: Isolation of cDNA clones coding for rat isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and assignment
  of the gene to human chromosome 15.
authors:
- Kraus JP
- Matsubara Y
- Barton D
- Yang-Feng TL
- Glassberg R
- Ito M
- Ikeda Y
- Mole J
- Francke U
- Tanaka K
journal: Genomics
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(87)90053-x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation of cDNA clones coding for rat isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and assignment of the gene to human chromosome 15.
**Authors:** Kraus JP, Matsubara Y, Barton D, Yang-Feng TL, Glassberg R, Ito M, Ikeda Y, Mole J, Francke U, Tanaka K
**Journal:** Genomics (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0888-7543(87)90053-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/0888-7543(87)90053-x)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1987 Nov;1(3):264-9. doi: 10.1016/0888-7543(87)90053-x.

Isolation of cDNA clones coding for rat isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase and 
assignment of the gene to human chromosome 15.

Kraus JP(1), Matsubara Y, Barton D, Yang-Feng TL, Glassberg R, Ito M, Ikeda Y, 
Mole J, Francke U, Tanaka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06510.

Rat liver mRNA encoding the cytoplasmic precursor of mitochondrial 
isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase was highly enriched by polysome immunopurification 
using a polyclonal monospecific antibody. The purified mRNA was used to prepare 
a plasmid cDNA library which was screened with two oligonucleotide mixtures 
encoding two peptides in the amino-terminal portion of mature rat isovaleryl-CoA 
dehydrogenase. Thirty-one overlapping cDNA clones, spanning a region of 2.1 kbp, 
were isolated and characterized. The cDNA sequence of a 5'-end clone, rIVD-13 
(155 bp), predicts a mitochondrial leader peptide of 30 amino acid residues and 
the first 18 amino acids of the mature protein. These consecutive 18 residues 
completely matched the amino-terminal peptide determined by automated Edman 
degradation of the rat enzyme. The leader peptide contains six arginines, has no 
acidic residues, and is particularly rich in leucine, alanine, and proline 
residues. Southern blot analysis of DNAs from human-rodent somatic cell hybrids 
with an isolated rat cDNA (2 kbp) assigned the isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase gene 
to the long arm of chromosome 15, region q14----qter. The chromosomal assignment 
was confirmed and further refined to bands q14----q15 by in situ hybridization 
of the probe to human metaphase cells. This location differs from that of the 
gene for medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, a closely related enzyme, which 
has been previously assigned to chromosome 1.

DOI: 10.1016/0888-7543(87)90053-x
PMID: 3446585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
