---
pmid: '15817463'
title: Actopaxin interacts with TESK1 to regulate cell spreading on fibronectin.
authors:
- LaLonde DP
- Brown MC
- Bouverat BP
- Turner CE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500752200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Actopaxin interacts with TESK1 to regulate cell spreading on fibronectin.
**Authors:** LaLonde DP, Brown MC, Bouverat BP, Turner CE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M500752200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M500752200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21680-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500752200. Epub
2005  Apr 6.

Actopaxin interacts with TESK1 to regulate cell spreading on fibronectin.

LaLonde DP(1), Brown MC, Bouverat BP, Turner CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, State University of New York 
Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

The focal adhesion protein actopaxin contributes to integrin-actin associations 
and is involved in cell adhesion, spreading, and motility. Herein, we identify 
and characterize an association between actopaxin and the serine/threonine 
kinase testicular protein kinase 1 (TESK1), a ubiquitously expressed protein 
previously reported to regulate cellular spreading and focal adhesion formation 
via phosphorylation of cofilin. The interaction between actopaxin and TESK1 is 
direct and the binding sites were mapped to the carboxyl terminus of both 
proteins. The association between actopaxin and TESK1 is negatively regulated by 
adhesion to fibronectin, and a phosphomimetic actopaxin mutant that promotes 
cell spreading also exhibits impaired binding to TESK1. Binding of actopaxin to 
TESK1 inhibits TESK1 kinase activity in vitro. Expression of the carboxyl 
terminus of actopaxin has previously been reported to retard cell spreading. 
This effect was reversed following overexpression of TESK1 and was found to be 
dependent on an inability of actopaxin carboxyl terminus expressing cells to 
promote cofilin phosphorylation upon matrix adhesion and caused by retention of 
TESK1 by this actopaxin mutant. Thus, the association between actopaxin and 
TESK1, which is likely regulated by phosphorylation of actopaxin, regulates 
TESK1 activity and subsequent cellular spreading on fibronectin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M500752200
PMID: 15817463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
