---
pmid: '19515974'
title: Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway inhibits timely myelination and remyelination
  in the mammalian CNS.
authors:
- Fancy SP
- Baranzini SE
- Zhao C
- Yuk DI
- Irvine KA
- Kaing S
- Sanai N
- Franklin RJ
- Rowitch DH
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2704469
doi: 10.1101/gad.1806309
---

# Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway inhibits timely myelination and remyelination in the mammalian CNS.
**Authors:** Fancy SP, Baranzini SE, Zhao C, Yuk DI, Irvine KA, Kaing S, Sanai N, Franklin RJ, Rowitch DH
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1806309](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1806309)
**PMC:** [PMC2704469](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2704469/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1571-85. doi: 10.1101/gad.1806309. Epub 2009 Jun 
10.

Dysregulation of the Wnt pathway inhibits timely myelination and remyelination 
in the mammalian CNS.

Fancy SP(1), Baranzini SE, Zhao C, Yuk DI, Irvine KA, Kaing S, Sanai N, Franklin 
RJ, Rowitch DH.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Regeneration Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1487-93. doi: 10.1101/gad.1824009.

The progressive loss of CNS myelin in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) has 
been proposed to result from the combined effects of damage to oligodendrocytes 
and failure of remyelination. A common feature of demyelinated lesions is the 
presence of oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) blocked at a premyelinating stage. 
However, the mechanistic basis for inhibition of myelin repair is incompletely 
understood. To identify novel regulators of OLP differentiation, potentially 
dysregulated during repair, we performed a genome-wide screen of 1040 
transcription factor-encoding genes expressed in remyelinating rodent lesions. 
We report that approximately 50 transcription factor-encoding genes show dynamic 
expression during repair and that expression of the Wnt pathway mediator Tcf4 
(aka Tcf7l2) within OLPs is specific to lesioned-but not normal-adult white 
matter. We report that beta-catenin signaling is active during oligodendrocyte 
development and remyelination in vivo. Moreover, we observed similar regulation 
of Tcf4 in the developing human CNS and lesions of MS. Data mining revealed 
elevated levels of Wnt pathway mRNA transcripts and proteins within MS lesions, 
indicating activation of the pathway in this pathological context. We show that 
dysregulation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling in OLPs results in profound delay of 
both developmental myelination and remyelination, based on (1) conditional 
activation of beta-catenin in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo and (2) 
findings from APC(Min) mice, which lack one functional copy of the endogenous 
Wnt pathway inhibitor APC. Together, our findings indicate that dysregulated 
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling inhibits myelination/remyelination in the mammalian 
CNS. Evidence of Wnt pathway activity in human MS lesions suggests that its 
dysregulation might contribute to inefficient myelin repair in human 
neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1806309
PMCID: PMC2704469
PMID: 19515974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The progressive loss of CNS myelin in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) has been proposed to result from the combined effects of damage to oligodendrocytes and failure of remyelination. A common feature of demyelinated lesions is the presence of oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) blocked at a premyelinating stage. However, the mechanistic basis for inhibition of myelin repair is incompletely understood. To identify novel regulators of OLP differentiation, potentially dysregulated during repair, we performed a genome-wide screen of 1040 transcription factor-encoding genes expressed in remyelinating rodent lesions. We report that ∼50 transcription factor-encoding genes show dynamic expression during repair and that expression of the Wnt pathway mediator Tcf4 (aka Tcf7l2) within OLPs is specific to lesioned—but not normal—adult white matter. We report that β-catenin signaling is active during oligodendrocyte development and remyelination in vivo. Moreover, we observed similar regulation of Tcf4 in the developing human CNS and lesions of MS. Data mining revealed elevated levels of Wnt pathway mRNA transcripts and proteins within MS lesions, indicating activation of the pathway in this pathological context. We show that dysregulation of Wnt–β-catenin signaling in OLPs results in profound delay of both developmental myelination and remyelination, based on (1) conditional activation of β-catenin in the oligodendrocyte lineage in vivo and (2) findings from APC Min mice, which lack one functional copy of the endogenous Wnt pathway inhibitor APC. Together, our findings indicate that dysregulated Wnt–β-catenin signaling inhibits myelination/remyelination in the mammalian CNS. Evidence of Wnt pathway activity in human MS lesions suggests that its dysregulation might contribute to inefficient myelin repair in human neurological disorders.

Discussion

Important insights into the cell-intrinsic mechanisms that regulate OLPs during remyelination have come from genetic analysis of TF-encoding genes ( Arnett et al. 2004 ; He et al. 2007 ). TFs as a class also have utility as nuclear markers (easy to distinguish from adjacent cells) in translational studies of human pathobiology ( Arnett et al. 2004 ; Ligon et al. 2004 ; Kuhlmann et al. 2008 ). From an ISH expression screen of 1040 TF-encoding genes ( Gray et al. 2004 ) (∼70% of all genes in this class in the mammalian genome) in tissue arrays of remyelinating rodent lesions at 5, 10, and 14 d post-injection of lysolethicin, we found>50 genes expressed at various key stages during the myelin repair process, associated with various cell types including oligodendrocyte lineage cells, astrocytes, or inflammatory cells ( Ghasemlou et al. 2007 ). Systematic functional screens are in progress to identify potentially complex regulatory networks of TFs in oligodendrocytes during myelin repair. Here we focused on expression of Tcf4 and actions of dysregulated Wnt signaling.
