---
pmid: '12812989'
title: 'Lathosterolosis: an inborn error of human and murine cholesterol synthesis
  due to lathosterol 5-desaturase deficiency.'
authors:
- Krakowiak PA
- Wassif CA
- Kratz L
- Cozma D
- Kovárová M
- Harris G
- Grinberg A
- Yang Y
- Hunter AG
- Tsokos M
- Kelley RI
- Porter FD
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg172
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Lathosterolosis: an inborn error of human and murine cholesterol synthesis due to lathosterol 5-desaturase deficiency.
**Authors:** Krakowiak PA, Wassif CA, Kratz L, Cozma D, Kovárová M, Harris G, Grinberg A, Yang Y, Hunter AG, Tsokos M, Kelley RI, Porter FD
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg172](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg172)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Jul 1;12(13):1631-41. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg172.

Lathosterolosis: an inborn error of human and murine cholesterol synthesis due 
to lathosterol 5-desaturase deficiency.

Krakowiak PA(1), Wassif CA, Kratz L, Cozma D, Kovárová M, Harris G, Grinberg A, 
Yang Y, Hunter AG, Tsokos M, Kelley RI, Porter FD.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Molecular Dysmorphology, Heritable Disorders Branch, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Lathosterol 5-desaturase catalyzes the conversion of lathosterol to 
7-dehydrocholesterol in the next to last step of cholesterol synthesis. Inborn 
errors of cholesterol synthesis underlie a group of human malformation syndromes 
including Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, desmosterolosis, CHILD syndrome, CDPX2 and 
lathosterolosis. We disrupted the lathosterol 5-desaturase gene (Sc5d ) in order 
to further our understanding of the pathophysiological processes underlying 
these disorders and to gain insight into the corresponding human disorder. Sc5d 
(-/-) pups were stillborn, had elevated lathosterol and decreased cholesterol 
levels, had craniofacial defects including cleft palate and micrognathia, and 
limb patterning defects. Many of the malformations found in Sc5d (-/-) mice are 
consistent with impaired hedgehog signaling, and appear to be a result of 
decreased cholesterol rather than increased lathosterol. A patient initially 
described as atypical SLOS with mucolipidosis was shown to have lathosterolosis 
by biochemical and molecular analysis. We identified a homozygous mutation of 
SC5D (137A>C, Y46S) in this patient. An unique aspect of the lathosterolosis 
phenotype is the combination of a malformation syndrome with an intracellular 
storage defect.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg172
PMID: 12812989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
