---
pmid: '19706601'
title: The sterol-sensing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein TRC8 hampers
  ER to Golgi transport of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 (SREBP-2)/SREBP
  cleavage-activated protein and reduces SREBP-2 cleavage.
authors:
- Irisawa M
- Inoue J
- Ozawa N
- Mori K
- Sato R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2781446
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041376
---

# The sterol-sensing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein TRC8 hampers ER to Golgi transport of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 (SREBP-2)/SREBP cleavage-activated protein and reduces SREBP-2 cleavage.
**Authors:** Irisawa M, Inoue J, Ozawa N, Mori K, Sato R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.041376](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.041376)
**PMC:** [PMC2781446](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2781446/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):28995-9004. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041376.
Epub  2009 Aug 25.

The sterol-sensing endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane protein TRC8 hampers ER 
to Golgi transport of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 
(SREBP-2)/SREBP cleavage-activated protein and reduces SREBP-2 cleavage.

Irisawa M(1), Inoue J, Ozawa N, Mori K, Sato R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

TRC8 (translocation in renal cancer from chromosome 8) is an intrinsic protein 
of the endoplasmic reticulum that contains a sterol-sensing domain and a RING 
finger motif encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Here we show that TRC8 
overexpression hinders sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 (SREBP-2) 
processing, thereby reducing SREBP-2 target gene expression, TRC8 depletion has 
the opposite effect. Mutation analyses of TRC8 reveal that the ubiquitin ligase 
activity is dispensable for these effects. Activating transcription factor 6 
(ATF6) is also processed in the Golgi by the same two proteases as those for 
SREBP, but ATF6 processing is not affected by TRC8. TRC8 is capable of binding 
both SREBP-2 and SREBP cleavage-activated protein (SCAP), thereby forming a 
TRC8.SREBP-2.SCAP complex. This complex formation hampers the interaction 
between SCAP and Sec24, one of the COPII proteins that are involved in SREBP-2 
transport to the Golgi, thereby reducing SREBP-2 cleavage. TRC8 conjugated by 
ubiquitin is unstable, whereas the mutant TRC8, lacking the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
activity and only slightly modified by ubiquitin, is quite stable. TRC8 becomes 
stable when cells are cultured with a proteasome inhibitor or under a 
lipoprotein-depleted condition. Lipoprotein depletion impairs ubiquitination of 
TRC8. Taken together, TRC8 is a novel sterol-sensing endoplasmic reticulum 
membrane protein that hinders SREBP-2 processing through interaction with 
SREBP-2 and SCAP, regulating its own turnover rate by means of its E3 ubiquitin 
ligase activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.041376
PMCID: PMC2781446
PMID: 19706601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

TRC8 (translocation in renal cancer from chromosome 8) is an intrinsic protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that contains a sterol-sensing domain and a RING finger motif encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Here we show that TRC8 overexpression hinders sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2 (SREBP-2) processing, thereby reducing SREBP-2 target gene expression, TRC8 depletion has the opposite effect. Mutation analyses of TRC8 reveal that the ubiquitin ligase activity is dispensable for these effects. Activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) is also processed in the Golgi by the same two proteases as those for SREBP, but ATF6 processing is not affected by TRC8. TRC8 is capable of binding both SREBP-2 and SREBP cleavage-activated protein (SCAP), thereby forming a TRC8·SREBP-2·SCAP complex. This complex formation hampers the interaction between SCAP and Sec24, one of the COPII proteins that are involved in SREBP-2 transport to the Golgi, thereby reducing SREBP-2 cleavage. TRC8 conjugated by ubiquitin is unstable, whereas the mutant TRC8, lacking the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and only slightly modified by ubiquitin, is quite stable. TRC8 becomes stable when cells are cultured with a proteasome inhibitor or under a lipoprotein-depleted condition. Lipoprotein depletion impairs ubiquitination of TRC8. Taken together, TRC8 is a novel sterol-sensing endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein that hinders SREBP-2 processing through interaction with SREBP-2 and SCAP, regulating its own turnover rate by means of its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity.

DISCUSSION

The current study shows that TRC8, localized in the ER along with the SREBP·SCAP complex, functions as a novel inhibitory protein of SREBP processing. We obtained the following findings. 1) Overexpression of TRC8 suppresses the expression of SREBP target genes, including SQS and HMG-CoA synthase , by hindering SREBP-2 processing. 2) RNA interference-mediated depletion of endogenous TRC8 conversely enhances SREBP-2 target gene expression through an augmentation of SREBP-2 processing. 3) TRC8 interacts with both SREBP-2 and SCAP, thereby inhibiting the binding of SCAP to Sec24 and hampering the ER to Golgi transport of the SREBP·SCAP complex. 4) TRC8 is rapidly degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and becomes stable under a lipoprotein-depleted condition. Thus, several lines of evidence show that INSIG-1 and -2 are exclusive regulatory membrane proteins that associate with the SREBP·SCAP complex and retain it in the ER in response to changes in the ER membrane cholesterol content ( 28 , 29 ). Once the proteolytic processing of SREBP-2 is initiated under sterol-depleted conditions, this processing evidently continues until the SREBP·SCAP·INSIG complex is reconstituted in response to increased cholesterol synthesis. It is reasonable to assume that enhanced SREBP-2 processing is finally hindered by the TRC8 that accumulates under lipoprotein-depleted conditions to avoid prolonged overactivation of SREBP-2 in the absence of INSIG-mediated blockade of SREBP processing.

In the liver of SCAP-null mice SREBPs are not processed without their escort protein and become unstable ( 7 , 8 ). It is possible that TRC8 might directly interact with SREBPs in the absence of SCAP, thereby enhancing degradation as a result of its E3 ligase activity. However, this does not seem to be the case, because there was no significant change in the level of precursor SREBPs when TRC8 was overexpressed or depleted by siRNA ( Fig. 2 ). Indeed, ubiquitination of endogenous or exogenous SREBP-2 was not observed even when TRC8 was highly expressed in cultured cells (data not shown). It is, therefore, possible that TRC8 in the SCAP-deficient liver retains SREBPs in the ER and assists in their rapid turnover, although it remains unclear how SREBPs free of SCAP become unstable. Under physiological conditions, it has been estimated that the amount of SCAP is a rate-limiting step in SREBP·SCAP complex formation and that only 20–40% of the SREBP precursors are in the complex with SCAP ( 30 ). It seems likely that TRC8 might interact with the SREBPs free of SCAP. The preceding interaction between TRC8 and SREBPs might hinder formation of the SREBP·SCAP complex, thereby inhibiting exit from the ER and SREBP processing. This would account for the current findings that RNA interference-mediated depletion of endogenous TRC8 enhances SREBP-2 processing.

The binding site of SCAP for Sec24 has been identified as a hexapeptide sequence, located in the cytoplasmic loop between transmembrane helices 6 and 7 ( 26 , 31 ). In the current study, we established a novel assay system to estimate the direct interaction between SCAP and Sec24 by means of the GST protein fused to this loop (GST-SCAP-Loop6). This assay revealed that TRC8 interfered with the association between Sec24 and the loop ( Fig. 6 ). Because a direct interaction between TRC8 and the loop was not observed ( supplemental Fig. S3 ), it is possible that TRC8 masked the binding site of Sec24 for the hexapeptide. Indeed, the TRC8 and Sec24 interaction was confirmed ( Fig. 6 ), suggesting that TRC8 moves to the Golgi through the COPII protein-coated vesicles. Next we examined whether TRC8 binds Sec24 even after the SREBP·SCAP·TRC8 complex is formed. The interaction between TRC8 and Sec24 was inhibited by SREBP-2 in a dose-dependent manner ( Fig. 6 ). This demonstrates that the SREBP·SCAP·TRC8 complex tends to remain in the ER as the result of weakening of Sec24 binding to both SCAP and TRC8.

It is noteworthy that TRC8 was determined to be one of the functional sterol-sensing proteins. TRC8 is rapidly degraded through a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, and becomes stable in the absence of lipoprotein in the culture medium. Another sterol-sensing protein, HMG-CoA reductase, is similarly degraded in response to an increase in intracellular sterols, especially lanosterol, which induces the formation of an HMG-CoA reductase·INSIG complex, including gp78 with its E3 ligase activity ( 32 – 35 ). The degradation of HMG-CoA reductase, therefore, requires two sequential steps, sterol-mediated INSIG binding and recruitment of gp78. On the other hand, TRC8 contains two functional domains, the SSD and RING finger domain, thereby controlling its own expression level by sensing the intracellular sterol levels without the need of any associated proteins. For as long as the examination was performed, the TRC8 protein was more rapidly degraded in the presence of lipoprotein, which is taken up by the cell surface low density lipoprotein receptors, rather than in the presence of the cholesterol and 25-hydroxycholesterol supplemented in the culture medium. It is possible that lipoprotein-derived sterols are more accessible to TRC8 via the internalization pathway in the vicinity of the ER and Golgi, which probably leads to the conformational change and ubiquitination of TRC8, thereby accelerating protein turnover. The detailed molecular mechanism of lipoprotein-accelerated TRC8 degradation is now under investigation.

We do not consider the major physiological function of TRC8 to be restricted to the regulation of SREBP processing, because this inhibitory effect does not require its RING domain. We attempted to identify as yet unknown TRC8-associated proteins using stable HEK293 cells expressing the FLAG-TRC8 established in the current study. Co-immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG antibodies and mass spectrometry analyses revealed a highly specific cytoplasm protein, which was not precipitated with mutant TRC8 lacking the E3 ligase activity (MUT24 cells), and is unlikely to be related to cholesterol metabolism. This protein physically interacted with TRC8 when both proteins were exogenously expressed in culture cells. As long as the protein levels were exogenously elevated or reduced with siRNA, SREBP processing was not affected. 3 It will be of interest to determine whether this protein is related to a putative original function of TRC8 as a tumor suppresser. These findings indicate that the transmembrane region with the SSD and the C-terminal region with the RING domain of TRC8 independently interact with individual associated proteins and exert their respective functions. Further studies are now underway to verify the additional TRC8 biological functions.

In conclusion, evidence is presented that TRC8 is a novel sterol-sensing ER membrane protein. This protein interacts with SREBP-2 and SCAP, thereby inhibiting the association between SCAP and Sec24, which drives the ER to Golgi translocation of the SREBP·SCAP complex via COPII protein-coated vesicles. TRC8 tends to hinder SREBP-2 processing rather than SREBP-1 processing, and affects the transcription of genes related to cholesterol metabolism. The molecular mechanism for this preferentiality should be determined in the near future. The inhibitory effect of TRC8 on cholesterol metabolism reflects its originally proposed function as a tumor suppressor, because tumor cells require large amounts of membrane cholesterol for their rapid growth.
