---
pmid: '9812985'
title: Transport of monoamine transmitters by the organic cation transporter type
  2, OCT2.
authors:
- Gründemann D
- Köster S
- Kiefer N
- Breidert T
- Engelhardt M
- Spitzenberger F
- Obermüller N
- Schömig E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.30915
---

# Transport of monoamine transmitters by the organic cation transporter type 2, OCT2.
**Authors:** Gründemann D, Köster S, Kiefer N, Breidert T, Engelhardt M, Spitzenberger F, Obermüller N, Schömig E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.47.30915](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.47.30915)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 20;273(47):30915-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.30915.

Transport of monoamine transmitters by the organic cation transporter type 2, 
OCT2.

Gründemann D(1), Köster S, Kiefer N, Breidert T, Engelhardt M, Spitzenberger F, 
Obermüller N, Schömig E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 
366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The recently cloned apical renal transport system for organic cations (OCT2) 
exists in dopamine-rich tissues such as kidney and some brain areas (Gründemann, 
D., Babin-Ebell, J., Martel, F., Ording, N., Schmidt, A., and Schömig, E. (1997) 
J. Biol. Chem. 272, 10408-10413). The study at hand was performed to answer the 
question of whether OCT2 accepts dopamine and other monoamine transmitters as 
substrate. 293 cells were stably transfected with the OCT2r cDNA resulting in 
the 293OCT2r cell line. Expression of OCT2r in 293 cells induces specific 
transport of tritiated dopamine, noradrenaline, adrenaline, and 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). Initial rates of specific 3H-dopamine, 
3H-noradrenaline, 3H-adrenaline, and 3H-5-HT transport were saturable, the Km 
values being 2.1, 4.4, 1.9, and 3.6 mmol/liter. The corresponding Vmax values 
were 3.9, 1.0, 0. 59, and 2.5 nmol min-1.mg of protein-1, respectively. 1, 
1'-diisopropyl-2,4'-cyanine (disprocynium24), a known inhibitor of OCT2 with a 
potent eukaliuric diuretic activity, inhibited 3H-dopamine uptake into 293OCT2r 
cells with an Ki of 5.1 (2.6, 9.9) nmol/liter. In situ hybridization reveals 
that, within the kidney, the OCT2r mRNA is restricted to the outer medulla and 
deep portions of the medullary rays indicating selective expression in the S3 
segment of the proximal tubule. These findings open the possibility that OCT2r 
plays a role in renal dopamine handling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.47.30915
PMID: 9812985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
