---
pmid: '31915252'
title: The GATOR2-mTORC2 axis mediates Sestrin2-induced AKT Ser/Thr kinase activation.
authors:
- Kowalsky AH
- Namkoong S
- Mettetal E
- Park HW
- Kazyken D
- Fingar DC
- Lee JH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7029113
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010857
---

# The GATOR2-mTORC2 axis mediates Sestrin2-induced AKT Ser/Thr kinase activation.
**Authors:** Kowalsky AH, Namkoong S, Mettetal E, Park HW, Kazyken D, Fingar DC, Lee JH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.010857](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.010857)
**PMC:** [PMC7029113](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7029113/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Feb 14;295(7):1769-1780. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010857. Epub
 2020 Jan 8.

The GATOR2-mTORC2 axis mediates Sestrin2-induced AKT Ser/Thr kinase activation.

Kowalsky AH(1), Namkoong S(2), Mettetal E(1), Park HW(3), Kazyken D(4), Fingar 
DC(4), Lee JH(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.
(2)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; Department of Biochemistry, College 
of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon 24341, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; Department of Cell Biology, Myunggok 
Medical Research Institute, Konyang University College of Medicine, Daejeon 
35365, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.
(5)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. Electronic address: leeju@umich.edu.

Sestrins represent a family of stress-inducible proteins that prevent the 
progression of many age- and obesity-associated disorders. Endogenous Sestrins 
maintain insulin-dependent AKT Ser/Thr kinase (AKT) activation during high-fat 
diet-induced obesity, and overexpressed Sestrins activate AKT in various cell 
types, including liver and skeletal muscle cells. Although Sestrin-mediated AKT 
activation improves metabolic parameters, the mechanistic details underlying 
such improvement remain elusive. Here, we investigated how Sestrin2, the Sestrin 
homolog highly expressed in liver, induces strong AKT activation. We found that 
two known targets of Sestrin2, mTOR complex (mTORC) 1 and AMP-activated protein 
kinase, are not required for Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Rather, 
phosphoinositol 3-kinase and mTORC2, kinases upstream of AKT, were essential for 
Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. Among these kinases, mTORC2 catalytic activity 
was strongly up-regulated upon Sestrin2 overexpression in an in vitro kinase 
assay, indicating that mTORC2 may represent the major link between Sestrin2 and 
AKT. As reported previously, Sestrin2 interacted with mTORC2; however, we found 
here that this interaction occurs indirectly through GATOR2, a pentameric 
protein complex that directly interacts with Sestrin2. Deleting or silencing 
WDR24 (WD repeat domain 24), the GATOR2 component essential for the 
Sestrin2-GATOR2 interaction, or WDR59, the GATOR2 component essential for the 
GATOR2-mTORC2 interaction, completely ablated Sestrin2-induced AKT activation. 
We also noted that Sestrin2 also directly binds to the pleckstrin homology 
domain of AKT and induces AKT translocation to the plasma membrane. These 
results uncover a signaling mechanism whereby Sestrin2 activates AKT through 
GATOR2 and mTORC2.

© 2020 Kowalsky et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.010857
PMCID: PMC7029113
PMID: 31915252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
