---
pmid: '15879519'
title: A two-hybrid screen of the yeast proteome for Hsp90 interactors uncovers a
  novel Hsp90 chaperone requirement in the activity of a stress-activated mitogen-activated
  protein kinase, Slt2p (Mpk1p).
authors:
- Millson SH
- Truman AW
- King V
- Prodromou C
- Pearl LH
- Piper PW
journal: Eukaryot Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1140089
doi: 10.1128/EC.4.5.849-860.2005
---

# A two-hybrid screen of the yeast proteome for Hsp90 interactors uncovers a novel Hsp90 chaperone requirement in the activity of a stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase, Slt2p (Mpk1p).
**Authors:** Millson SH, Truman AW, King V, Prodromou C, Pearl LH, Piper PW
**Journal:** Eukaryot Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/EC.4.5.849-860.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/EC.4.5.849-860.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1140089](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1140089/)

## Abstract

1. Eukaryot Cell. 2005 May;4(5):849-60. doi: 10.1128/EC.4.5.849-860.2005.

A two-hybrid screen of the yeast proteome for Hsp90 interactors uncovers a novel 
Hsp90 chaperone requirement in the activity of a stress-activated 
mitogen-activated protein kinase, Slt2p (Mpk1p).

Millson SH(1), Truman AW, King V, Prodromou C, Pearl LH, Piper PW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of 
Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom.

The Hsp90 chaperone cycle catalyzes the final activation step of several 
important eukaryotic proteins (Hsp90 "clients"). Although largely a functional 
form of Hsp90, an Hsp90-Gal4p DNA binding domain fusion (Hsp90-BD) displays no 
strong interactions in the yeast two-hybrid system, consistent with a general 
transience of most Hsp90-client associations. Strong in vivo interactions are 
though detected when the E33A mutation is introduced into this bait, a mutation 
that should arrest Hsp90-client complexes at a stage where the client is 
stabilized, yet prevented from attaining its active form. This E33A mutation 
stabilized the two-hybrid interactions of the Hsp90-BD fusion with approximately 
3% of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome in a screen of the 6,000 yeast 
proteins expressed as fusions to the Gal4p activation domain (AD). Among the 
detected interactors were the two stress-activated mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinases of yeast, Hog1p and Slt2p (Mpk1p). Column retention experiments 
using wild-type and mutant forms of Hsp90 and Slt2p MAP kinase, as well as 
quantitative measurements of the effects of stress on the two-hybrid interaction 
of mutant Hsp90-BD and AD-Slt2p fusions, revealed that Hsp90 binds exclusively 
to the dually Thr/Tyr-phosphorylated, stress-activated form of Slt2p 
[(Y-P,T-P)Slt2p] and also to the MAP kinase domain within this (Y-P,T-P)Slt2p. 
Phenotypic analysis of a yeast mutant that expresses a mutant Hsp90 (T22Ihsp82) 
revealed that Hsp90 function is essential for this (Y-P,T-P)Slt2p to activate 
one of its downstream targets, the Rlm1p transcription factor. The interaction 
between Hsp90 and (Y-P,T-P)Slt2p, characterized in this study, is probably 
essential in this Hsp90 facilitation of the Rlm1p activation by Slt2p.

DOI: 10.1128/EC.4.5.849-860.2005
PMCID: PMC1140089
PMID: 15879519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
