---
pmid: '9731530'
title: Mutations in a polycistronic nuclear gene associated with molybdenum cofactor
  deficiency.
authors:
- Reiss J
- Cohen N
- Dorche C
- Mandel H
- Mendel RR
- Stallmeyer B
- Zabot MT
- Dierks T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/1706
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in a polycistronic nuclear gene associated with molybdenum cofactor deficiency.
**Authors:** Reiss J, Cohen N, Dorche C, Mandel H, Mendel RR, Stallmeyer B, Zabot MT, Dierks T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/1706](https://doi.org/10.1038/1706)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Sep;20(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/1706.

Mutations in a polycistronic nuclear gene associated with molybdenum cofactor 
deficiency.

Reiss J(1), Cohen N, Dorche C, Mandel H, Mendel RR, Stallmeyer B, Zabot MT, 
Dierks T.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany. jreiss@gwdg.de

All molybdoenzymes other than nitrogenase require molybdopterin as a 
metal-binding cofactor. Several genes necessary for the synthesis of the 
molybdenum cofactor (MoCo) have been characterized in bacteria and plants. The 
proteins encoded by the Escherichia coli genes moaA and moaC catalyse the first 
steps in MoCo synthesis. The human homologues of these genes are therefore 
candidate genes for molybdenum cofactor deficiency, a rare and fatal disease. 
Using oligonucleotides complementary to a conserved region in the moaA gene, we 
have isolated a human cDNA derived from liver mRNA. This transcript contains an 
open reading frame (ORF) encoding the human moaA homologue and a second ORF 
encoding a human moaC homologue. Mutations can be found in the majority of 
MoCo-deficient patients that confirm the functional role of both ORFs in the 
corresponding gene MOCS1 (for 'molybdenum cofactor synthesis-step 1'). 
Northern-blot analysis detected only full-length transcripts containing both 
consecutive ORFs in various human tissues. The mRNA structure suggests a 
translation reinitiation mechanism for the second ORF. These data indicate the 
existence of a eukaryotic mRNA, which as a single and uniform transcript guides 
the synthesis of two different enzymatic polypeptides with disease-causing 
potential.

DOI: 10.1038/1706
PMID: 9731530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
