---
pmid: '10413501'
title: Superadditive and subadditive effects of "hot spot" mutations within the interfaces
  of placental ribonuclease inhibitor with angiogenin and ribonuclease A.
authors:
- Chen CZ
- Shapiro R
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi990762a
---

# Superadditive and subadditive effects of "hot spot" mutations within the interfaces of placental ribonuclease inhibitor with angiogenin and ribonuclease A.
**Authors:** Chen CZ, Shapiro R
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi990762a](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi990762a)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1999 Jul 20;38(29):9273-85. doi: 10.1021/bi990762a.

Superadditive and subadditive effects of "hot spot" mutations within the 
interfaces of placental ribonuclease inhibitor with angiogenin and ribonuclease 
A.

Chen CZ(1), Shapiro R.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biochemical and Biophysical Sciences and Medicine, Department of 
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Previous single-site mutagenesis studies on the complexes of ribonuclease 
inhibitor (RI) with angiogenin (Ang) and RNase A suggested that in both cases a 
substantial fraction of the binding energy is concentrated within one small part 
of the crystallographically observed interface, involving RI residues 434-438. 
Such energetic "hot spots" are common in protein-protein complexes, but their 
physical meaning is generally unclear. Here we have investigated this question 
by examining the detailed interactions within the RI.ligand hot spots and the 
extent to which they function independently. The effects of Phe versus Ala 
substitutions show that the key residue Tyr434 interacts with both ligands 
primarily through its phenyl ring; for Tyr437, the OH group forms the important 
contacts with RNase A, whereas the phenyl group interacts with Ang. Kinetic 
characterization of complexes containing multiple substitutions reveals 
striking, but distinctive, cooperativity in the interactions of RI with the two 
ligands. The losses in binding energy for the RNase complex associated with 
replacements of Tyr434 and Asp435, and Tyr434 and Tyr437, are markedly less than 
additive (i.e., by 2.4 and 1.3 kcal/mol, respectively). In contrast, the 
energetic effects of the 434 and 435, and 434 and 437, substitution pairs on 
binding of Ang are fully additive and 2.5 kcal/mol beyond additive, 
respectively. Superadditivities (0.9-2.4 kcal/mol) are also observed for several 
multisite replacements involving these inhibitor residues and two Ang residues, 
Arg5 and Lys40, from this part of the interface. Consequently, the decreases in 
binding energy for some triple-variant complexes are as large as 8.5-10.1 
kcal/mol (compared to a total DeltaG of -21.0 kcal/mol for the wild-type 
complex). Potential explanations for these functional couplings, many of which 
occur over distances of >13 A and are not mediated by direct or triangulated 
contacts, are proposed. These findings show that the basis for the generation of 
hot spots can be complex, and that these sites can assume significantly more (as 
with Ang) or less (as with RNase) importance than indicated from the effects of 
single-site mutations.

DOI: 10.1021/bi990762a
PMID: 10413501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
