---
pmid: '21189423'
title: Molecular basis of Wnt activation via the DIX domain protein Ccd1.
authors:
- Liu YT
- Dan QJ
- Wang J
- Feng Y
- Chen L
- Liang J
- Li Q
- Lin SC
- Wang ZX
- Wu JW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3048742
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.186742
---

# Molecular basis of Wnt activation via the DIX domain protein Ccd1.
**Authors:** Liu YT, Dan QJ, Wang J, Feng Y, Chen L, Liang J, Li Q, Lin SC, Wang ZX, Wu JW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.186742](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.186742)
**PMC:** [PMC3048742](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3048742/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8597-8608. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.186742. Epub
 2010 Dec 28.

Molecular basis of Wnt activation via the DIX domain protein Ccd1.

Liu YT(1), Dan QJ(2), Wang J(1), Feng Y(2), Chen L(1), Liang J(1), Li Q(3), Lin 
SC(3), Wang ZX(4), Wu JW(5).

Author information:
(1)From the MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)the Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China, and.
(3)the MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Biology and Tumor Cell Engineering, School of 
Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361005, China.
(4)From the MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,; the Institute of Biophysics, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, and.
(5)From the MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, 
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China,. Electronic address: 
jiaweiwu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

The Wnt signaling plays pivotal roles in embryogenesis and cancer, and the three 
DIX domain-containing proteins, Dvl, Axin, and Ccd1, play distinct roles in the 
initiation and regulation of canonical Wnt signaling. Overexpressed Dvl has a 
tendency to form large polymers in a cytoplasmic punctate pattern, whereas the 
biologically active Dvl in fact forms low molecular weight oligomers. The 
molecular basis for how the polymeric sizes of Dvl proteins are controlled upon 
Wnt signaling remains unclear. Here we show that Ccd1 up-regulates canonical Wnt 
signaling via acting synergistically with Dvl. We determined the crystal 
structures of wild type Ccd1-DIX and mutant Dvl1-DIX(Y17D), which pack into 
"head-to-tail" helical filaments. Structural analyses reveal two sites crucial 
for intra-filament homo- and hetero-interaction and a third site for 
inter-filament homo-assembly. Systematic mutagenesis studies identified critical 
residues from all three sites required for Dvl homo-oligomerization, puncta 
formation, and stimulation of Wnt signaling. Remarkably, Ccd1 forms a 
hetero-complex with Dvl through the "head" of Dvl-DIX and the "tail" of 
Ccd1-DIX, depolymerizes Dvl homo-assembly, and thereby controls the size of Dvl 
polymer. These data together suggest a molecular mechanism for Ccd1-mediated Wnt 
activation in that Ccd1 converts latent polymeric Dvl to a biologically active 
oligomer(s).

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.186742
PMCID: PMC3048742
PMID: 21189423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
