---
pmid: '15907477'
title: The interaction of the hnRNP family member E1B-AP5 with p53.
authors:
- Barral PM
- Rusch A
- Turnell AS
- Gallimore PH
- Byrd PJ
- Dobner T
- Grand RJ
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.095
---

# The interaction of the hnRNP family member E1B-AP5 with p53.
**Authors:** Barral PM, Rusch A, Turnell AS, Gallimore PH, Byrd PJ, Dobner T, Grand RJ
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.095](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.095)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 May 23;579(13):2752-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.095.
Epub  2005 Apr 20.

The interaction of the hnRNP family member E1B-AP5 with p53.

Barral PM(1), Rusch A, Turnell AS, Gallimore PH, Byrd PJ, Dobner T, Grand RJ.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham.

Adenovirus early region 1B-associated protein 5, E1B-AP5, a member of the
heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family, was originally isolated
on the basis of its ability to bind to the adenovirus 5 early region1B55K
protein. Here, it has been demonstrated that E1B-AP5 interacts with mutant and
wild-type p53 from human cells in pull-down assays using GST-E1B-AP5. This
interaction has been confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation studies and pull-down
experiments with in vitro translated E1B-AP5 and GST-p53. The binding site for
E1B-AP5 has been mapped to the C-terminal region of p53. In reciprocal
experiments, it has been shown that several regions of E1B-AP5 bound to p53
although it is probable that a major site of interaction is located between
amino acids 395 and 732 of E1B-AP5. In reporter assays, E1B-AP5 inhibited p53
transcriptional activity although not as efficiently as the Ad5E1B55K protein.
Transfection of E1B-AP5 into human tumour cells affected the cellular response
to UV radiation, such that, although p53 expression was induced, little change
in the level of p53-inducible genes could be observed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.03.095
PMID: 15907477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
