---
pmid: '18388859'
title: Akt- and Foxo1-interacting WD-repeat-FYVE protein promotes adipogenesis.
authors:
- Fritzius T
- Moelling K
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2374844
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.67
---

# Akt- and Foxo1-interacting WD-repeat-FYVE protein promotes adipogenesis.
**Authors:** Fritzius T, Moelling K
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.67](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.67)
**PMC:** [PMC2374844](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2374844/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 May 7;27(9):1399-410. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.67. Epub 2008 Apr
3.

Akt- and Foxo1-interacting WD-repeat-FYVE protein promotes adipogenesis.

Fritzius T(1), Moelling K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

We have previously identified a protein, consisting of seven WD-repeats, forming 
a putative beta-propeller, and an FYVE domain, ProF, which is highly expressed 
in 3T3-L1 cells, a cell line that can be differentiated into adipocytes. We 
recently found ProF to interact with the kinases Akt and protein kinase Czeta. 
Here we demonstrate that ProF is a positive regulator of adipogenesis. Knockdown 
of ProF by RNA interference leads to decreased adipocyte differentiation. This 
is shown by reduced lipid accumulation, decreased expression of the 
differentiation markers PPARgamma and C/EBPalpha, and reduced glucose uptake in 
differentiated cells. Furthermore, ProF overexpression leads to increased 
adipogenesis. ProF binds to the transcription factor Foxo1 (Forkhead box O1), a 
negative regulator of insulin action and adipogenesis, and facilitates the 
phosphorylation and thus inactivation of Foxo1 by Akt. Additionally, 
dominant-negative Foxo1 restores adipogenesis in ProF knockdown cells. Thus, 
ProF modulates Foxo1 phosphorylation by Akt, promoting adipocyte 
differentiation. Furthermore, ProF might be involved in metabolic disorders such 
as diabetes.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.67
PMCID: PMC2374844
PMID: 18388859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
