---
pmid: '9744800'
title: Caenorhabditis elegans small heat-shock proteins Hsp12.2 and Hsp12.3 form tetramers
  and have no chaperone-like activity.
authors:
- Kokke BP
- Leroux MR
- Candido EP
- Boelens WC
- de Jong WW
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00917-x
---

# Caenorhabditis elegans small heat-shock proteins Hsp12.2 and Hsp12.3 form tetramers and have no chaperone-like activity.
**Authors:** Kokke BP, Leroux MR, Candido EP, Boelens WC, de Jong WW
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00917-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00917-x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1998 Aug 21;433(3):228-32. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00917-x.

Caenorhabditis elegans small heat-shock proteins Hsp12.2 and Hsp12.3 form 
tetramers and have no chaperone-like activity.

Kokke BP(1), Leroux MR, Candido EP, Boelens WC, de Jong WW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Four 12.2-12.6 kDa small heat-shock proteins (sHSPs) of Caenorhabditis elegans 
are the smallest known members of the sHSP family. They essentially comprise the 
characteristic C-terminal 'alpha-crystallin domain' of the sHSPs, having a very 
short N-terminal region, and lacking a C-terminal tail. Recombinant Hsp12.2 and 
12.3 are characterized here. Far-UV CD spectra reveal, as for other sHSPs, 
predominantly a beta-sheet structure. By gel permeation and crosslinking, they 
are the first sHSPs shown to occur as tetramers, rather than forming the usual 
large multimeric complexes. Exceptionally, too, both appear devoid of in vitro 
chaperone-like abilities. This supports the notion that tetramers are the 
building blocks of sHSP complexes, and that higher multimer formation, mediated 
through the N-terminal domains, is a prerequisite for chaperone-like activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00917-x
PMID: 9744800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
