---
pmid: '8900170'
title: PIG-A and PIG-H, which participate in glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis,
  form a protein complex in the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Watanabe R
- Kinoshita T
- Masaki R
- Yamamoto A
- Takeda J
- Inoue N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26868
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# PIG-A and PIG-H, which participate in glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor biosynthesis, form a protein complex in the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Watanabe R, Kinoshita T, Masaki R, Yamamoto A, Takeda J, Inoue N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.43.26868](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.43.26868)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 25;271(43):26868-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26868.

PIG-A and PIG-H, which participate in glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor 
biosynthesis, form a protein complex in the endoplasmic reticulum.

Watanabe R(1), Kinoshita T, Masaki R, Yamamoto A, Takeda J, Inoue N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565, Japan.

Many eukaryotic cell surface proteins are bound to the membrane via a 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Assembly of the GPI anchor precursor 
is a sequential addition of components to phosphatidylinositol (PI) in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The first step is the transfer of 
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to PI from UDP-GlcNAc to generate GlcNAc-PI. This 
simple step, however, is regulated by at least three genes because in both 
mammals and yeasts, there are three mutants of different complementation 
classes. To clarify this complexity, we analyzed the products of two cloned 
human genes, PIG-A and PIG-H. Here we demonstrate 1) that PIG-A is an ER 
transmembrane protein with a large cytoplasmic domain that has homology to a 
bacterial GlcNAc transferase and a small lumenal domain; 2) that PIG-H is a 
cytoplasmically oriented, ER-associated protein; and 3) that they form a protein 
complex. We also show that part of the small lumenal domain of PIG-A plays an 
essential functional role in targeting itself to the rough ER. Taken together 
with the cytoplasmic orientation of GlcNAc-PI, these results indicated that 
PIG-A and PIG-H are subunits of the GPI GlcNAc transferase that transfers GlcNAc 
to PI on the cytoplasmic side of the ER.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.43.26868
PMID: 8900170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
