---
pmid: '20605918'
title: The Lyn kinase C-lobe mediates Golgi export of Lyn through conformation-dependent
  ACSL3 association.
authors:
- Obata Y
- Fukumoto Y
- Nakayama Y
- Kuga T
- Dohmae N
- Yamaguchi N
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.066266
---

# The Lyn kinase C-lobe mediates Golgi export of Lyn through conformation-dependent ACSL3 association.
**Authors:** Obata Y, Fukumoto Y, Nakayama Y, Kuga T, Dohmae N, Yamaguchi N
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.066266](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.066266)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2010 Aug 1;123(Pt 15):2649-62. doi: 10.1242/jcs.066266. Epub 2010 
Jul 6.

The Lyn kinase C-lobe mediates Golgi export of Lyn through 
conformation-dependent ACSL3 association.

Obata Y(1), Fukumoto Y, Nakayama Y, Kuga T, Dohmae N, Yamaguchi N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Cell Sci. 2010 Aug 1;123(Pt 15):2681.

The Src-family tyrosine kinase Lyn has a role in signal transduction at the 
cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane upon extracellular ligand stimulation. 
After synthesis in the cytoplasm, Lyn accumulates on the Golgi and is 
subsequently transported to the plasma membrane. However, the mechanism of Lyn 
trafficking remains elusive. We show here that the C-lobe of the Lyn kinase 
domain is associated with long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase 3 (ACSL3) on the Golgi 
in a manner that is dependent on Lyn conformation but is independent of its 
kinase activity. Formation of a closed conformation by CSK prevents Lyn from 
associating with ACSL3, resulting in blockade of Lyn export from the Golgi. 
Overexpression and knockdown of ACSL3 accelerates and blocks Golgi export of 
Lyn, respectively. The post-Golgi route of Lyn, triggered by ACSL3, is distinct 
from that of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) and of caveolin. 
Moreover, an ACSL3 mutant lacking the LR2 domain, which is required for the 
catalytic activity, retains the ability to associate with Lyn and accelerate 
Golgi export of Lyn. These results suggest that initiation of Golgi export of 
Lyn involves association of ACSL3 with the Lyn C-lobe, which is exposed to the 
molecular surface in an open conformation.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.066266
PMID: 20605918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
