---
pmid: '18832350'
title: The EGL-4 PKG acts with KIN-29 salt-inducible kinase and protein kinase A to
  regulate chemoreceptor gene expression and sensory behaviors in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- van der Linden AM
- Wiener S
- You YJ
- Kim K
- Avery L
- Sengupta P
journal: Genetics
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2581950
doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.094771
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The EGL-4 PKG acts with KIN-29 salt-inducible kinase and protein kinase A to regulate chemoreceptor gene expression and sensory behaviors in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** van der Linden AM, Wiener S, You YJ, Kim K, Avery L, Sengupta P
**Journal:** Genetics (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1534/genetics.108.094771](https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.108.094771)
**PMC:** [PMC2581950](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2581950/)

## Abstract

1. Genetics. 2008 Nov;180(3):1475-91. doi: 10.1534/genetics.108.094771. Epub 2008
 Oct 1.

The EGL-4 PKG acts with KIN-29 salt-inducible kinase and protein kinase A to 
regulate chemoreceptor gene expression and sensory behaviors in Caenorhabditis 
elegans.

van der Linden AM(1), Wiener S, You YJ, Kim K, Avery L, Sengupta P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts 02454, 
USA.

The regulation of chemoreceptor (CR) gene expression by environmental signals 
and internal cues may contribute to the modulation of multiple physiological 
processes and behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans. We previously showed that 
KIN-29, a homolog of salt-inducible kinase, acts in sensory neurons to regulate 
the expression of a subset of CR genes, as well as sensory behaviors. Here we 
show that the cGMP-dependent protein kinase EGL-4 acts partly in parallel with 
KIN-29 to regulate CR gene expression. Sensory inputs inhibit both EGL-4 and 
KIN-29 functions, and KIN-29 function is inhibited in turn by cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase (PKA) activation. EGL-4 and KIN-29 regulate CR gene expression by 
antagonizing the gene repression functions of the class II HDAC HDA-4 and the 
MEF-2 transcription factor, and KIN-29, EGL-4, and PKA target distinct residues 
in HDA-4 to regulate its function and subcellular localization. While KIN-29 
acts primarily via MEF-2/HDA-4 to regulate additional sensory signal-regulated 
physiological processes and behaviors, EGL-4 acts via both MEF-2-dependent and 
-independent pathways. Our results suggest that integration of complex sensory 
inputs via multiple signaling pathways allows animals to precisely regulate 
sensory gene expression, thereby appropriately modulating physiology and 
behavior.

DOI: 10.1534/genetics.108.094771
PMCID: PMC2581950
PMID: 18832350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
