---
pmid: '22773187'
title: Dual functions of DP1 promote biphasic Wnt-on and Wnt-off states during anteroposterior
  neural patterning.
authors:
- Kim WT
- Kim H
- Katanaev VL
- Joon Lee S
- Ishitani T
- Cha B
- Han JK
- Jho EH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3419924
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.181
---

# Dual functions of DP1 promote biphasic Wnt-on and Wnt-off states during anteroposterior neural patterning.
**Authors:** Kim WT, Kim H, Katanaev VL, Joon Lee S, Ishitani T, Cha B, Han JK, Jho EH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2012.181](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.181)
**PMC:** [PMC3419924](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3419924/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Aug 15;31(16):3384-97. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.181. Epub 2012 Jul
 6.

Dual functions of DP1 promote biphasic Wnt-on and Wnt-off states during 
anteroposterior neural patterning.

Kim WT(1), Kim H, Katanaev VL, Joon Lee S, Ishitani T, Cha B, Han JK, Jho EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2012 Aug 15;31(16):3377-9. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.201.

DP1, a dimerization partner protein of the transcription factor E2F, is known to 
inhibit Wnt/β-catenin signalling along with E2F, although the function of DP1 
itself was not well characterized. Here, we present a novel dual regulatory 
mechanism of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by DP1 independent from E2F. DP1 
negatively regulates Wnt/β-catenin signalling by inhibiting Dvl-Axin interaction 
and by enhancing poly-ubiquitination of β-catenin. In contrast, DP1 positively 
modulates the signalling upon Wnt stimulation, via increasing cytosolic 
β-catenin and antagonizing the kinase activity of NLK. In Xenopus embryos, DP1 
exerts both positive and negative roles in Wnt/β-catenin signalling during 
anteroposterior neural patterning. From subcellular localization analyses, we 
suggest that the dual roles of DP1 in Wnt/β-catenin signalling are endowed by 
differential nucleocytoplasmic localizations. We propose that these dual 
functions of DP1 can promote and stabilize biphasic Wnt-on and Wnt-off states in 
response to a gradual gradient of Wnt/β-catenin signalling to determine 
differential cell fates.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2012.181
PMCID: PMC3419924
PMID: 22773187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
