---
pmid: '17030088'
title: APPL1, APPL2, Akt2 and FOXO1a interact with FSHR in a potential signaling complex.
authors:
- Nechamen CA
- Thomas RM
- Dias JA
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1782224
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.08.014
---

# APPL1, APPL2, Akt2 and FOXO1a interact with FSHR in a potential signaling complex.
**Authors:** Nechamen CA, Thomas RM, Dias JA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2006.08.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2006.08.014)
**PMC:** [PMC1782224](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1782224/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jan 2;260-262:93-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.08.014. 
Epub 2006 Oct 9.

APPL1, APPL2, Akt2 and FOXO1a interact with FSHR in a potential signaling 
complex.

Nechamen CA(1), Thomas RM, Dias JA.

Author information:
(1)Wadsworth Center, David Axelrod Institute for Public Health, New York State 
Department of Health, 120 New Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY 12208, United States.

A number of signaling proteins have been demonstrated to interact with follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH) receptor (FSHR), including APPL1, 14-3-3tau and Akt2. 
To further define the repertoire of proteins involved in FSH-induced signal 
transduction, several signaling and adapter proteins were examined for the 
ability to associate with FSHR. This report shows that, in addition to APPL1, 
FSHR interacts with FOXO1a and APPL2. Moreover, APPL1 and APPL2 associate with 
one another via the N-terminus of APPL1, presumably via the Bin-Amphiphysin-Rvs 
(BAR) domain. The interactions between FSHR and APPL2 and between FSHR and 
FOXO1a evidently are distinct since FOXO1a does not associate with either APPL1 
or with APPL2. Though APPL1 and APPL2 show some similarity in primary sequence, 
APPL1 associates with Akt2, whereas APPL2 does not. This is the first documented 
difference in function between APPL1 and APPL2. These results suggest that FSHR, 
APPL1, APPL2, Akt2 and FOXO1a are organized into distinct scaffolding networks 
in the cell. Accordingly, the spatial organization of signaling and adapter 
proteins with FSHR likely facilitates and finely regulates the signal 
transduction induced by FSH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.08.014
PMCID: PMC1782224
PMID: 17030088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
