---
pmid: '21075311'
title: B55β-associated PP2A complex controls PDK1-directed myc signaling and modulates
  rapamycin sensitivity in colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Tan J
- Lee PL
- Li Z
- Jiang X
- Lim YC
- Hooi SC
- Yu Q
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.021
---

# B55β-associated PP2A complex controls PDK1-directed myc signaling and modulates rapamycin sensitivity in colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Tan J, Lee PL, Li Z, Jiang X, Lim YC, Hooi SC, Yu Q
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.021)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2010 Nov 16;18(5):459-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.021.

B55β-associated PP2A complex controls PDK1-directed myc signaling and modulates 
rapamycin sensitivity in colorectal cancer.

Tan J(1), Lee PL, Li Z, Jiang X, Lim YC, Hooi SC, Yu Q.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research, Biopolis, Singapore.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 1;10(7):1019-20. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.7.15163.

The PP2A serine/threonine protein phosphatase serves as a critical cellular 
regulator of cell growth, proliferation, and survival. However, how this pathway 
is altered in human cancer to confer growth advantage is largely unknown. Here, 
we show that PPP2R2B, encoding the B55β regulatory subunit of the PP2A complex, 
is epigenetically inactivated by DNA hypermethylation in colorectal cancer. 
B55β-associated PP2A interacts with PDK1 and modulates its activity toward Myc 
phosphorylation. On loss of PPP2R2B, mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin triggers a 
compensatory Myc phosphorylation in PDK1-dependent, but PI3K and AKT-independent 
manner, resulting in resistance. Reexpression of PPP2R2B, genetic ablation of 
PDK1 or pharmacologic inhibition of PDK1 abrogates the rapamycin-induced Myc 
phosphorylation, leading to rapamycin sensitization. Thus, PP2A-B55β antagonizes 
PDK1-Myc signaling and modulates rapamycin sensitivity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.021
PMID: 21075311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
