---
pmid: '8943022'
title: Multiple potential germ-line helicases are components of the germ-line-specific
  P granules of Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Gruidl ME
- Smith PA
- Kuznicki KA
- McCrone JS
- Kirchner J
- Roussell DL
- Strome S
- Bennett KL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC19442
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13837
---

# Multiple potential germ-line helicases are components of the germ-line-specific P granules of Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Gruidl ME, Smith PA, Kuznicki KA, McCrone JS, Kirchner J, Roussell DL, Strome S, Bennett KL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.24.13837](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.24.13837)
**PMC:** [PMC19442](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC19442/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13837-42. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.24.13837.

Multiple potential germ-line helicases are components of the germ-line-specific 
P granules of Caenorhabditis elegans.

Gruidl ME(1), Smith PA, Kuznicki KA, McCrone JS, Kirchner J, Roussell DL, Strome 
S, Bennett KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, 
Columbia 65212, USA.

Two components of the germ-line-specific P granules of the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elgans have been identified using polyclonal antibodies specific 
for each. Both components are putative germ-line RNA helicases (GLHs) that 
contain CCHC zinc fingers of the type found in the RNA-binding nucleocapsid 
proteins of retroviruses. The predicted GLH-1 protein has four CCHC fingers; 
GLH-2 has six. Both GLH proteins localize in the P granules at all stage of 
germ-line development. However, the two glh genes display different patterns of 
RNA and protein accumulation in the germ lines of hermaphrodites and males. 
Injection of antisense glh-1 or glh-2 RNA into wild-type worms causes some 
offspring to develop into sterile adults, suggesting that either or both genes 
are required for normal germ-line development. As these very similar glh genes 
physically map within several hundred kilobases of one another, it seems likely 
that they represent a fairly recent gene duplication event.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.24.13837
PMCID: PMC19442
PMID: 8943022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
