---
pmid: '14580348'
title: Targeting activity is required for SWI/SNF function in vivo and is accomplished
  through two partially redundant activator-interaction domains.
authors:
- Prochasson P
- Neely KE
- Hassan AH
- Li B
- Workman JL
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00366-6
---

# Targeting activity is required for SWI/SNF function in vivo and is accomplished through two partially redundant activator-interaction domains.
**Authors:** Prochasson P, Neely KE, Hassan AH, Li B, Workman JL
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00366-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00366-6)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Oct;12(4):983-90. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00366-6.

Targeting activity is required for SWI/SNF function in vivo and is accomplished 
through two partially redundant activator-interaction domains.

Prochasson P(1), Neely KE, Hassan AH, Li B, Workman JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, 306 Althouse Laboratory, The Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, PA 16802, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex is required for the expression of many yeast genes. Previous 
studies have implicated DNA binding transcription activators in targeting 
SWI/SNF to UASs and promoters. To determine how activators interact with the 
complex and to examine the importance of these interactions, relative to other 
potential targeting mechanisms, for SWI/SNF function, we sought to identify and 
mutate the activator-interaction domains in the complex. Here we show that the 
N-terminal domain of Snf5 and the second quarter of Swi1 are sites of activation 
domain contact. Deletion of both of these domains left the SWI/SNF complex 
intact but impaired its ability to bind activation domains. Importantly, while 
deletion of either domain alone had minor phenotypic effect, deletion of both 
resulted in strong SWI/SNF related phenotypes. Thus, two distinct 
activator-interaction domains play overlapping roles in the targeting activity 
of SWI/SNF, which is essential for its function in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00366-6
PMID: 14580348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
