---
pmid: '10764762'
title: Identification and characterization of leukocyte-associated Ig-like receptor-1
  as a major anchor protein of tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 in hematopoietic cells.
authors:
- Xu Mj
- Zhao R
- Zhao ZJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001313200
---

# Identification and characterization of leukocyte-associated Ig-like receptor-1 as a major anchor protein of tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 in hematopoietic cells.
**Authors:** Xu Mj, Zhao R, Zhao ZJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M001313200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M001313200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 9;275(23):17440-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M001313200.

Identification and characterization of leukocyte-associated Ig-like receptor-1 
as a major anchor protein of tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 in hematopoietic cells.

Xu Mj(1), Zhao R, Zhao ZJ.

Author information:
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram 
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6305, USA.

SHP-1, an SH2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase, has a crucial role in 
hematopoiesis. Here we report that SHP-1 is associated with two major 
tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins in hematopoietic cells treated with the 
tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, pervanadate. One of the proteins corresponds to 
leukocyte-associated Ig-like receptor-1 (LAIR-1), a recently cloned 
transmembrane protein. Molecular cloning revealed four isoforms of the protein. 
LAIR-1 is hyper-phosphorylated on tyrosyl residues in cells overexpressing a 
catalytically inactive mutant form of SHP-1 as well as in pervanadate-treated 
cells. An antibody against the extracellular domain of the protein also induced 
its tyrosine phosphorylation. Tyrosine-phosphorylated LAIR-1 specifically 
interacts with SHP-1 but not with SHP-2, a structurally related tyrosine 
phosphatase. Using site-specific mutagenesis, we demonstrated that Tyr(233) and 
Tyr(263), each embedded in an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif, 
are responsible for tyrosine phosphorylation of LAIR-1 and recruitment of SHP-1. 
Both tyrosyl residues are required for SHP-1 binding. Protein kinases 
responsible for tyrosine phosphorylation of LAIR-1 may belong to the Src family 
since PP1, a Src family kinase inhibitor, significantly inhibited its 
phosphorylation. As a major binding protein of SHP-1 on the plasma membrane, 
LAIR-1 may play an important role in hematopoietic cell signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M001313200
PMID: 10764762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
