---
pmid: '10995219'
title: Human cytoplasmic serine hydroxymethyltransferase is an mRNA binding protein.
authors:
- Liu X
- Reig B
- Nasrallah IM
- Stover PJ
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi000665d
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human cytoplasmic serine hydroxymethyltransferase is an mRNA binding protein.
**Authors:** Liu X, Reig B, Nasrallah IM, Stover PJ
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi000665d](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi000665d)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2000 Sep 26;39(38):11523-31. doi: 10.1021/bi000665d.

Human cytoplasmic serine hydroxymethyltransferase is an mRNA binding protein.

Liu X(1), Reig B, Nasrallah IM, Stover PJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
USA.

The 5' untranslated region (UTR) of the human cytoplasmic serine 
hydroxymethyltransferase (cSHMT) message is alternatively spliced, creating a 
full-length 5' UTR (LUTR) encoded within exons 1-3 and a shorter UTR (SUTR) that 
results from excision of exon 2. The role of the 5' UTRs in cSHMT expression was 
investigated by fusing the cSHMT 5' UTRs to the 5' end of the luciferase gene. 
Human cSHMT protein at 10 microM inhibits in vitro translation of cSHMT 5' 
UTR-luciferase fusion mRNA templates by more than 90%, but does not inhibit 
translation of the luciferase message lacking the UTR. Translation inhibition is 
independent of amino acid and folate substrate binding to the cSHMT enzyme. The 
cSHMT SUTR-luciferase mRNA binds to the cSHMT.glycine.5-formyltetrahydrofolate 
ternary complex with an apparent K(d) of 10 microM. Gel mobility shift assays 
demonstrate that the human cSHMT protein binds to the cSHMT LUTR-luciferase 
fusion mRNA in the presence and absence of glycine and 5-formyltetrahydrofolate 
pentaglutamate. The fusion cSHMT SUTR-luciferase message at 65 microM inhibits 
the cSHMT-catalyzed cleavage of allothreonine as a partial mixed type inhibitor, 
reducing both k(cat) and K(m) by 40 and 75%, respectively, while tRNA has no 
effect on cSHMT catalysis. These studies indicate that the cSHMT protein can 
bind mRNA, and displays increased affinity for the 5' untranslated region of its 
mRNA.

DOI: 10.1021/bi000665d
PMID: 10995219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
