---
reference_id: PMID:15225124
title: Protein disulphide-isomerase reduces ricin to its A and B chains in the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Spooner RA
- Watson PD
- Marsden CJ
- Smith DC
- Moore KA
- Cook JP
- Lord JM
- Roberts LM
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1042/BJ20040742
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Protein disulphide-isomerase reduces ricin to its A and B chains in the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Spooner RA, Watson PD, Marsden CJ, Smith DC, Moore KA, Cook JP, Lord JM, Roberts LM
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20040742](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20040742)

## Content

1. Biochem J. 2004 Oct 15;383(Pt 2):285-93. doi: 10.1042/BJ20040742.

Protein disulphide-isomerase reduces ricin to its A and B chains in the
endoplasmic reticulum.

Spooner RA(1), Watson PD, Marsden CJ, Smith DC, Moore KA, Cook JP, Lord JM,
Roberts LM.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.

Cells expressing ricin B chain within the secretory pathway are significantly
more resistant to intoxication by ricin holotoxin but not to other cytotoxins
that exploit similar endocytic routes to the cytosol. Furthermore, cells
expressing the related B chain of abrin are protected against both incoming
abrin and ricin. These phenotypes can be correlated with the abilities of the
respective B chains to form disulphide-linked A-B holotoxins, since abrin B
chain forms heterodimers with either abrin or ricin A chains, whereas ricin B
chain forms heterodimers with ricin A chain only. In the ricin B-expressing
cells, this newly made lectin disappears with biphasic kinetics comprising a
retention phase followed by slow turnover and disposal after disengagement from
calnexin cycle components. Interference with ricin cytotoxicity occurs during
the early retention phase when ricin B chain is associated with PDI (protein
disulphide-isomerase). The data show that retrotranslocation of incoming toxin
is impeded by PDI-catalysed formation of heterodimers between endogenous B and A
chains derived from reduced holotoxin, thus proving that reduction of ricin
occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum. In contrast with other toxins, ricin does
not appear to require either proteolytic cleavage or unfolding for PDI-catalysed
reduction.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20040742
PMCID: PMC1134069
PMID: 15225124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]