---
pmid: '16631155'
title: Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neocortex.
authors:
- Bani-Yaghoub M
- Tremblay RG
- Lei JX
- Zhang D
- Zurakowski B
- Sandhu JK
- Smith B
- Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M
- Kennedy J
- Walker PR
- Sikorska M
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007
---

# Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neocortex.
**Authors:** Bani-Yaghoub M, Tremblay RG, Lei JX, Zhang D, Zurakowski B, Sandhu JK, Smith B, Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M, Kennedy J, Walker PR, Sikorska M
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):52-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007. Epub 2006
 Apr 24.

Role of Sox2 in the development of the mouse neocortex.

Bani-Yaghoub M(1), Tremblay RG, Lei JX, Zhang D, Zurakowski B, Sandhu JK, Smith
B, Ribecco-Lutkiewicz M, Kennedy J, Walker PR, Sikorska M.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenesis and Brain Repair Group, Neurobiology Program, Institute for
Biological Sciences, National Research Council of Canada, 1200 Montreal Rd.,
Bldg. M-54, Ottawa, ON, Canada K1A 0R6. mahmud.bani@nrc.ca

The mammalian neocortex is established from neural stem and progenitor cells
that utilize specific transcriptional and environmental factors to create
functional neurons and astrocytes. Here, we examined the mechanism of Sox2
action during neocortical neurogenesis and gliogenesis. We established a robust
Sox2 expression in neural stem and progenitor cells within the ventricular zone,
which persisted until the cells exited the cell cycle. Overexpression of
constitutively active Sox2 in neural progenitors resulted in upregulation of
Notch1, recombination signal-sequence binding protein-J (RBP-J) and hairy
enhancer of split 5 (Hes5) transcripts and the Sox2 high mobility group (HMG)
domain seemed sufficient to confer these effects. While Sox2 overexpression
permitted the differentiation of progenitors into astroglia, it inhibited
neurogenesis, unless the Notch pathway was blocked. Moreover, neuronal
precursors engaged a serine protease(s) to eliminate the overexpressed Sox2
protein and relieve the repression of neurogenesis. Glial precursors and
differentiated astrocytes, on the other hand, maintained Sox2 expression until
they reached a quiescent state. Sox2 expression was re-activated by signals that
triggered astrocytic proliferation (i.e., injury, mitogenic and gliogenic
factors). Taken together, Sox2 appears to act upstream of the Notch signaling
pathway to maintain the cell proliferative potential and to ensure the
generation of sufficient cell numbers and phenotypes in the developing
neocortex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2006.03.007
PMID: 16631155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
