---
pmid: '15190072'
title: Cbl-mediated degradation of Lyn and Fyn induced by constitutive fibroblast
  growth factor receptor-2 activation supports osteoblast differentiation.
authors:
- Kaabeche K
- Lemonnier J
- Le Mée S
- Caverzasio J
- Marie PJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402469200
---

# Cbl-mediated degradation of Lyn and Fyn induced by constitutive fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 activation supports osteoblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Kaabeche K, Lemonnier J, Le Mée S, Caverzasio J, Marie PJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M402469200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M402469200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36259-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M402469200. Epub 
2004 Jun 9.

Cbl-mediated degradation of Lyn and Fyn induced by constitutive fibroblast 
growth factor receptor-2 activation supports osteoblast differentiation.

Kaabeche K(1), Lemonnier J, Le Mée S, Caverzasio J, Marie PJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Osteoblast Biology and Pathology, INSERM U606, University Paris 
7, Hôpital Lariboisière, 2 rue Ambroise Paré, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) play an important regulatory role in skeletal 
development and bone formation. However, the FGF signaling mechanisms 
controlling osteoblast function are poorly understood. Here, we identified a 
role for the Src family members Lyn and Fyn in osteoblast differentiation 
promoted by constitutive activation of FGF receptor-2 (FGFR2). We show that the 
overactive FGFR2 S252W mutation induced decreased Src family kinase tyrosine 
phosphorylation and activity associated with decreased Lyn and Fyn protein 
expression in human osteoblasts. Pharmacological stimulation of Src family 
kinases or transfection with Lyn or Fyn vectors repressed alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP) up-regulation induced by overactive FGFR2. Inhibition of proteasome 
activity restored normal Lyn and Fyn expression and ALP activity in FGFR2 mutant 
osteoblasts. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that Lyn, Fyn, and FGFR2 
interacted with the ubiquitin ligase c-Cbl and ubiquitin. Transfection with 
c-Cbl in which the RING finger was disrupted or with c-Cbl with a point mutation 
that abolishes the binding ability of the Cbl phosphotyrosine-binding domain 
restored Src kinase activity and Lyn, Fyn, and FGFR2 levels and reduced ALP 
up-regulation in mutant osteoblasts. Thus, constitutive FGFR2 activation induces 
c-Cbl-dependent Lyn and Fyn proteasome degradation, resulting in reduced Lyn and 
Fyn kinase activity, increased ALP expression, and FGFR2 down-regulation. This 
reveals a common Cbl-mediated negative feedback mechanism controlling Lyn, Fyn, 
and FGFR2 degradation in response to overactive FGFR2 and indicates a role for 
Cbl-dependent down-regulation of Lyn and Fyn in osteoblast differentiation 
induced by constitutive FGFR2 activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M402469200
PMID: 15190072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
