---
pmid: '22144673'
title: Acyl chain specificity of ceramide synthases is determined within a region
  of 150 residues in the Tram-Lag-CLN8 (TLC) domain.
authors:
- Tidhar R
- Ben-Dor S
- Wang E
- Kelly S
- Merrill AH Jr
- Futerman AH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3270974
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.280271
---

# Acyl chain specificity of ceramide synthases is determined within a region of 150 residues in the Tram-Lag-CLN8 (TLC) domain.
**Authors:** Tidhar R, Ben-Dor S, Wang E, Kelly S, Merrill AH Jr, Futerman AH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.280271](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.280271)
**PMC:** [PMC3270974](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3270974/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 27;287(5):3197-206. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.280271. Epub 
2011 Dec 5.

Acyl chain specificity of ceramide synthases is determined within a region of 
150 residues in the Tram-Lag-CLN8 (TLC) domain.

Tidhar R(1), Ben-Dor S, Wang E, Kelly S, Merrill AH Jr, Futerman AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

In mammals, ceramides are synthesized by a family of six ceramide synthases 
(CerS), transmembrane proteins located in the endoplasmic reticulum, where each 
use fatty acyl-CoAs of defined chain length for ceramide synthesis. Little is 
known about the molecular features of the CerS that determine acyl-CoA 
selectivity. We now explore CerS structure-function relationships by 
constructing chimeric proteins combining sequences from CerS2, which uses 
C22-CoA for ceramide synthesis, and CerS5, which uses C16-CoA. CerS2 and -5 are 
41% identical and 63% similar. Chimeras containing approximately half of CerS5 
(from the N terminus) and half of CerS2 (from the C terminus) were catalytically 
inactive. However, the first 158 residues of CerS5 could be replaced with the 
equivalent region of CerS2 without affecting specificity of CerS5 toward 
C16-CoA; likewise, the putative sixth transmembrane domain (at the C terminus) 
of CerS5 could be replaced with the corresponding sequence of CerS2 without 
affecting CerS5 specificity. Remarkably, a chimeric CerS5/2 protein containing 
the first 158 residues and the last 83 residues of CerS2 displayed specificity 
toward C16-CoA, and a chimeric CerS2/5 protein containing the first 150 residues 
and the last 79 residues of CerS5 displayed specificity toward C22-CoA, 
demonstrating that a minimal region of 150 residues is sufficient for retaining 
CerS specificity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.280271
PMCID: PMC3270974
PMID: 22144673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
