---
pmid: '27302062'
title: The Endosome-associated Deubiquitinating Enzyme USP8 Regulates BACE1 Enzyme
  Ubiquitination and Degradation.
authors:
- Yeates EF
- Tesco G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4957057
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.718023
---

# The Endosome-associated Deubiquitinating Enzyme USP8 Regulates BACE1 Enzyme Ubiquitination and Degradation.
**Authors:** Yeates EF, Tesco G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M116.718023](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M116.718023)
**PMC:** [PMC4957057](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4957057/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jul 22;291(30):15753-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.718023. Epub 
2016 Jun 14.

The Endosome-associated Deubiquitinating Enzyme USP8 Regulates BACE1 Enzyme 
Ubiquitination and Degradation.

Yeates EF(1), Tesco G(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02111.
(2)From the Department of Neuroscience, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02111 giuseppina.tesco@Tufts.edu.

The β-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) is the 
rate-limiting enzyme in the production of amyloid-β, the toxic peptide that 
accumulates in the brain of subjects affected by Alzheimer disease. Our previous 
studies have shown that BACE1 is degraded via the lysosomal pathway and that 
that depletion of the trafficking molecule Golgi-localized γ-ear-containing 
ARF-binding protein 3 (GGA3) results in increased BACE1 levels and activity 
because of impaired lysosomal degradation. We also determined that GGA3 
regulation of BACE1 levels requires its ability to bind ubiquitin. Accordingly, 
we reported that BACE1 is ubiquitinated at lysine 501 and that lack of 
ubiquitination at lysine 501 produces BACE1 stabilization. Ubiquitin conjugation 
is a reversible process mediated by deubiquitinating enzymes. The 
ubiquitin-specific peptidase 8 (USP8), an endosome-associated deubiquitinating 
enzyme, regulates the ubiquitination, trafficking, and lysosomal degradation of 
several plasma membrane proteins. Here, we report that RNAi-mediated depletion 
of USP8 reduced levels of both ectopically expressed and endogenous BACE1 in H4 
human neuroglioma cells. Moreover, USP8 depletion increased BACE1 
ubiquitination, promoted BACE1 accumulation in the early endosomes and late 
endosomes/lysosomes, and decreased levels of BACE1 in the recycling endosomes. 
We also found that decreased BACE1 protein levels were accompanied by a decrease 
in BACE1-mediated amyloid precursor protein cleavage and amyloid-β levels. Our 
findings demonstrate that USP8 plays a key role in the trafficking and 
degradation of BACE1 by deubiquitinating lysine 501. These studies suggest that 
therapies able to accelerate BACE1 degradation (e.g. by increasing BACE1 
ubiquitination) may represent a potential treatment for Alzheimer disease.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M116.718023
PMCID: PMC4957057
PMID: 27302062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
