---
pmid: '21059946'
title: Molecular chaperone function of Mia40 triggers consecutive induced folding
  steps of the substrate in mitochondrial protein import.
authors:
- Banci L
- Bertini I
- Cefaro C
- Cenacchi L
- Ciofi-Baffoni S
- Felli IC
- Gallo A
- Gonnelli L
- Luchinat E
- Sideris D
- Tokatlidis K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2996643
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1010095107
---

# Molecular chaperone function of Mia40 triggers consecutive induced folding steps of the substrate in mitochondrial protein import.
**Authors:** Banci L, Bertini I, Cefaro C, Cenacchi L, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Felli IC, Gallo A, Gonnelli L, Luchinat E, Sideris D, Tokatlidis K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1010095107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010095107)
**PMC:** [PMC2996643](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2996643/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 23;107(47):20190-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1010095107. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Molecular chaperone function of Mia40 triggers consecutive induced folding steps 
of the substrate in mitochondrial protein import.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Cefaro C, Cenacchi L, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Felli IC, Gallo A, 
Gonnelli L, Luchinat E, Sideris D, Tokatlidis K.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center, University of Florence, Via Luigi Sacconi 6, 50019 
Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy. banci@cerm.unifi.it

Several proteins of the mitochondrial intermembrane space are targeted by 
internal targeting signals. A class of such proteins with α-helical hairpin 
structure bridged by two intramolecular disulfides is trapped by a 
Mia40-dependent oxidative process. Here, we describe the oxidative folding 
mechanism underpinning this process by an exhaustive structural characterization 
of the protein in all stages and as a complex with Mia40. Two consecutive 
induced folding steps are at the basis of the protein-trapping process. In the 
first one, Mia40 functions as a molecular chaperone assisting α-helical folding 
of the internal targeting signal of the substrate. Subsequently, in a 
Mia40-independent manner, folding of the second substrate helix is induced by 
the folded targeting signal functioning as a folding scaffold. The Mia40-induced 
folding pathway provides a proof of principle for the general concept that 
internal targeting signals may operate as a folding nucleus upon 
compartment-specific activation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1010095107
PMCID: PMC2996643
PMID: 21059946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Several proteins of the mitochondrial intermembrane space are targeted by internal targeting signals. A class of such proteins with α-helical hairpin structure bridged by two intramolecular disulfides is trapped by a Mia40-dependent oxidative process. Here, we describe the oxidative folding mechanism underpinning this process by an exhaustive structural characterization of the protein in all stages and as a complex with Mia40. Two consecutive induced folding steps are at the basis of the protein-trapping process. In the first one, Mia40 functions as a molecular chaperone assisting α-helical folding of the internal targeting signal of the substrate. Subsequently, in a Mia40-independent manner, folding of the second substrate helix is induced by the folded targeting signal functioning as a folding scaffold. The Mia40-induced folding pathway provides a proof of principle for the general concept that internal targeting signals may operate as a folding nucleus upon compartment-specific activation.

Discussion

Disulfide bond formation in mitochondria has been studied intensely in recent years and is intimately linked to Mia40-dependent oxidative trapping of the substrates in the IMS. Recent efforts by several groups have elucidated important aspects mainly of the mechanism of electron transfer or the initial recognition of the substrates; however, the actual protein folding events in this process and the role of Mia40 on these have remained elusive.

By dissecting and monitoring the elementary steps of the folding process we were able to unravel in a very comprehensive way the Mia40-dependent oxidative folding mechanism ( Fig. 3 ). The starting point was the production of the substrate in the E. coli cytosol and the in-cell NMR analysis that showed the substrate is completely unfolded. This condition represents well the unfolded state of the protein in the eukaryotic cytosol, which is also a reducing environment.

The isolation of the complex between Cox17 and Mia40 allowed us to obtain structural information on the interaction between a translocase component and a full-length substrate. Key to this effort was the use of previously described cysteine mutants of the substrate and Mia40 ( 9 , 19 , 20 ) that allow their interaction but block further progression of the redox reaction, hence trapping the complex in a stable state. Previous reports on the structures between a synthetic mitochondrial presequence peptide and the cytosolic domain of the outer membrane receptor Tom20 ( 15 ) and between a synthetic bacterial signal peptide and SecA ( 16 ) indicated in both cases a bimodal type of interaction involving both hydrophobic and ionic interactions. Mia40 interacts with its substrate in a different manner: Exclusively hydrophobic interactions coupled with the formation of disulfide pairing induce the folding of the substrate. Mia40 therefore functions as a chaperone hub with a foldase action on the targeting signal of the substrate, determining induced folding of only one helix of the substrate. The disulfide bond formation is essential to fold the ITS, whereas Mia40 itself does not undergo any large structural changes upon binding of the substrate. The fact that the same type of induced folding is observed on both the ITS of Tim9 (which, in the full-length protein, is located near the N terminus) and the ITS segment of Cox17 (which is located at the C terminus of the protein) argue for a clear and surprising localized effect on the folding of the ITS by Mia40, irrespective of its exact location within the polypeptide chain. In support of this notion, in vivo data showing interaction with Mia40 upon import of a deleted version of Tim10 containing only the ITS helix but not the second helix have been reported ( 11 ). We have also showed that Mia40 weakly interacts with the ITS region before the formation of the intermolecular disulfide but without significant α-helical folding induction. This first step in the Mia40-substrate recognition process is essential to select and to correctly position the substrate cysteine forming the intermolecular disulfide. The so-driven disulfide pairing then determines ITS α-helical formation thanks to the Mia40–substrate hydrophobic interactions. In support to this mechanism, we previously showed that removal of hydrophobic residues of Mia40 cleft or substrate-ITS prevents the formation of the covalent intermediate ( 9 – 11 ).

After the helical folding of the ITS segment kept covalently attached to Mia40 via the intermolecular disulfide bond, nucleofilic attack of the second inner cysteine of the substrate to this bond releases the substrate that now undergoes folding of its second helix through interactions with the same hydrophobic residues that were engaged in the Mia40 substrate binding cleft. In essence, the now released and folded ITS functions as a scaffold for the folding of the second helix. The entire reaction can therefore be described as an α-helical folding chain reaction—i.e., in step 1 the first ITS helix in Mia40 substrates is formed coupled to the covalent interaction with Mia40, and in step 2 the ITS helix of the substrate released from Mia40 with one formed disulfide bond induces the α-helical folding of the other CX 9 C segment not interacting with Mia40 ( Fig. S3 ). Our results highlight that only the first folding step is Mia40-dependent, whereas the second one is dependent on the sequence of the substrate. Both events, however, employ a common mechanism: Helix formation is induced by the creation of a hydrophobic folding nucleus coupled to the formation of a disulfide bond. The difference is that the formation of the first helix requires the intermolecular disulfide bond with the catalyst Mia40, whereas that of the second helix requires the intramolecular disulfide bond ( Fig. 3 ). Also the hydrophobic side of the substrate ITS has a pivotal role first to make the contact with the Mia40 cleft and then to interact with the hydrophobic side chains of the second helix, thus inducing its folding.

The generation of the second disulfide is still open and could follow different routes depending on the substrate and on different cellular conditions (for example, anaerobic or hypoxic growth). Indeed, the fact that foldase activity of Mia40 for the substrate is no longer needed at this final stage could indicate that the second disulfide bond on the substrate may be introduced by different small oxidants (oxygen and metals). On the other hand, Bien et al. ( 13 ) have recently presented 4-acetamido-4'-maleimidylstilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid-thiol trapping assays as proof for the capacity of Mia40 to completely oxidize the substrate under anaerobic conditions. The latter finding is in complete agreement with our previous suggestion that Mia40 is the only protein necessary and sufficient for the complete oxidation of the substrate ( 9 ). In this report, we had also shown that in the case of Cox17, it is the inner disulfide that is first recognized by Mia40 by using a mutant lacking either the inner or the outer disulfide of this substrate ( 9 ). Bien et al. ( 13 ) extended this finding by using the Cox19 protein that is homologous to Cox17. Bien et al. have also suggested a “proofreading” role for glutathione in the full oxidation reaction for the substrate, but this proposal was based solely on in vitro data.

The previously unknown function of Mia40 reported here is to induce the folding specifically of the ITS (in an event coupled to the intermolecular disulfide pairing). This folded segment represents the key initial folding unit that triggers complete folding of the rest of the substrate, which is usually a highly cooperative process ( 26 ). The second folding step of a Mia40–substrate complex may differ for different substrates (for example, involving different kinds of residues able to make hydrophobic and H bonds and/or salt bridges interactions), all of them being Mia40-independent and not necessarily requiring the formation of a second disulfide bond. The formation of the first Mia40-induced helix can therefore differently influence the second folding steps of the rest of the protein depending on the substrate topology. This mechanism allows us therefore to rationalize the function of Mia40 even for substrates that contain only one disulfide bond. We propose that the essential function of Mia40 is that of a chaperone foldase that assists specifically the folding of the targeting signal (through an assisted hydrophobic collapse). The now-folded targeting signal can operate as the crucial folding nucleus in subsequent cooperative steps that complete folding of the substrate to its native state.

Is there a relevance of these data for other (mitochondria- and Mia40-independent) protein targeting and folding events in eukaryotic cells? There are many proteins that are targeted to intracellular compartments by internal targeting signals that are still poorly defined and whose function is not understood. The case of Mia40-dependent folding represents an example that provides a proof of principle that internal targeting signals may function as the key initiating folding units for a protein after they get “activated” as folding units in the right compartment. Activation of the internal signal in each case should be compartment-specific (in terms of the environment and components present in the target compartment). Such a role of the internal targeting signals would be a fundamental underlying property and provide an efficient way for the cell to ensure correct protein folding in various intracellular compartments.
