---
pmid: '7533181'
title: Three functional soluble forms of the human apoptosis-inducing Fas molecule
  are produced by alternative splicing.
authors:
- Cascino I
- Fiucci G
- Papoff G
- Ruberti G
journal: J Immunol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
---

# Three functional soluble forms of the human apoptosis-inducing Fas molecule are produced by alternative splicing.
**Authors:** Cascino I, Fiucci G, Papoff G, Ruberti G
**Journal:** J Immunol (1995)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1995 Mar 15;154(6):2706-13.

Three functional soluble forms of the human apoptosis-inducing Fas molecule are 
produced by alternative splicing.

Cascino I(1), Fiucci G, Papoff G, Ruberti G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Institute of Cell Biology, National Research 
Council, Rome, Italy.

Fas/Apo-1 molecule is an apoptosis-signaling cell surface Ag belonging to the 
TNFR family. To investigate the possibility that soluble forms of the Fas 
receptor are expressed in human cells, we analyzed Fas mRNA transcripts obtained 
from activated peripheral mononuclear cells of healthy donors and from human 
tumor cell lines. We identified and characterized three human mRNA Fas variants: 
FasTMDel, FasDel2, and FasDel3. To determine whether the three transcripts were 
derived by alternative splicing, the Fas genomic intron/exon organization of the 
regions surrounding the deleted sequences was analyzed in Fas clones isolated 
from a human genomic library. Expression of the transcripts was studied in COS 
cells transiently transfected with the FasTMDel, FasDel2, and FasDel3 cDNAs. 
Immunocytochemical and in vitro apoptosis inhibition studies suggest that the 
transcripts are expressed as soluble Fas proteins that may play a functional 
role in the regulation of apoptosis.

PMID: 7533181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
