---
pmid: '23984860'
title: A novel tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism within KCNQ1OT1 confers risk for
  hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Wan J
- Huang M
- Zhao H
- Wang C
- Zhao X
- Jiang X
- Bian S
- He Y
- Gao Y
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2118
---

# A novel tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism within KCNQ1OT1 confers risk for hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Wan J, Huang M, Zhao H, Wang C, Zhao X, Jiang X, Bian S, He Y, Gao Y
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1089/dna.2013.2118](https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.2013.2118)

## Abstract

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;32(11):628-34. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2118. Epub 2013
Aug  28.

A novel tetranucleotide repeat polymorphism within KCNQ1OT1 confers risk for 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wan J(1), Huang M, Zhao H, Wang C, Zhao X, Jiang X, Bian S, He Y, Gao Y.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical College of Soochow University , 
Suzhou, People's Republic of China .

KCNQ1 overlapping transcript 1 (KCNQ1OT1), a long noncoding RNA responsible for 
silencing a cluster of genes in cis, has been shown to be involved in multiple 
cancers. However, much remains unclear of how KCNQ1OT1 contributes to 
carcinogenesis. By thoroughly analyzing 510 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cases 
and 1014 healthy controls in a Chinese population, we identified a novel short 
tandem repeat (STR) polymorphism (rs35622507) within the KCNQ1OT1 coding region 
and evaluated its association with HCC susceptibility. Logistic regression 
analysis showed that compared with individuals carrying the homozygote 10-10 
genotype, those heterozygote subjects who carry only one allele 10 had a 
significantly decreased risk of HCC (adjusted odds ratio [OR]=0.67, 95% 
confidence interval [CI]=0.53-0.86, p=0.0009), with the risk decreased even 
further in those without allele 10 (adjusted OR=0.38, 95% CI=0.21-0.69, 
p=0.0005). Furthermore, genotype-phenotype correlation studies using four 
hepatoma cell lines support a significant association between STR genotypes and 
the expression of KCNQ1OT1. Cell lines without allele 10 conferred a 
20.9-33.3-fold higher expression of KCNQ1OT1. Meanwhile, KCNQ1OT1 expression was 
reversely correlated with the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor 1C (CDKN1C), a tumor suppressor gene located within the 
CDKN1C/KCNQ1OT1 imprinted region, in three hepatoma cell lines. Finally, in 
silico prediction suggested that different alleles could alter the local 
structure of KCNQ1OT1. Taken together, our findings suggest that the STR 
polymorphism within KCNQ1OT1 contributes to hepatocarcinogenesis, possibly by 
affecting KCNQ1OT1 and CDKN1C expression through a structure-dependent 
mechanism. The replication of our studies and further functional studies are 
needed to validate our hypothesis and understand the roles of KCNQ1OT1 
polymorphisms in predisposition for HCC.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2013.2118
PMID: 23984860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
