---
pmid: '16236769'
title: LIN-12/Notch trafficking and regulation of DSL ligand activity during vulval
  induction in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Shaye DD
- Greenwald I
journal: Development
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.02076
---

# LIN-12/Notch trafficking and regulation of DSL ligand activity during vulval induction in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Shaye DD, Greenwald I
**Journal:** Development (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.02076](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.02076)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):5081-92. doi: 10.1242/dev.02076. Epub 2005 Oct
19.

LIN-12/Notch trafficking and regulation of DSL ligand activity during vulval 
induction in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Shaye DD(1), Greenwald I.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

A novel mode of crosstalk between the EGFR-Ras-MAPK and LIN-12/Notch pathways 
occurs during the patterning of a row of vulval precursor cells (VPCs) in 
Caenorhabditis elegans: activation of the EGFR-Ras-MAPK pathway in the central 
VPC promotes endocytosis and degradation of LIN-12 protein. LIN-12 
downregulation in the central VPC is a prerequisite for the activity of the 
lateral signal, which activates LIN-12 in neighboring VPCs. Here we characterize 
cis-acting targeting sequences in the LIN-12 intracellular domain and find that 
in addition to a di-leucine motif, serine/threonine residues are important for 
internalization and lysine residues are important for post-internalization 
trafficking and degradation. We also identify two trans-acting factors that are 
required for post-internalization trafficking and degradation: ALX-1, a homolog 
of yeast Bro1p and mammalian Alix and the WWP-1/Su(dx)/Itch ubiquitin ligase. By 
examining the effects of mutated forms of LIN-12 and reduced wwp-1 or alx-1 
activity on subcellular localization and activity of LIN-12, we provide evidence 
that the lateral signal-inhibiting activity of LIN-12 resides in the 
extracellular domain and occurs at the apical surface of the VPCs.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.02076
PMID: 16236769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
