---
pmid: '10809762'
title: Hrs-2 regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis via interactions with Eps15.
authors:
- Bean AJ
- Davanger S
- Chou MF
- Gerhardt B
- Tsujimoto S
- Chang Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.20.15271
---

# Hrs-2 regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis via interactions with Eps15.
**Authors:** Bean AJ, Davanger S, Chou MF, Gerhardt B, Tsujimoto S, Chang Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.20.15271](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.20.15271)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 19;275(20):15271-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.20.15271.

Hrs-2 regulates receptor-mediated endocytosis via interactions with Eps15.

Bean AJ(1), Davanger S, Chou MF, Gerhardt B, Tsujimoto S, Chang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, and The W. M. Keck Center for the 
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of Texas Medical School, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Hrs-2, via interactions with SNAP-25, plays a regulatory role on the exocytic 
machinery. We now show that Hrs-2 physically interacts with Eps15, a protein 
required for receptor-mediated endocytosis. The Hrs-2/Eps15 interaction is 
calcium dependent, inhibited by SNAP-25 and alpha-adaptin, and results in the 
inhibition of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Immunoelectron microscopy reveals 
Hrs-2 localization on the limiting membrane of multivesicular bodies, organelles 
in the endosomal pathway. These data show that Hrs-2 regulates endocytosis, 
delineate a biochemical pathway (Hrs-2-Eps15-AP2) in which Hrs-2 functions, and 
suggest that Hrs-2 acts to provide communication between endo- and exocytic 
processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.20.15271
PMID: 10809762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
