---
pmid: '22354088'
title: Mitochondrial processing peptidase regulates PINK1 processing, import and Parkin
  recruitment.
authors:
- Greene AW
- Grenier K
- Aguileta MA
- Muise S
- Farazifard R
- Haque ME
- McBride HM
- Park DS
- Fon EA
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3321149
doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.14
---

# Mitochondrial processing peptidase regulates PINK1 processing, import and Parkin recruitment.
**Authors:** Greene AW, Grenier K, Aguileta MA, Muise S, Farazifard R, Haque ME, McBride HM, Park DS, Fon EA
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2012.14](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.14)
**PMC:** [PMC3321149](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3321149/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2012 Apr;13(4):378-85. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.14.

Mitochondrial processing peptidase regulates PINK1 processing, import and Parkin 
recruitment.

Greene AW(1), Grenier K, Aguileta MA, Muise S, Farazifard R, Haque ME, McBride 
HM, Park DS, Fon EA.

Author information:
(1)McGill Parkinson Program, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal 
Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Mutations in phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause 
recessively inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder 
linked to mitochondrial dysfunction. In healthy mitochondria, PINK1 is rapidly 
degraded in a process involving both mitochondrial proteases and the proteasome. 
However, when mitochondrial import is compromised by depolarization, PINK1 
accumulates on the mitochondrial surface where it recruits the PD-linked E3 
ubiquitin ligase Parkin from the cytosol, which in turn mediates the autophagic 
destruction of the dysfunctional organelles. Using an unbiased RNA-mediated 
interference (RNAi)-based screen, we identified four mitochondrial proteases, 
mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP), presenilin-associated rhomboid-like 
protease (PARL), m-AAA and ClpXP, involved in PINK1 degradation. We find that 
PINK1 turnover is particularly sensitive to even modest reductions in MPP 
levels. Moreover, PINK1 cleavage by MPP is coupled to import such that reducing 
MPP activity induces PINK1 accumulation at the mitochondrial surface, leading to 
Parkin recruitment and mitophagy. These results highlight a new role for MPP in 
PINK1 import and mitochondrial quality control via the PINK1–Parkin pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2012.14
PMCID: PMC3321149
PMID: 22354088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Mutations in phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause recessively inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder linked to mitochondrial dysfunction. In healthy mitochondria, PINK1 is rapidly degraded in a process involving both mitochondrial proteases and the proteasome. However, when mitochondrial import is compromised by depolarization, PINK1 accumulates on the mitochondrial surface where it recruits the PD-linked E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin from the cytosol, which in turn mediates the autophagic destruction of the dysfunctional organelles. Using an unbiased RNA-mediated interference (RNAi)-based screen, we identified four mitochondrial proteases, mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP), presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protease (PARL), m-AAA and ClpXP, involved in PINK1 degradation. We find that PINK1 turnover is particularly sensitive to even modest reductions in MPP levels. Moreover, PINK1 cleavage by MPP is coupled to import such that reducing MPP activity induces PINK1 accumulation at the mitochondrial surface, leading to Parkin recruitment and mitophagy. These results highlight a new role for MPP in PINK1 import and mitochondrial quality control via the PINK1–Parkin pathway.

Introduction

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by both motor and non-motor symptoms [ 1 ]. Several lines of evidence implicate mitochondrial dysfunction in PD [ 2 ], including the role of two recessive PD genes, Parkin and phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), in a new mitochondrial quality control pathway [ 3 ]. A landmark study in 2008 showed that on disruption of the electrochemical potential (Δψ m ) across the inner mitochondrial membrane with the protonophore carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone (CCCP), the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin translocates from the cytosol to mitochondria [ 4 ]. Parkin subsequently mediates the destruction of such defective mitochondria by autophagy (termed mitophagy). A series of follow-up studies showed that the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 is required for Parkin-mediated mitophagy [ 5 ]. Under basal conditions PINK1 is rapidly degraded in a process involving Δψ m -driven mitochondrial import and cleavage by mitochondrial proteases. Disrupting Δψ m with CCCP blocks import and stabilizes PINK1 on the mitochondrial outer membrane, which in turn promotes Parkin recruitment [ 6 ].

Given the importance of PINK1 in mitochondrial Parkin recruitment, understanding how PINK1 is cleaved and degraded is crucial for gaining insight into mitochondrial quality control in PD. Here we identify a key step in PINK1 turnover, mediated by the mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP). Remarkably, MPP links PINK1 proteolysis with its import into mitochondria. MPP knockdown stabilizes PINK1 at the mitochondrial surface, induces Parkin recruitment and leads to mitochondrial clearance, much like CCCP. In contrast, silencing ClpXP, m-AAA or presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protease (PARL), which were also found to affect PINK1 turnover, did not stabilize PINK1 on the surface of mitochondria and failed to promote Parkin recruitment. Thus, MPP seems to have a crucial role in coupling PINK1 import with proteolysis at a proximal step where it is uniquely poised to regulate mitochondrial quality control.

Conclusions

Our study adds weight to the notion that PINK1 import into, and cleavage within, mitochondria are responsible for keeping PINK1 levels low under basal conditions so that they may be specifically and rapidly elevated when mitochondria become dysfunctional. Our findings support the previously identified role for PARL in PINK1 cleavage, and implicate three more proteases, MPP, m-AAA and ClpXP, in the cleavage of this PD-linked protein (see supplementary Fig S4 online for model). Mutations in the AFG3L2 subunit of m-AAA have been linked to the neurodegenerative disorder dominant hereditary ataxia SCA28 [ 23 ], and it will be interesting to examine whether altered PINK1 cleavage has a role in this disease. As a considerable proportion of endogenous PINK1 is found in the 52-kDa form ( Fig 1A ), it will also be interesting to determine whether this cleavage product exerts a physiological function, rather than simply being a degradation intermediate.

Importantly, we have shown that a relatively modest knockdown of MPPβ, which has little overall effect on mitochondrial integrity, is sufficient to induce Parkin recruitment to mitochondria and promote mitochondrial clearance. MPPβ inhibition may therefore represent a useful model for future studies of the mitophagy pathway. In addition, based on our findings it is possible that tonic, low-level inhibition of MPPβ activity could induce a moderate increase in PINK1 levels, Parkin recruitment and mitophagy of defective organelles, without otherwise broadly affecting mitochondrial function. This could represent an exciting therapeutic opportunity for slowing the progression of PD by reducing the accumulation of mitochondrial defects.

Methods

Confocal microscopy. Cells were imaged live with or without MitoTracker Green and MitoTracker Deep Red (Invitrogen) staining on MatTek glass-bottom dishes on a Zeiss LSM710 microscope using a × 63 Plan Apo objective (Zeiss). Mitochondrial interconnectivity and MitoTracker Deep Red fluorescence/Total MitoTracker Green fluorescence ratio were analysed using ImageJ (National Institute of Health).

In organello cleavage assay. Mitochondria from cells treated with either 10 μM CCCP or dimethylsulphoxide for 3 h were enriched and resuspended in reaction buffer (100 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 10 μM EGTA, 5 mM Tris, pH 7.4). The mitochondria were incubated at 0.8 μg/μl in 30 μl reaction buffer with or without respiration mix (1 mM ATP, 0.08 mM ADP, 5 mM NaSuccinate, 2 mM K 2 HPO 4 , pH 7.5) and 1 μM CCCP for 30 min at 37°C.

Supplementary information is available at EMBO reports online ( http://www.emboreports.org ).
