---
pmid: '8407791'
title: Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the Pseudomonas putida protocatechuate
  3,4-dioxygenase genes.
authors:
- Frazee RW
- Livingston DM
- LaPorte DC
- Lipscomb JD
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC206714
doi: 10.1128/jb.175.19.6194-6202.1993
---

# Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the Pseudomonas putida protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase genes.
**Authors:** Frazee RW, Livingston DM, LaPorte DC, Lipscomb JD
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.175.19.6194-6202.1993](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.175.19.6194-6202.1993)
**PMC:** [PMC206714](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC206714/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1993 Oct;175(19):6194-202. doi: 10.1128/jb.175.19.6194-6202.1993.

Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the Pseudomonas putida protocatechuate 
3,4-dioxygenase genes.

Frazee RW(1), Livingston DM, LaPorte DC, Lipscomb JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis 55455.

The genes that encode the alpha and beta subunits of protocatechuate 
3,4-dioxygenase (3,4-PCD [EC 1.13.11.3]) were cloned from a Pseudomonas putida 
(formerly P. aeruginosa) (ATCC 23975) genomic library prepared in lambda phage. 
Plaques were screened by hybridization with degenerate oligonucleotides designed 
using known amino acid sequences. A 1.5-kb SmaI fragment from a 15-kb primary 
clone was subcloned, sequenced, and shown to contain two successive open reading 
frames, designated pcaH and pcaG, corresponding to the beta and alpha subunits, 
respectively, of 3,4-PCD. The amino acid sequences deduced from pcaHG matched 
the chemically determined sequence of 3,4-PCD in all except three positions. 
Cloning of pcaHG into broad-host-range expression vector pKMY319 allowed high 
levels of expression in P. putida strains, as well as in Proteus mirabilis after 
specific induction of the plasmid-encoded nahG promoter with salicylate. The 
recombinant enzyme was purified and crystallized from P. mirabilis, which lacks 
an endogenous 3,4-PCD. The physical, spectroscopic, and kinetic properties of 
the recombinant enzyme were indistinguishable from those of the wild-type 
enzyme. Moreover, the same transient enzyme intermediates were formed during the 
catalytic cycle. These studies establish the methodology which will allow 
mechanistic investigations to be pursued through site-directed mutagenesis of P. 
putida 3,4-PCD, the only aromatic ring-cleaving dioxygenase for which the 
three-dimensional structure is known.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.175.19.6194-6202.1993
PMCID: PMC206714
PMID: 8407791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
