---
pmid: '17318191'
title: Bcr-Abl stabilizes beta-catenin in chronic myeloid leukemia through its tyrosine
  phosphorylation.
authors:
- Coluccia AM
- Vacca A
- Duñach M
- Mologni L
- Redaelli S
- Bustos VH
- Benati D
- Pinna LA
- Gambacorti-Passerini C
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1817619
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601485
---

# Bcr-Abl stabilizes beta-catenin in chronic myeloid leukemia through its tyrosine phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Coluccia AM, Vacca A, Duñach M, Mologni L, Redaelli S, Bustos VH, Benati D, Pinna LA, Gambacorti-Passerini C
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601485](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601485)
**PMC:** [PMC1817619](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1817619/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Mar 7;26(5):1456-66. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601485. Epub 2007 Feb
 22.

Bcr-Abl stabilizes beta-catenin in chronic myeloid leukemia through its tyrosine 
phosphorylation.

Coluccia AM(1), Vacca A, Duñach M, Mologni L, Redaelli S, Bustos VH, Benati D, 
Pinna LA, Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Milan, 
Italy. g_lagna@hotmail.com

Self-renewal of Bcr-Abl(+) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) cells is sustained by 
a nuclear activated serine/threonine-(S/T) unphosphorylated beta-catenin. 
Although beta-catenin can be tyrosine (Y)-phosphorylated, the occurrence and 
biological relevance of this covalent modification in Bcr-Abl-associated 
leukemogenesis is unknown. Here we show that Bcr-Abl levels control the degree 
of beta-catenin protein stabilization by affecting its Y/S/T-phospho content in 
CML cells. Bcr-Abl physically interacts with beta-catenin, and its oncogenic 
tyrosine kinase activity is required to phosphorylate beta-catenin at Y86 and 
Y654 residues. This Y-phospho beta-catenin binds to the TCF4 transcription 
factor, thus representing a transcriptionally active pool. Imatinib, a Bcr-Abl 
antagonist, impairs the beta-catenin/TCF-related transcription causing a rapid 
cytosolic retention of Y-unphosphorylated beta-catenin, which presents an 
increased binding affinity for the Axin/GSK3beta complex. Although Bcr-Abl does 
not affect GSK3beta autophosphorylation, it prevents, through its effect on 
beta-catenin Y phosphorylation, Axin/GSK3beta binding to beta-catenin and its 
subsequent S/T phosphorylation. Silencing of beta-catenin by small interfering 
RNA inhibited proliferation and clonogenicity of Bcr-Abl(+) CML cells, in 
synergism with Imatinib. These findings indicate the Bcr-Abl triggered Y 
phosphorylation of beta-catenin as a new mechanism responsible for its protein 
stabilization and nuclear signalling activation in CML.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601485
PMCID: PMC1817619
PMID: 17318191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
