---
pmid: '11463386'
title: Phosphoprotein-protein interactions revealed by the crystal structure of kinase-associated
  phosphatase in complex with phosphoCDK2.
authors:
- Song H
- Hanlon N
- Brown NR
- Noble ME
- Johnson LN
- Barford D
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(01)00208-8
---

# Phosphoprotein-protein interactions revealed by the crystal structure of kinase-associated phosphatase in complex with phosphoCDK2.
**Authors:** Song H, Hanlon N, Brown NR, Noble ME, Johnson LN, Barford D
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(01)00208-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(01)00208-8)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2001 Mar;7(3):615-26. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(01)00208-8.

Phosphoprotein-protein interactions revealed by the crystal structure of 
kinase-associated phosphatase in complex with phosphoCDK2.

Song H(1), Hanlon N, Brown NR, Noble ME, Johnson LN, Barford D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

The CDK-interacting protein phosphatase KAP dephosphorylates phosphoThr-160 
(pThr-160) of the CDK2 activation segment, the site of regulatory 
phosphorylation that is essential for kinase activity. Here we describe the 
crystal structure of KAP in association with pThr-160-CDK2, representing an 
example of a protein phosphatase in complex with its intact protein substrate. 
The major protein interface between the two molecules is formed by the 
C-terminal lobe of CDK2 and the C-terminal helix of KAP, regions remote from the 
kinase-activation segment and the KAP catalytic site. The kinase-activation 
segment interacts with the catalytic site of KAP almost entirely via the 
phosphate group of pThr-160. This interaction requires that the activation 
segment is unfolded and drawn away from the kinase molecule, inducing a 
conformation of CDK2 similar to the activated state observed in the CDK2/cyclin 
A complex.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(01)00208-8
PMID: 11463386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
