---
pmid: '27143545'
title: Phytochrome-interacting ankyrin repeat protein 2 modulates phytochrome A-mediated
  PIF3 phosphorylation in light signal transduction.
authors:
- Yoo J
- Cho MH
- Lee SW
- Bhoo SH
journal: J Biochem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/jb/mvw031
---

# Phytochrome-interacting ankyrin repeat protein 2 modulates phytochrome A-mediated PIF3 phosphorylation in light signal transduction.
**Authors:** Yoo J, Cho MH, Lee SW, Bhoo SH
**Journal:** J Biochem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jb/mvw031](https://doi.org/10.1093/jb/mvw031)

## Abstract

1. J Biochem. 2016 Oct;160(4):243-249. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvw031. Epub 2016 May 2.

Phytochrome-interacting ankyrin repeat protein 2 modulates phytochrome 
A-mediated PIF3 phosphorylation in light signal transduction.

Yoo J(1), Cho MH(2), Lee SW(3), Bhoo SH(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Biotechnology.
(2)Graduate School of Biotechnology shbhoo@khu.ac.kr manhocho@khu.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Plant Molecular Systems Biotechnology & Crop Biotech Institute, 
Kyung Hee University, Yongin, 17104, Korea.
(4)Graduate School of Biotechnology shbhoo@khu.ac.kr.

Light signals recognized by phytochromes are transduced through interactions 
between down-stream signaling components. Phytochrome-interacting ankyrin repeat 
protein 2 (PIA2) was found to interact with phytochrome interacting factor 3 
(PIF3), a well-known repressor of plant photomorphogenesis in response to 
phytochrome-mediated light signalling. Both PIA2 and PIF3 are known to be 
positive regulators of anthocyanin accumulation in Arabidopsis seedlings under 
far-red conditions. Thus, we investigated the functional relationship between 
PIA2 and PIF3 in light signalling. We found that PIA2 suppressed PIF3 
phosphorylation by phyA. To elucidate how PIA2 modulates phyA-mediated PIF3 
phosphorylation, we generated non-phosphorylation mutants and N-terminal α-helix 
breaking mutants of PIA2. PIF3 phosphorylation by phyA was not suppressed by 
α-helix breaking PIA2 mutants. The α-helix breaking mutations also resulted in 
remarkably decreased interactions between PIA2 and PIF3. However, the 
non-phosphorylation mutants exhibited no effect on phyA-mediated PIF3 
phosphorylation. In addition, decreased anthocyanin accumulation in pia2 
knockout plant seedlings was not rescued by overexpression of the α-helix 
breaking mutant in transgenic plants under far-red conditions. These results 
suggest that PIA2 modulates phyA-mediated PIF3 phosphorylation by physical 
interaction with PIF3 and that the secondary structure of the PIA2 N-terminus is 
important in this modulation.

© The Authors 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/jb/mvw031
PMID: 27143545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
