---
pmid: '11983712'
title: Congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ig is defined by a deficiency in
  dolichyl-P-mannose:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase.
authors:
- Chantret I
- Dupré T
- Delenda C
- Bucher S
- Dancourt J
- Barnier A
- Charollais A
- Heron D
- Bader-Meunier B
- Danos O
- Seta N
- Durand G
- Oriol R
- Codogno P
- Moore SE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203285200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ig is defined by a deficiency in dolichyl-P-mannose:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase.
**Authors:** Chantret I, Dupré T, Delenda C, Bucher S, Dancourt J, Barnier A, Charollais A, Heron D, Bader-Meunier B, Danos O, Seta N, Durand G, Oriol R, Codogno P, Moore SE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M203285200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M203285200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25815-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203285200. Epub 
2002 Apr 30.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ig is defined by a deficiency in 
dolichyl-P-mannose:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl mannosyltransferase.

Chantret I(1), Dupré T, Delenda C, Bucher S, Dancourt J, Barnier A, Charollais 
A, Heron D, Bader-Meunier B, Danos O, Seta N, Durand G, Oriol R, Codogno P, 
Moore SE.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Glycobiologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, INSERM U504, Bâtiment 
INSERM, 16 Avenue Paul Vaillant-Couturier, 94807 Villejuif, France.

Type I congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG I) are diseases presenting 
multisystemic lesions including central and peripheral nervous system deficits. 
The disease is characterized by under-glycosylated serum glycoproteins and is 
caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in the stepwise assembly 
of dolichol-oligosaccharide used for protein N-glycosylation. We report that 
fibroblasts from a type I CDG patient, born of consanguineous parents, are 
deficient in their capacity to add the eighth mannose residue onto the 
lipid-linked oligosaccharide precursor. We have characterized cDNA corresponding 
to the human ortholog of the yeast gene ALG12 that encodes the 
dolichyl-P-Man:Man(7)GlcNAc(2)-PP-dolichyl alpha6-mannosyltransferase that is 
thought to accomplish this reaction, and we show that the patient is homozygous 
for a point mutation (T571G) that causes an amino acid substitution (F142V) in a 
conserved region of the protein. As the pathological phenotype of the 
fibroblasts of the patient was largely normalized upon transduction with the 
wild type gene, we demonstrate that the F142V substitution is the underlying 
cause of this new CDG, which we suggest be called CDG Ig. Finally, we show that 
the fibroblasts of the patient are capable of the direct transfer of 
Man(7)GlcNAc(2) from dolichol onto protein and that this N-linked structure can 
be glucosylated by UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase in the 
endoplasmic reticulum.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203285200
PMID: 11983712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
