---
pmid: '17274630'
title: Nucleosome recognition by the Piccolo NuA4 histone acetyltransferase complex.
authors:
- Berndsen CE
- Selleck W
- McBryant SJ
- Hansen JC
- Tan S
- Denu JM
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1994252
doi: 10.1021/bi602366n
---

# Nucleosome recognition by the Piccolo NuA4 histone acetyltransferase complex.
**Authors:** Berndsen CE, Selleck W, McBryant SJ, Hansen JC, Tan S, Denu JM
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi602366n](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi602366n)
**PMC:** [PMC1994252](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1994252/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2007 Feb 27;46(8):2091-9. doi: 10.1021/bi602366n. Epub 2007 Feb
3.

Nucleosome recognition by the Piccolo NuA4 histone acetyltransferase complex.

Berndsen CE(1), Selleck W, McBryant SJ, Hansen JC, Tan S, Denu JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The mechanisms by which multisubunit histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes 
recognize and perform efficient acetylation on nucleosome substrates are largely 
unknown. Here, we use a variety of biochemical approaches and compare 
histone-based substrates of increasing complexity to determine the critical 
components of nucleosome recognition by the MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, Tip60 family 
HAT complex, Piccolo NuA4 (picNuA4). We find the histone tails to be dispensable 
for binding to both nucleosomes and free histones and that the H2A, H3, and H2B 
tails do not influence the ability of picNuA4 to tetra-acetylate the H4 tail 
within the nucleosome. Most notably, we discovered that the histone-fold domain 
(HFD) regions of histones, particularly residues 21-52 of H4, are critical for 
tight binding and efficient tail acetylation. Presented evidence suggests that 
picNuA4 recognizes the open surface of the nucleosome on which the HFD of H4 is 
located. This binding mechanism serves to direct substrate access to the tails 
of H4 and H2A and allows the enzyme to be "tethered", thereby increasing the 
effective concentration of the histone tail and permitting successive cycles of 
H4 tail acetylation.

DOI: 10.1021/bi602366n
PMCID: PMC1994252
PMID: 17274630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
