---
pmid: '17766369'
title: 'Crystal Structure of human pyridoxal kinase: structural basis of M(+) and
  M(2+) activation.'
authors:
- Musayev FN
- di Salvo ML
- Ko TP
- Gandhi AK
- Goswami A
- Schirch V
- Safo MK
journal: Protein Sci
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2204131
doi: 10.1110/ps.073022107
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal Structure of human pyridoxal kinase: structural basis of M(+) and M(2+) activation.
**Authors:** Musayev FN, di Salvo ML, Ko TP, Gandhi AK, Goswami A, Schirch V, Safo MK
**Journal:** Protein Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1110/ps.073022107](https://doi.org/10.1110/ps.073022107)
**PMC:** [PMC2204131](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2204131/)

## Abstract

1. Protein Sci. 2007 Oct;16(10):2184-94. doi: 10.1110/ps.073022107. Epub 2007 Aug
 31.

Crystal Structure of human pyridoxal kinase: structural basis of M(+) and M(2+) 
activation.

Musayev FN(1), di Salvo ML, Ko TP, Gandhi AK, Goswami A, Schirch V, Safo MK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy and Institute for 
Structural Biology and Drug Discovery, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, Virginia 23219, USA.

Pyridoxal kinase catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to the 5' 
alcohol of pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, and pyridoxal. In this work, kinetic 
studies were conducted to examine monovalent cation dependence of human 
pyridoxal kinase kinetic parameters. The results show that hPLK affinity for ATP 
and PL is increased manyfold in the presence of K(+) when compared to Na(+); 
however, the maximal activity of the Na(+) form of the enzyme is more than 
double the activity in the presence of K(+). Other monovalent cations, Li(+), 
Cs(+), and Rb(+) do not show significant activity. We have determined the 
crystal structure of hPLK in the unliganded form, and in complex with MgATP to 
2.0 and 2.2 A resolution, respectively. Overall, the two structures show similar 
open conformation, and likely represent the catalytically idle state. The 
crystal structure of the MgATP complex also reveals Mg(2+) and Na(+) acting in 
tandem to anchor the ATP at the active site. Interestingly, the active site of 
hPLK acts as a sink to bind several molecules of MPD. The features of monovalent 
and divalent metal cation binding, active site structure, and vitamin B6 
specificity are discussed in terms of the kinetic and structural studies, and 
are compared with those of the sheep and Escherichia coli enzymes.

DOI: 10.1110/ps.073022107
PMCID: PMC2204131
PMID: 17766369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
