---
pmid: '24286867'
title: Hsp90 activity is necessary to acquire a proper neuronal polarization.
authors:
- Benitez MJ
- Sanchez-Ponce D
- Garrido JJ
- Wandosell F
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.11.013
---

# Hsp90 activity is necessary to acquire a proper neuronal polarization.
**Authors:** Benitez MJ, Sanchez-Ponce D, Garrido JJ, Wandosell F
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.11.013)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1843(2):245-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.11.013. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Hsp90 activity is necessary to acquire a proper neuronal polarization.

Benitez MJ(1), Sanchez-Ponce D(2), Garrido JJ(3), Wandosell F(4).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa", CSIC-UAM, Univ. Autonoma de 
Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain; Dpto Química Física Aplicada, Univ. Autónoma de 
Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental 
Neurobiology, Madrid 28002, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain; Instituto Cajal, CSIC, Department 
of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology, Madrid 28002, Spain. 
Electronic address: jjgarrido@cajal.csic.es.
(4)Centro de Biología Molecular "Severo Ochoa", CSIC-UAM, Univ. Autonoma de 
Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre 
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
fwandosell@cbm.uam.es.

Chaperones are critical for the folding and regulation of a wide array of 
cellular proteins. Heat Shock Proteins (Hsps) are the most representative group 
of chaperones. Hsp90 represents up to 1-2% of soluble protein. Although the 
Hsp90 role is being studied in neurodegenerative diseases, its role in neuronal 
differentiation remains mostly unknown. Since neuronal polarity mechanisms 
depend on local stability and degradation, we asked whether Hsp90 could be a 
regulator of axonal polarity and growth. Thus, we studied the role of Hsp90 
activity in a well established model of cultured hippocampal neurons using an 
Hsp90 specific inhibitor, 17-AAG. Our present data shows that Hsp90 inhibition 
at different developmental stages disturbs neuronal polarity formation or axonal 
elongation. Hsp90 inhibition during the first 3h in culture promotes multiple 
axon morphology, while this inhibition after 3h slows down axonal elongation. 
Hsp90 inhibition was accompanied by decreased Akt and GSK3 expression, as well 
as, a reduced Akt activity. In parallel, we detected an alteration of kinesin-1 
subcellular distribution. Moreover, these effects were seconded by changes in 
Hsp70/Hsc70 subcellular localization that seem to compensate the lack of Hsp90 
activity. In conclusion, our data strongly suggests that Hsp90 activity is 
necessary to control the expression, activity or location of specific kinases 
and motor proteins during the axon specification and axon elongation processes. 
Even more, our data demonstrate the existence of a "time-window" for axon 
specification in this model of cultured neurons after which the inhibition of 
Hsp90 only affects axonal elongation mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.11.013
PMID: 24286867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
