---
pmid: '12065401'
title: Crystal structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin.
authors:
- Woo EJ
- Marshall J
- Bauly J
- Chen JG
- Venis M
- Napier RM
- Pickersgill RW
journal: EMBO J
year: '2002'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC126050
doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf291
---

# Crystal structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin.
**Authors:** Woo EJ, Marshall J, Bauly J, Chen JG, Venis M, Napier RM, Pickersgill RW
**Journal:** EMBO J (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/cdf291](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/cdf291)
**PMC:** [PMC126050](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC126050/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):2877-85. doi: 10.1093/emboj/cdf291.

Crystal structure of auxin-binding protein 1 in complex with auxin.

Woo EJ(1), Marshall J, Bauly J, Chen JG, Venis M, Napier RM, Pickersgill RW.

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, Mile End Road, London 
E1 4NS, UK.

The structure of auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) from maize has been determined 
at 1.9 A resolution, revealing its auxin-binding site. The structure confirms 
that ABP1 belongs to the ancient and functionally diverse germin/seed storage 7S 
protein superfamily. The binding pocket of ABP1 is predominantly hydrophobic 
with a metal ion deep inside the pocket coordinated by three histidines and a 
glutamate. Auxin binds within this pocket, with its carboxylate binding the zinc 
and its aromatic ring binding hydrophobic residues including Trp151. There is a 
single disulfide between Cys2 and Cys155. No conformational rearrangement of 
ABP1 was observed when auxin bound to the protein in the crystal, but 
examination of the structure reveals a possible mechanism of signal 
transduction.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/cdf291
PMCID: PMC126050
PMID: 12065401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The structure of auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1) from maize has been determined at 1.9 Å resolution, revealing its auxin-binding site. The structure confirms that ABP1 belongs to the ancient and functionally diverse germin/seed storage 7S protein superfamily. The binding pocket of ABP1 is predominantly hydrophobic with a metal ion deep inside the pocket coordinated by three histidines and a glutamate. Auxin binds within this pocket, with its carboxylate binding the zinc and its aromatic ring binding hydrophobic residues including Trp151. There is a single disulfide between Cys2 and Cys155. No conformational rearrangement of ABP1 was observed when auxin bound to the protein in the crystal, but examination of the structure reveals a possible mechanism of signal transduction.

Introduction

The plant hormone auxin regulates cell elongation, division, differentiation and morphogenesis. Synthetic auxin analogues are also important selective herbicides. The best candidate for an auxin receptor is auxin-binding protein 1 (ABP1), first studied in membrane fractions 30 years ago and subsequently isolated and purified ( Hertel et al., 1972 ; Venis, 1977 ; Jones, 1994 ). ABP1 is a soluble 22 kDa glycoprotein, ubiquitous amongst green plants, found predominantly within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and in smaller quantities at the cell surface associated with the plasma membrane ( Diekmann et al., 1995 ). ABP1 is dimeric in solution ( Shimomura et al., 1986 ) and has submicromolar affinity for auxins, consistent with its ability to bind free auxin at physiological concentrations ( Löbler and Klämbt, 1985 ). The most widely used assays for ABP1 receptor activity measure auxin-induced plasma membrane hyperpolarizations and ion fluxes in protoplasts ( Barbier-Brygoo et al., 1991 ; LeBlanc et al., 1999 ; David et al., 2001 ). Auxin-induced cell swelling of proteoplasts and intact guard cells can also be attributed to ABP1 ( Gehring et al., 1998 ; Steffens et al., 2001 ). Ectopic and inducible expression of ABP1 confers auxin-dependent cell expansion in tobacco cells normally lacking auxin responsiveness ( Jones et al., 1998 ); antisense suppression of ABP1 eliminates auxin-induced cell elongation and reduces cell division; and a homozygous null mutation in ABP1 confers embryo lethality in Arabidopsis ( Chen et al., 2001 ). ABP1 is therefore firmly implicated in mediating cell elongation and, directly or indirectly, cell division.

Attempts have been made to deduce the nature and location of the auxin-binding site of ABP1 based on group-reactive reagents ( Jones and Venis, 1989 ), the structure of its ligands ( Edgerton et al ., 1994 ), and by using photolabels ( Brown and Jones, 1994 ). Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy of ABP1 showed it to be a β-protein ( Shimomura et al ., 1986 ), and a change in the CD spectrum on auxin binding has been cited as indicating conformational change. The failure of antibodies to recognize the C-terminus when auxin is bound has also been cited as evidence for conformational change ( Napier and Venis, 1990 ).

ABP1 has two sequence motifs, HXH(X) 11 G and P(X) 4 H(X) 3 N (where X is any amino acid residue), that place it within a family of proteins (cupins) that includes germin and the vicilins ( Dunwell and Gane, 1998 ; Dunwell et al ., 2000 , 2001 ). A partial model of ABP1 was proposed by comparative modelling using the vicilin domains as a template ( Warwicker, 2001 ). This model suggested a metal-binding site within a β-barrel structure similar to that of germin ( Woo et al ., 2000a ). Additionally, the modelling suggested that the C-terminus competes for the auxin-binding site, thereby providing a model of conformational change ( Warwicker, 2001 ).

Discussion

The crystal structure reveals the architecture, disulfide arrangement and glycosylation of ABP1, and the structure of the ABP1 auxin-binding site. The overall similarity of the ABP1 subunit to that of germin is confirmed; however, substantial differences are also revealed. Previous work has suggested a disulfide bridge between Cys2 and Cys61 of maize ABP1 ( Feckler et al., 2001 ) and, for tobacco ABP1 expressed in Escherichia coli , a disulfide involving the residue equivalent to 155 ( David et al., 2001 ). The crystal structure reveals the single disulfide is between Cys2 and Cys155, with the third cysteine, Cys61, buried close to the zinc-binding site. The selectivity of ABP1 for auxins is explained by the characteristics of the binding pocket. The binding pocket is deep and hydrophobic except for the zinc ion at the bottom of the pocket.

No change in the conformation of ABP1 was observed when auxin binds in the crystal. The obvious conclusion is that there is no change in the structure of ABP1 when auxin binds in solution. Certainly the evidence for conformational change from far UV CD is not compelling, and the near UV CD spectral changes probably reflect the changing environment of aromatics when auxin binds ( Shimomura et al ., 1986 ). Conformational change is the most obvious explanation for the antibody-binding data. The antibody binds the auxin-free form but not the auxin-bound form of ABP1 ( Napier and Venis, 1990 ; David et al ., 2001 ). There is an alternative explanation for this observation; the antibody might induce a change in the structure of ABP1, one that is resisted by the more stable complex. However, if antibody binding does induce a change, this itself might suggest that conformational rearrangement of ABP1 is biologically important.

The contacts between the N-terminal extensions in the crystal lattice imply that conformational change involving the N- and C-terminal regions of ABP1 cannot be ruled out. The crystal contacts may be selecting a ‘crystallizable conformation’ of the protein in which the auxin-binding pocket is fully formed whether auxin is bound or not. It is unlikely that these crystal contacts could exist on the surface of a membrane. Alternatively, the interaction of ABP1 with membrane proteins may favour an alternative conformation of the extensions. We can therefore suggest a mechanism by which ABP1 may signal the presence of auxin to membrane-bound proteins. The auxin-free conformation of the extensions in ABP1 would be different, possibly because of the interaction of ABP1 with other components, possibly simply because of the lack of crystal contacts. The binding of auxin would then alter the position of Trp151 and cause the C-terminal helix to move. Because of the disulfide bridge, the N-terminal extension may also undergo some rearrangement (Figure 2 A). The rearrangement of the N- and C-terminal extensions would then signal the presence of auxin to membrane proteins, resulting in the observed changes in ion fluxes across the plasma membrane ( Theil et al ., 1993 ).

Studying the conformation of the extensions of ABP1 in other crystal forms and in the antibody (Fab)–ABP1 complex will illuminate the effect of crystal packing and antibody binding on the conformation of the extensions of ABP1 and lead to a fuller understanding of the role of ABP1 in auxin signal transduction. Ultimately, the goal is to identify the proteins with which ABP1 interacts in vivo and study their interactions in detail.
