---
pmid: '17090404'
title: Asymmetric subcellular distribution of glucose transporters in the endothelium
  of small contractile arteries.
authors:
- Gaudreault N
- Scriven DR
- Moore ED
journal: Endothelium
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/10623320600972085
---

# Asymmetric subcellular distribution of glucose transporters in the endothelium of small contractile arteries.
**Authors:** Gaudreault N, Scriven DR, Moore ED
**Journal:** Endothelium (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10623320600972085](https://doi.org/10.1080/10623320600972085)

## Abstract

1. Endothelium. 2006 Sep-Oct;13(5):317-24. doi: 10.1080/10623320600972085.

Asymmetric subcellular distribution of glucose transporters in the endothelium 
of small contractile arteries.

Gaudreault N(1), Scriven DR, Moore ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The authors have recently reported the presence and asymmetric distribution of 
the glucose transporters GLUT-1 to -5 and SGLT-1 in the endothelium of rat 
coronary artery (Gaudreault et al. 2004, Diabetologica, 47, 2081-2092). In the 
present study the authors investigate and compare the presence and subcellular 
distribution of the classic glucose transporter isoforms in endothelial cells of 
cerebral, renal, and mesenteric arteries. The GLUTs and SGLT-1 were examined 
with immunohistochemistry and wide-field fluorescence microscopy coupled to 
deconvolution in en face preparation of intact artery. We identified GLUT-1 to 
-5 and SGLT-1 in the endothelial cells of all three vascular beds. The relative 
level of expression for each isoform was found comparable amongst arteries. 
Clusters of the glucose transporter isoforms were found at a high density in 
proximity to the cell-to-cell junctions. In addition, a consistent asymmetric 
distribution of GLUT-1 to -5 was found, predominantly located on the abluminal 
side of the endothelium in all three vascular beds examined (ranging from 68% to 
91%, p<.05). The authors conclude that the expression and subcellular 
distribution of glucose transporters are similar in endothelial cells from 
vascular beds of comparable diameter and suggest that their subcellular 
organization may facilitate transendothelial transport of glucose in small 
contractile arteries.

DOI: 10.1080/10623320600972085
PMID: 17090404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
