---
pmid: '23200991'
title: Cdc42 explores the cell periphery for mate selection in fission yeast.
authors:
- Bendezú FO
- Martin SG
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.042
---

# Cdc42 explores the cell periphery for mate selection in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Bendezú FO, Martin SG
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.042](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.042)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2013 Jan 7;23(1):42-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.042. Epub 2012
Nov  29.

Cdc42 explores the cell periphery for mate selection in fission yeast.

Bendezú FO(1), Martin SG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, 
University of Lausanne, Biophore Building, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Jan 7;23(1):R10-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.11.037.

How cells polarize in response to external cues is a fundamental biological 
problem. For mating, yeast cells orient growth toward the source of a pheromone 
gradient produced by cells of the opposite mating type. Polarized growth depends 
on the small GTPase Cdc42, a central eukaryotic polarity regulator that controls 
signaling, cytoskeleton polarization, and vesicle trafficking. However, the 
mechanisms of polarity establishment and mate selection in complex cellular 
environments are poorly understood. Here we show that, in fission yeast, 
low-level pheromone signaling promotes a novel polarization state, where active 
Cdc42, its GEF Scd1, and scaffold Scd2 form colocalizing dynamic zones that 
sample the periphery of the cell. Two direct Cdc42 effectors--actin cables 
marked by myosin V Myo52 and the exocyst complex labeled by Sec6 and Sec8--also 
dynamically colocalize with active Cdc42. However, these cells do not grow due 
to a block in the exocytosis of cell wall synthases Bgs1 and Bgs4. High-level 
pheromone stabilizes active Cdc42 zones and promotes cell wall synthase 
exocytosis and polarized growth. However, in the absence of prior low-level 
pheromone signaling, exploration fails, and cells polarize growth at cell poles 
by default. Consequently, these cells show altered partner choice, mating 
preferentially with sister rather than nonsister cells. Thus, Cdc42 exploration 
serves to orient growth for partner selection. This process may also promote 
genetic diversification.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.10.042
PMID: 23200991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
