---
pmid: '11740561'
title: Kinesin-mediated axonal transport of a membrane compartment containing beta-secretase
  and presenilin-1 requires APP.
authors:
- Kamal A
- Almenar-Queralt A
- LeBlanc JF
- Roberts EA
- Goldstein LS
journal: Nature
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/414643a
---

# Kinesin-mediated axonal transport of a membrane compartment containing beta-secretase and presenilin-1 requires APP.
**Authors:** Kamal A, Almenar-Queralt A, LeBlanc JF, Roberts EA, Goldstein LS
**Journal:** Nature (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/414643a](https://doi.org/10.1038/414643a)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2001 Dec 6;414(6864):643-8. doi: 10.1038/414643a.

Kinesin-mediated axonal transport of a membrane compartment containing 
beta-secretase and presenilin-1 requires APP.

Kamal A(1), Almenar-Queralt A, LeBlanc JF, Roberts EA, Goldstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0683, USA.

Proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) generates amyloid-beta 
peptide and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. 
However, the normal function of APP, whether this function is related to the 
proteolytic processing of APP, and where this processing takes place in neurons 
in vivo remain unknown. We have previously shown that the axonal transport of 
APP in neurons is mediated by the direct binding of APP to the kinesin light 
chain subunit of kinesin-I, a microtubule motor protein. Here we identify an 
axonal membrane compartment that contains APP, beta-secretase and presenilin-1. 
The fast anterograde axonal transport of this compartment is mediated by APP and 
kinesin-I. Proteolytic processing of APP can occur in the compartment in vitro 
and in vivo in axons. This proteolysis generates amyloid-beta and a 
carboxy-terminal fragment of APP, and liberates kinesin-I from the membrane. 
These results suggest that APP functions as a kinesin-I membrane receptor, 
mediating the axonal transport of beta-secretase and presenilin-1, and that 
processing of APP to amyloid-beta by secretases can occur in an axonal membrane 
compartment transported by kinesin-I.

DOI: 10.1038/414643a
PMID: 11740561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
