---
pmid: '29712776'
title: eIF5A is required for autophagy by mediating ATG3 translation.
authors:
- Lubas M
- Harder LM
- Kumsta C
- Tiessen I
- Hansen M
- Andersen JS
- Lund AH
- Frankel LB
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5989740
doi: 10.15252/embr.201846072
---

# eIF5A is required for autophagy by mediating ATG3 translation.
**Authors:** Lubas M, Harder LM, Kumsta C, Tiessen I, Hansen M, Andersen JS, Lund AH, Frankel LB
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201846072](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201846072)
**PMC:** [PMC5989740](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5989740/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2018 Jun;19(6):e46072. doi: 10.15252/embr.201846072. Epub 2018 Apr
30.

eIF5A is required for autophagy by mediating ATG3 translation.

Lubas M(1), Harder LM(2), Kumsta C(3), Tiessen I(1), Hansen M(3), Andersen 
JS(2), Lund AH(4), Frankel LB(4).

Author information:
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(3)Program of Development, Aging and Regeneration, Sanford Burnham Prebys 
Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark anders.lund@bric.ku.dk lisa.frankel@bric.ku.dk.

Autophagy is an essential catabolic process responsible for recycling of 
intracellular material and preserving cellular fidelity. Key to the autophagy 
pathway is the ubiquitin-like conjugation system mediating lipidation of Atg8 
proteins and their anchoring to autophagosomal membranes. While regulation of 
autophagy has been characterized at the level of transcription, protein 
interactions and post-translational modifications, its translational regulation 
remains elusive. Here we describe a role for the conserved eukaryotic 
translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) in autophagy. Identified from a 
high-throughput screen, we find that eIF5A is required for lipidation of LC3B 
and its paralogs and promotes autophagosome formation. This feature is 
evolutionarily conserved and results from the translation of the E2-like ATG3 
protein. Mechanistically, we identify an amino acid motif in ATG3 causing eIF5A 
dependency for its efficient translation. Our study identifies eIF5A as a key 
requirement for autophagosome formation and demonstrates the importance of 
translation in mediating efficient autophagy.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201846072
PMCID: PMC5989740
PMID: 29712776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Autophagy is an essential catabolic process responsible for recycling of intracellular material and preserving cellular fidelity. Key to the autophagy pathway is the ubiquitin‐like conjugation system mediating lipidation of Atg8 proteins and their anchoring to autophagosomal membranes. While regulation of autophagy has been characterized at the level of transcription, protein interactions and post‐translational modifications, its translational regulation remains elusive. Here we describe a role for the conserved eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A) in autophagy. Identified from a high‐throughput screen, we find that eIF5A is required for lipidation of LC3B and its paralogs and promotes autophagosome formation. This feature is evolutionarily conserved and results from the translation of the E2‐like ATG3 protein. Mechanistically, we identify an amino acid motif in ATG3 causing eIF5A dependency for its efficient translation. Our study identifies eIF5A as a key requirement for autophagosome formation and demonstrates the importance of translation in mediating efficient autophagy.

Introduction

Macroautophagy, hereafter referred to as autophagy, is an evolutionarily conserved catabolic process targeting intracellular components for lysosomal degradation 1 . This process, which operates at basal levels in all eukaryotic cells, is essential for preserving cellular fidelity through nutrient recycling and by mediating effective clearance of damaged or superfluous cytoplasmic material. Intensive efforts have unveiled multiple components of the basic autophagy machinery that allow for highly controlled, fine‐tuned execution of this vesicular trafficking system 2 , 3 . The fundamental importance of autophagy is demonstrated by the fact that its dysregulation is implicated in multiple human diseases including neurodegeneration, infection and cancer 4 , 5 .

Key to autophagy is the formation of double‐membrane structures called phagophores, which sequester cellular components while growing to form sphere‐like, closed organelles called autophagosomes 1 . Autophagosomes ultimately fuse with acidic, hydrolase‐containing lysosomes to form autolysosomes where cargo digestion occurs 3 . The core autophagy machinery consists of a large group of autophagy‐related (ATG) proteins, most of which were originally identified in yeast, that work together through complex mechanisms to execute the various steps in the pathway 1 , 6 . Key to this machinery is the Atg8 family of ubiquitin‐like proteins, which associate with the growing phagophore through conjugation to the lipid phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) 7 . While only one Atg8 exists in yeast, humans have six Atg8 homologs comprising two families: the microtubule‐associated protein 1 light chain 3 (MAP1LC3 or LC3) proteins including MAP1LC3A, MAP1LC3B, MAP1LC3C and the γ‐amino‐butyric acid (GABA) receptor‐associated (GABARAP) proteins including GABARAP, GABARAPL1 and GABARAPL2/GATE‐16 8 . A unique and highly conserved ubiquitin‐like conjugation system involving the sequential action of the E1‐like ATG7, the E2‐like ATG3 and the E3‐like ATG12–ATG5–ATG16L1 complex mediates lipidation of LC3 and GABARAP proteins, thereby anchoring them to the membrane 9 , 10 . From a functional perspective, this ubiquitin‐like conjugation system is crucial in ensuring proper autophagosome formation 11 as well as for driving subsequent steps of autophagosome maturation, including cargo capture, membrane expansion and sealing and lysosome targeting/fusion 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 . The importance of the Atg3 enzyme, a main player in this pathway and catalyser of the lipid conjugation reaction, is emphasized by the finding that Atg3‐deficient mice display severe defects in autophagosome formation and die within 1 day after birth 11 . While the molecular functions of ATG3 are well understood, the mechanisms governing its regulation remain unclear.

Emerging evidence of autophagy regulation by RNA‐binding proteins (RBPs) has recently been reviewed 16 , including examples of post‐transcriptional regulation of key autophagy mRNAs via stability or translational control 17 , 18 , 19 . In fact, RBPs comprise almost 10% of the human proteome and play key roles in most aspects of cellular function 20 . Besides well‐described contributions of RBPs to major cellular processes including transcription, translation, RNA processing, localization and decay, more recent elucidation of RBP function revealed novel links to metabolic signalling pathways 21 , 22 , 23 . In search for autophagy regulators among RBPs, we found the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A, eIF5A, initially characterized as a translation initiation factor 24 , 25 , but subsequently implicated in translation elongation 26 , 27 , 28 . eIF5A is broadly conserved and contains the highly unusual amino acid hypusine, which is formed by a unique post‐translational modification of a specific lysine residue 29 . Importantly, the hypusine residue has been ascribed a critical role in eIF5A‐mediated translation 26 , 27 , 30 , 31 . Yeast eIF5A and its bacterial ortholog EF‐P have been shown to specifically promote translation of troublesome poly‐proline motifs 27 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 leading to a model in which eIF5A/EF‐P binds to and prevents ribosomes from stalling during translation of geometrically challenging amino acid stretches 31 , 36 . Recent advances in yeast suggest that this does not only hold true for poly‐prolines, but also for a broader range of amino acid motifs 37 , 38 . eIF5A is highly conserved in higher eukaryotes including humans where it is also known to be hypusinated 39 , yet little is known concerning the mechanisms for eIF5A function with the ribosome in protein synthesis of mammalian cells.

Here we present a high‐throughput comprehensive siRNA screen identifying RBPs, which affect the autophagy process. Among the top hits, we identify eIF5A as a positive effector of autophagy, through a mechanism ascribed to translation. We find that eIF5A depletion interferes with lipidation of LC3B and its family members and inhibits autophagosome formation. Importantly, these defects are effectively rescued by wild type, but not by a hypusination‐defective mutant of eIF5A. By employing a global proteomics‐based approach, we identify the E2‐like ATG3 protein as a direct translational target of eIF5A. We show that eIF5A, by ensuring efficient translation of ATG3, is required for LC3B lipidation. In addition, we identify a tripeptide motif in the ATG3 sequence, which contributes to its translational dependency on eIF5A. Collectively, our data shed light on a previously unknown mechanistic requirement for translation of a core autophagy protein, ATG3, necessary for a key biochemical step in the autophagy pathway.

Discussion

The autophagy process is tightly controlled at multiple levels. This ensures that a fine‐tuned balance is maintained to manage the cellular needs for quality control and nutrient availability, while at the same time preventing excessive degradation of crucial cellular components 3 . Although the regulatory mechanisms governing this control are well studied in terms of protein interactions, post‐translational modifications and transcriptional regulation of ATG proteins 56 , 57 , 58 , the regulation of ATG protein production at the translational level is not well investigated. The data presented here reveal a novel requirement for ATG3 translation, helping us to understand the complexity of this fundamental process.

Prompted by recent literature assigning novel functions to RBPs with links to metabolic signalling pathways including autophagy 16 , 21 , 22 , 23 , we here present a high‐throughput screen identifying several RBP candidates with functional effects in autophagy regulation. Our screen not only sheds light on novel regulatory mechanisms of autophagy regulation, but also provides a strong resource for the research community. A top candidate from this screen was the highly conserved translation factor, eIF5A, found to positively impact autophagy. Specifically, we show that eIF5A is a limiting factor for lipidation of LC3B and its mammalian paralogs GABARAP and GATE‐16, and hence required for proper autophagosome formation. Our proteomics approach elucidated the key finding that the translation of the E2‐like enzyme ATG3, a crucial factor in autophagosome formation 11 , 59 , 60 , is hyperdependent on eIF5A. Indeed, it is known that depletion of ATG3 blocks accumulation of LC3B puncta and renders cells incapable of forming lipidated LC3B (LC3B‐II). Moreover, it has previously been shown that Atg3 KO mice display hampered membrane elongation and closure, resulting both in malformation and reduced number of autophagosomes 11 , 60 . Likewise, mutation of Atg3 in yeast results in inefficient expansion of the isolation membrane and leads to the formation of smaller autophagosomes 59 . Our own observations strongly support these findings by establishing that eIF5A depletion and thereby reduced ATG3 translation not only inhibits lipidation of LC3B and its paralogs and decreases autophagosome number, but also causes a reduction in autophagosome size, as revealed by electron microscopy experiments. In addition, the increase in ATG16L1 puncta seen upon eIF5A depletion suggests the accumulation of pre‐autophagosomal intermediate structures, similar to what has been previously observed upon ATG3 depletion 11 , 60 . Indeed, the Atg12–Atg5–Atg16L complex is localized on the isolation membrane during elongation, but disassociates again before completion of mature autophagosomes 44 . While we observe lipidation phenotypes in a panel of mammalian cells, including human and mouse normal and cancer cell lines, we additionally find that depletion of the eIF5A homolog iff‐2 in C. elegans decreases the number of GFP::LGG‐1 puncta in the body‐wall muscle and terminal pharyngeal bulb. Thus, although it is important to acknowledge the likely role of eIF5A in several cellular processes, our data strongly advocate for the evolutionary conservation, and thus broad functional importance, of this newly described role for eIF5A.

eIF5A has mainly been studied as a somewhat inert regulator of translation, and to our knowledge, little is known concerning the dynamics of eIF5A function or for instance whether it displays differential expression, activity and/or subcellular localization during conditions of cellular stress. One study showed that eIF5A contributes to stress granule assembly and that it differentially modulates translation in the absence or presence of arsenite‐induced stress 53 . Interestingly, while mTORC1 inhibition via starvation or Torin‐1 treatment did not affect eIF5A expression levels, we observed an increase of eIF5A in ribosome‐enriched fractions and increased eIF5A‐mediated retrieval of ribosomal proteins and rRNA under these conditions. The reason for this enhanced association is unknown and will require further investigation. This result underscores the physiological relevance of our findings and leads us to propose a model in which eIF5A displays increased binding to ribosomes under conditions of autophagy induction where it is needed to assist the translation likely of several proteins including ATG3. Whether this enhanced ribosomal binding could result from an active recruitment or increased stabilization of eIF5A remains unknown. The increased production of ATG3 protein resulting from this in turn mediates a positive regulation of the autophagy response via increased lipidation of Atg8 family proteins, enabling efficient autophagosome formation (Fig 6 ).

eIF5A has been proposed to play an essential role in facilitating slow or difficult reactions encountered at the ribosome peptidyl‐transferase centre during translation 27 , 36 , 61 . Notably, its hypusination stabilizes the association of eIF5A with the ribosome 47 , 48 , 49 and has been ascribed a key role in eIF5A‐mediated translation 26 , 27 , 30 , 31 . Moreover, eIF5A is proposed to be particularly critical for the translation of poor ribosome substrates or geometrically challenging amino acid motifs 30 , 31 . Interestingly, we found that inhibition of eIF5A hypusination by K50 mutation or GC7 treatment effectively impaired the induction of GFP‐LC3B puncta mediated by eIF5A overexpression. Moreover, the LC3B lipidation defect was efficiently rescued by WT eIF5A but not by its hypusination‐defective mutant. Hence, in contrast to previous indications 62 , these findings collectively suggest the importance of this highly unique post‐translational modification. Remarkably, spermidine, which is the donor for hypusination, is also well characterized as an autophagy inducer 63 . Yet, it remains unknown whether spermidine‐induced autophagy can, to some extent, be attributed to activation of eIF5A via hypusination. Working in Drosophila , Patel et al 64 hypothesized a role for eIF5A and the deoxyhypusine hydrolase homolog nero in autophagy. In contrast to our data in mammalian cell lines and C. elegans , loss of eIF5A or lack of its hypusination in larvae resulted in the appearance of Atg8‐positive structures perhaps indicating stress induction. However, mechanistic aspects of these findings remain unclear.

In agreement with previous studies from both yeast and human cells 52 , 53 , 54 , we did not detect noticeable effects of eIF5A depletion on global translation in our cellular system, supporting the idea that eIF5A is less important for general protein synthesis, and instead required for more specific translation of a subset of mRNAs. One defining characteristic of such mRNAs is the amino acid stretches they encode. Indeed, initial functional studies of yeast eIF5A and its bacterial ortholog EF‐P focused on hard‐to‐translate poly‐proline stretches, which were shown to cause ribosome stalling in the absence of eIF5A/EF‐P 27 , 32 , 33 . Two recent studies, utilizing transcriptome‐wide ribosome profiling and 5′‐phosphorylated RNA sequencing, suggest that there are, at least in yeast, several additional eIF5A‐dependent motifs 37 , 38 . In fact, among 29 identified tripeptide pause motifs, 18 do not contain more than one proline, and four (DVG, DDG, GGT, RDK) are completely devoid of proline 37 . Since the details of eIF5A function in translation have not been fully addressed in mammalian cells, the importance of poly‐prolines for eIF5A function in mammals remains unknown. Surprisingly, our study shows that while four consecutive prolines in the sequence of ATG3 had little or no effect on ATG3 regulation by eIF5A, mutation of a motif devoid of prolines, DDG, clearly reduced the sensitivity of ATG3 to eIF5A depletion. Interestingly, poly‐proline enrichment was neither found among total proteome changes occurring in HeLa cells after knockdown of eIF5A 52 nor in our own nascent proteomics data (not shown). Undoubtedly, future efforts including in‐depth ribosome profiling analysis in mammalian cells will help us to unravel these mechanistic details further. While the DDG motif is not fully conserved in C. elegans Atg3 , there are two additional potential eIF5A‐sensitive tripeptide motifs present the C. elegans Atg3 homolog. Thus, it is possible that iff‐2 acts via an another motif or an alternative mechanism to affect autophagy in C. elegans .

While the vast majority of studies exploring core autophagy regulation via ATG proteins has focused mainly on their molecular actions, less attention has been given to mechanisms ensuring their adequate levels of production. More elaborate insight has been obtained with regard to transcriptional control of ATG transcripts 57 , 65 , 66 , 67 , though only a small handful of studies have addressed aspects of translational regulation of ATG proteins 17 , 68 . Importantly, the highly dynamic nature of autophagy, its importance in stress response and the potentially detrimental consequences of its dysregulation all underscore the necessity for its tightly coordinated control at multiple levels. Our findings highlight novel insight towards the translational requirements for LC3B lipidation and autophagosome formation.
