---
pmid: '32783947'
title: NACHO Engages N-Glycosylation ER Chaperone Pathways for α7 Nicotinic Receptor
  Assembly.
authors:
- Kweon HJ
- Gu S
- Witham E
- Dhara M
- Yu H
- Mandon ED
- Jawhari A
- Bredt DS
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108025
---

# NACHO Engages N-Glycosylation ER Chaperone Pathways for α7 Nicotinic Receptor Assembly.
**Authors:** Kweon HJ, Gu S, Witham E, Dhara M, Yu H, Mandon ED, Jawhari A, Bredt DS
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108025)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2020 Aug 11;32(6):108025. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108025.

NACHO Engages N-Glycosylation ER Chaperone Pathways for α7 Nicotinic Receptor 
Assembly.

Kweon HJ(1), Gu S(1), Witham E(1), Dhara M(1), Yu H(1), Mandon ED(2), Jawhari 
A(2), Bredt DS(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Discovery, Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & 
Johnson, 3210 Merryfield Row, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
(2)CALIXAR, 60 Avenue Rockefeller, 69008 Lyon, France.
(3)Neuroscience Discovery, Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & 
Johnson, 3210 Merryfield Row, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. Electronic address: 
dbredt@its.jnj.com.

The α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor participates in diverse aspects of brain 
physiology and disease. Neurons tightly control α7 assembly, which relies upon 
NACHO, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized integral membrane protein. By 
constructing α7 chimeras and mutants, we find that NACHO requires the α7 
ectodomain to promote receptor assembly and surface trafficking. Also critical 
are two amino acids in the α7 second transmembrane domain. NACHO-mediated 
assembly is independent and separable from that induced by cholinergic ligands 
or RIC-3 protein, the latter of which acts on the large α7 intracellular loop. 
Proteomics indicates that NACHO associates with the ER oligosaccharyltransferase 
machinery and with calnexin. Accordingly, NACHO-mediated effects on α7 assembly 
and channel function require N-glycosylation and calnexin chaperone activity. 
These studies identify ER pathways that mediate α7 assembly by NACHO and provide 
insights into novel pharmacological strategies for these crucial nicotinic 
receptors.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108025
PMID: 32783947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests E.D.M. and A.J. are 
employees of CALIXAR, which has patent applications covering some of the CALX 
detergents described in this paper. The other authors are all full-time 
employees of Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies of Johnson & Johnson.
