---
pmid: '14739300'
title: Src kinase activity is essential for osteoclast function.
authors:
- Miyazaki T
- Sanjay A
- Neff L
- Tanaka S
- Horne WC
- Baron R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311032200
---

# Src kinase activity is essential for osteoclast function.
**Authors:** Miyazaki T, Sanjay A, Neff L, Tanaka S, Horne WC, Baron R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311032200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311032200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17660-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311032200. Epub
2004  Jan 22.

Src kinase activity is essential for osteoclast function.

Miyazaki T(1), Sanjay A, Neff L, Tanaka S, Horne WC, Baron R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Deletion of the c-src gene impairs osteoclast bone resorbing activity, causing 
osteopetrosis. Although it has been concluded that restoring only the Src 
adaptor function at least partly rescues the cell attachment and skeletal 
phenotypes, the contribution of Src kinase activity remains controversial. Src 
forms a complex with Pyk2 and Cbl after adhesion-induced stimulation of 
alpha(V)beta(3) integrin. To demonstrate the importance of the Pyk2-Src 
association in osteoclasts and to distinguish the contributions of the Src 
adaptor and kinase activities in cytoskeletal organization and osteoclast 
function, we expressed mutants of Src and Pyk2 in osteoclasts using adenovirus 
vectors. Eliminating the Src-binding site on Pyk2 (Pyk2(Y402F)) markedly 
inhibited bone resorption by osteoclast-like cells, whereas kinase-dead Pyk2 had 
little effect. Kinase-dead Src, unlike kinase-dead Pyk2, markedly inhibited the 
bone-resorbing activity of wild type osteoclasts and failed to significantly 
restore bone-resorbing activity to Src(-/-) osteoclast-like cells. Activation of 
Src kinase by overexpressing kinase-dead Csk failed to reverse the inhibitory 
effect of Pyk2(Y402F), suggesting that osteoclastic bone resorption requires 
both c-Src kinase activity and the targeting of Src kinase by Pyk2. 
Src-catalyzed phosphorylation of Cbl on Tyr-731 is reported to induce the 
activation and recruitment of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to the cell membrane 
in a signaling pathway that is critical for osteoclast function. Expressing the 
Cbl(Y731F) mutant in osteoclasts markedly reduced their bone resorbing activity, 
suggesting that phosphorylation of Cbl(Y731) and the subsequent recruitment and 
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase may be critical signaling events 
downstream of Src in osteoclasts.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311032200
PMID: 14739300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
