---
pmid: '24209620'
title: A Cul4 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates histone hand-off during nucleosome assembly.
authors:
- Han J
- Zhang H
- Zhang H
- Wang Z
- Zhou H
- Zhang Z
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3994564
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.014
---

# A Cul4 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates histone hand-off during nucleosome assembly.
**Authors:** Han J, Zhang H, Zhang H, Wang Z, Zhou H, Zhang Z
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.014)
**PMC:** [PMC3994564](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3994564/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):817-29. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.014.

A Cul4 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates histone hand-off during nucleosome 
assembly.

Han J(1), Zhang H, Zhang H, Wang Z, Zhou H, Zhang Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

Nucleosome assembly following DNA replication and gene transcription is 
important to maintain genome stability and epigenetic information. Newly 
synthesized histones H3-H4 first bind histone chaperone Asf1 and are then 
transferred to other chaperones for nucleosome assembly. However, it is unknown 
how H3-H4 is transferred from the Asf1-H3-H4 complex to other chaperones because 
Asf1 binds H3-H4 with high affinity. Here, we show that yeast Rtt101(Mms1) E3 
ubiquitin ligase preferentially binds and ubiquitylates new histone H3 
acetylated at lysine 56. Inactivation of Rtt101 or mutating H3 lysine residues 
ubiquitylated by the Rtt101(Mms1) ligase impairs nucleosome assembly and 
promotes Asf1-H3 interactions. Similar phenotypes occur in human cells in which 
the ortholog of Rtt101(Mms1), Cul4A(DDB1), is depleted. These results indicate 
that the transfer of H3-H4 from the Asf1-H3-H4 complex to other histone 
chaperones is regulated by a conserved E3 ligase and provide evidence for 
crosstalk between histone acetylation and ubiquitylation in nucleosome assembly.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.014
PMCID: PMC3994564
PMID: 24209620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
