---
pmid: '16601204'
title: Functions of hUpf3a and hUpf3b in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and translation.
authors:
- Kunz JB
- Neu-Yilik G
- Hentze MW
- Kulozik AE
- Gehring NH
journal: RNA
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1464862
doi: 10.1261/rna.12506
---

# Functions of hUpf3a and hUpf3b in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and translation.
**Authors:** Kunz JB, Neu-Yilik G, Hentze MW, Kulozik AE, Gehring NH
**Journal:** RNA (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.12506](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.12506)
**PMC:** [PMC1464862](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1464862/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2006 Jun;12(6):1015-22. doi: 10.1261/rna.12506. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Functions of hUpf3a and hUpf3b in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and translation.

Kunz JB(1), Neu-Yilik G, Hentze MW, Kulozik AE, Gehring NH.

Author information:
(1)Department for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University of 
Heidelberg, Germany.

The exon-junction complex (EJC) components hUpf3a and hUpf3b serve a dual 
function: They promote nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and they also 
regulate translation efficiency. Whether these two functions are interdependent 
or independent of each other is unknown. We characterized the function of the 
hUpf3 proteins in a lambdaN/boxB-based tethering system. Despite the high degree 
of sequence similarity between hUpf3b and hUpf3a, hUpf3a is much less active 
than hUpf3b to induce NMD and to stimulate translation. We show that induction 
of NMD by hUpf3 proteins requires interaction with Y14, Magoh, BTZ, and 
eIF4AIII. The protein region that mediates this interaction and discriminates 
between hUpf3a and hUpf3b in NMD function is located in the C-terminal domain 
and fully contained within a small sequence that is highly conserved in Upf3b 
but not Upf3a proteins. Stimulation of translation is independent of this 
interaction and is determined by other regions of the hUpf3 protein, indicating 
the presence of different downstream pathways of hUpf3 proteins either in NMD or 
in translation.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.12506
PMCID: PMC1464862
PMID: 16601204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The exon–junction complex (EJC) components hUpf3a and hUpf3b serve a dual function: They promote nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), and they also regulate translation efficiency. Whether these two functions are interdependent or independent of each other is unknown. We characterized the function of the hUpf3 proteins in a λN/boxB-based tethering system. Despite the high degree of sequence similarity between hUpf3b and hUpf3a, hUpf3a is much less active than hUpf3b to induce NMD and to stimulate translation. We show that induction of NMD by hUpf3 proteins requires interaction with Y14, Magoh, BTZ, and eIF4AIII. The protein region that mediates this interaction and discriminates between hUpf3a and hUpf3b in NMD function is located in the C-terminal domain and fully contained within a small sequence that is highly conserved in Upf3b but not Upf3a proteins. Stimulation of translation is independent of this interaction and is determined by other regions of the hUpf3 protein, indicating the presence of different downstream pathways of hUpf3 proteins either in NMD or in translation.

INTRODUCTION

Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a gene expression surveillance mechanism reported in all eukaryotic organisms analyzed. In humans, the activity of NMD modulates the phenotype of acquired and hereditary disorders ( Hall and Thein 1994 ; Wilschanski et al. 2003 ; Holbrook et al. 2004 ) by degrading transcripts with premature termination codons arising from errors in transcription or splicing, from mutated genes, or from genes that are physiologically regulated by NMD ( He et al. 2003 ; Mendell et al. 2004 ). Thus, NMD is of general biological and medical importance. Mechanistically, NMD depends on splicing, translation, and a number of trans -acting protein factors, such as the Upf and Smg proteins ( Gonzalez et al. 2001 ; Schell et al. 2002 ; Maquat 2004 ).

According to current models of mammalian NMD, the exon–junction complex (EJC) is deposited on the mRNA during splicing at a position 20–24 nt upstream of exon–exon boundaries ( Le Hir et al. 2001 ). Components of the EJC, namely Y14 (RBM8A), Magoh, RNPS1, eIF4AIII (DDX48, Nuk34), and Barentsz (BTZ, MLN51, CASC3), are involved in the definition of the exon–intron junctions during NMD ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2001 ; Fribourg et al. 2003 ; Gehring et al. 2003 ; Chan et al. 2004 ; Degot et al. 2004 ; Ferraiuolo et al. 2004 ; Palacios et al. 2004 ; Shibuya et al. 2004 ). Recently, we have shown that these EJC components define two functionally distinguishable EJC subgroups: RNPS1-type EJCs require normal levels of UPF2 to trigger efficient NMD, whereas Y14-Magoh-eIF4AIII-BTZ-type EJCs even activate NMD in UPF2-depleted cells and thus tolerate very low UPF2 levels ( Gehring et al. 2005 ). In the cytoplasm, the translating ribosome removes EJCs and associated NMD factors within the open reading frame, which validates the mRNA for the pool of stable translated mRNAs. If, however, the ribosome terminates at a stop codon upstream of an EJC, it is thought to recruit hUpf1, possibly via an interaction of hUpf1 with the peptide release factors. hUpf1 is required for the degradation of all known NMD substrates, which is thought to involve both decapping and deadenylation ( Lejeune et al. 2003 ).

EJCs play a role not only in NMD, but in several other post-transcriptional steps of gene expression ( Tange et al. 2004 ). The EJC's role in nucleocytoplasmic transport is indicated by the interaction of REF/Aly with export factors such as TAP/p15 ( Stutz et al. 2000 ; Zhou et al. 2000 ). The EJC has also been shown to enhance translation when deposited within an ORF by increasing the proportion of mRNAs associated with polysomes ( Lu and Cullen 2003 ; Nott et al. 2003 , 2004 ).

In vertebrates, two homologs of the yeast Upf3 protein exist, termed hUpf3a and hUpf3b ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ) or hUpf3 and hUpf3X, respectively ( Serin et al. 2001 ). Two splice variants of hUpf3a, hUpf3aL and hUpf3aS, have been described that either retain or skip exon 4. Each hUpf3 mRNA isoform and splice variant is expressed in all adult tissue types examined ( Serin et al. 2001 ). hUpf3a and hUpf3b are predominantly nuclear and shuttle between nucleus and cytoplasm ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ; Serin et al. 2001 ). Both hUpf3 proteins preferentially associate with spliced rather than unspliced mRNA, indicating that the process of splicing and EJC recruitment facilitates their interaction with mRNAs ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ). hUpf3aL and hUpf3b can bind hUpf2 ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ; Serin et al. 2001 ), an interaction that is conserved from yeast to humans. The cocrystal structure of the interacting domains of hUpf2 and hUpf3b revealed that the N-terminal RNP domain (ribonucleoprotein-type RNA-binding domain, also known as RNA recognition motif, RRM) of hUpf3b interacts hydrophilically with the C-terminal MIF4G (middle portion of eIF4G) domain of hUpf2 ( Kadlec et al. 2004 ). Although the interaction between Upf3 and Upf2 is evolutionarily widely conserved, it is not required for the NMD activity of tethered hUpf3b, suggesting either that tethering of hUpf3b to the RNA bypasses the hUpf2-requiring step of NMD or that the interaction with hUpf2 is a redundant step within the NMD process ( Gehring et al. 2003 , 2005 ). By contrast, the C-terminal domain of hUpf3b is essential for NMD and is needed to assemble a complex containing the Y14/Magoh heterodimer. This domain is also present in hUpf3a, explaining its coprecipitation with Y14 ( Kim et al. 2001 ; Lykke-Andersen et al. 2001 ). Functionally, both hUpf3a and hUpf3b destabilize a reporter mRNA if tethered downstream of a physiological termination codon ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ). This mRNA degradation reflects characteristic features of NMD such as dependency on translation and hUpf1 ( Lykke-Andersen et al. 2000 ; Gehring et al. 2003 ). In contrast to hUpf3aL, hUpf3aS lacks a part of the N-terminal RNP fold and does not coprecipitate hUpf2 ( Ohnishi et al. 2003 ). In gel filtration experiments, hUpf3aL cofractionates with hUpf2 and elutes at a higher molecular weight than hUpf3aS, which associates with Smg7 but not hUpf2 ( Ohnishi et al. 2003 ; Schell et al. 2003 ). These differences in the protein–protein interactions suggest different functions of the various hUpf3 isoforms. Therefore, we have analyzed the different activities of hUpf3a and hUpf3b in NMD and in translation stimulation. Immunoprecipitated complexes of hUpf3a and hUpf3b contain a similar set of proteins, including Y14, Magoh, eIF4AIII, and BTZ. However, hUpf3a is much less efficient than hUpf3b in triggering NMD and in stimulating translation. NMD and translation stimulation by hUpf3 proteins require different protein regions and interacting factors, representing separable and likely independent functions of hUpf3a and hUpf3b.
