---
pmid: '9188692'
title: 'The product of the MLD gene is a member of the membrane fatty acid desaturase
  family: overexpression of MLD inhibits EGF receptor biosynthesis.'
authors:
- Cadena DL
- Kurten RC
- Gill GN
journal: Biochemistry
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi970091l
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The product of the MLD gene is a member of the membrane fatty acid desaturase family: overexpression of MLD inhibits EGF receptor biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Cadena DL, Kurten RC, Gill GN
**Journal:** Biochemistry (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi970091l](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi970091l)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 1997 Jun 10;36(23):6960-7. doi: 10.1021/bi970091l.

The product of the MLD gene is a member of the membrane fatty acid desaturase 
family: overexpression of MLD inhibits EGF receptor biosynthesis.

Cadena DL(1), Kurten RC, Gill GN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0650, USA. dcadena@ucsd.edu

Membrane fatty acid desaturases are responsible for inserting double bonds into 
specific positions in fatty acids. We have cloned a new member of the human 
membrane fatty acid (lipid) desaturase gene family, MLD. The derived amino acid 
sequence of MLD contains three consensus motifs, HX3H, HX2HH, and HX2HHXFP, that 
are characteristic of a group of membrane fatty acid desaturases. MLD is 
predicted to be a multiple membrane-spanning protein and is found to be 
extractable from particulate fractions with detergent but not salt or urea. MLD 
is widely expressed in human tissues and is localized to the endoplasmic 
reticulum. Cotransfection of MLD with the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor 
resulted in decreased expression of the receptor but did not affect 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor expression. MLD overexpression inhibited 
biosynthesis of the EGF receptor, suggesting a possible role of a fatty acid 
desaturase in regulating biosynthetic processing of the EGF receptor.

DOI: 10.1021/bi970091l
PMID: 9188692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
