---
pmid: '15885686'
title: TRIM37 defective in mulibrey nanism is a novel RING finger ubiquitin E3 ligase.
authors:
- Kallijärvi J
- Lahtinen U
- Hämäläinen R
- Lipsanen-Nyman M
- Palvimo JJ
- Lehesjoki AE
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.001
---

# TRIM37 defective in mulibrey nanism is a novel RING finger ubiquitin E3 ligase.
**Authors:** Kallijärvi J, Lahtinen U, Hämäläinen R, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Palvimo JJ, Lehesjoki AE
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.001)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Aug 1;308(1):146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.001.

TRIM37 defective in mulibrey nanism is a novel RING finger ubiquitin E3 ligase.

Kallijärvi J(1), Lahtinen U, Hämäläinen R, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Palvimo JJ, 
Lehesjoki AE.

Author information:
(1)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics and 
Neuroscience Center, Biomedicum Helsinki, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

Mulibrey nanism is an autosomal recessive prenatal-onset growth disorder 
characterized by dysmorphic features, cardiomyopathy, and hepatomegaly. 
Mutations in TRIM37 encoding a tripartite motif (TRIM, 
RING-B-box-coiled-coil)-family protein underlie mulibrey nanism. We investigated 
the ubiquitin ligase activity predicted for the RING domain of TRIM37 by 
analyzing its autoubiquitination. Full-length TRIM37 and its TRIM domain were 
highly polyubiquitinated when co-expressed with ubiquitin. Polyubiquitination 
was decreased in a mutant protein with disrupted RING domain (Cys35Ser;Cys36Ser) 
and in the Leu76Pro mutant protein, a disease-associated missense mutation 
affecting the TRIM domain of TRIM37. Bacterially produced GST-TRIM domain fusion 
protein, but not its Cys35Ser;Cys36Ser or Leu76Pro mutants, were 
polyubiquitinated in cell-free conditions, implying RING-dependent modification. 
Ubiquitin was also identified as an interaction partner for TRIM37 in a yeast 
two-hybrid screen. Ectopically expressed TRIM37 rapidly formed aggregates that 
were ubiquitin-, proteasome subunit-, and chaperone-positive in 
immunofluorescence analysis, defining them as aggresomes. The Cys35Ser;Cys36Ser 
mutant and the Leu76Pro and Gly322Val patient mutant proteins were markedly less 
prone to aggregation, implying that aggresomal targeting reflects a 
physiological function of TRIM37. These findings suggest that TRIM37 acts as a 
TRIM domain-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase and imply defective 
ubiquitin-dependent degradation of an as-yet-unidentified target protein in the 
pathogenesis of mulibrey nanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.001
PMID: 15885686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
