---
pmid: '26491108'
title: Notch-Tnf signalling is required for development and homeostasis of arterial
  valves.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wu B
- Farrar E
- Lui W
- Lu P
- Zhang D
- Alfieri CM
- Mao K
- Chu M
- Yang D
- Xu D
- Rauchman M
- Taylor V
- Conway SJ
- Yutzey KE
- Butcher JT
- Zhou B
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5837252
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv520
---

# Notch-Tnf signalling is required for development and homeostasis of arterial valves.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wu B, Farrar E, Lui W, Lu P, Zhang D, Alfieri CM, Mao K, Chu M, Yang D, Xu D, Rauchman M, Taylor V, Conway SJ, Yutzey KE, Butcher JT, Zhou B
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehv520](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehv520)
**PMC:** [PMC5837252](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5837252/)

## Abstract

1. Eur Heart J. 2017 Mar 1;38(9):675-686. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv520.

Notch-Tnf signalling is required for development and homeostasis of arterial 
valves.

Wang Y(1), Wu B(1), Farrar E(2), Lui W(1), Lu P(1), Zhang D(1), Alfieri CM(3), 
Mao K(4), Chu M(5), Yang D(5), Xu D(5), Rauchman M(6), Taylor V(7), Conway 
SJ(8), Yutzey KE(3), Butcher JT(2), Zhou B(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Pediatrics, and Medicine (Cardiology), Wilf 
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Price 
420, 1301 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 14061, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical 
Centre, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(4)Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, 
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine and Geriatrics (Cardiology), First Affiliated Hospital 
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(7)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2017 Mar 1;38(9):687-689. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv622.

AIMS: Congenital anomalies of arterial valves are common birth defects, leading 
to valvar stenosis. With no pharmaceutical treatment that can prevent the 
disease progression, prosthetic replacement is the only choice of treatment, 
incurring considerable morbidity and mortality. Animal models presenting 
localized anomalies and stenosis of congenital arterial valves similar to that 
of humans are critically needed research tools to uncover developmental 
molecular mechanisms underlying this devastating human condition.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated and characterized mouse models with 
conditionally altered Notch signalling in endothelial or interstitial cells of 
developing valves. Mice with inactivation of Notch1 signalling in valvar 
endothelial cells (VEC) developed congenital anomalies of arterial valves 
including bicuspid aortic valves and valvar stenosis. Notch1 signalling in VEC 
was required for repressing proliferation and activating apoptosis of valvar 
interstitial cells (VIC) after endocardial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT). 
We showed that Notch signalling regulated Tnfα expression in vivo, and Tnf 
signalling was necessary for apoptosis of VIC and post-EMT development of 
arterial valves. Furthermore, activation or inhibition of Notch signalling in 
cultured pig aortic VEC-promoted or suppressed apoptosis of VIC, respectively.
CONCLUSION: We have now met the need of critical animal models and shown that 
Notch-Tnf signalling balances proliferation and apoptosis for post-EMT 
development of arterial valves. Our results suggest that mutations in its 
components may lead to congenital anomaly of aortic valves and valvar stenosis 
in humans.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author 2015. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehv520
PMCID: PMC5837252
PMID: 26491108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
