---
pmid: '39489485'
title: Jasmonate induces translation of the Arabidopsis transfer RNA-binding protein
  YUELAO1, which activates MYC2 in jasmonate signaling.
authors:
- Wang J
- Li Y
- Hu Y
- Zhu S
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC11663558
doi: 10.1093/plcell/koae294
---

# Jasmonate induces translation of the Arabidopsis transfer RNA-binding protein YUELAO1, which activates MYC2 in jasmonate signaling.
**Authors:** Wang J, Li Y, Hu Y, Zhu S
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/plcell/koae294](https://doi.org/10.1093/plcell/koae294)
**PMC:** [PMC11663558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11663558/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2024 Dec 23;37(1):koae294. doi: 10.1093/plcell/koae294.

Jasmonate induces translation of the Arabidopsis transfer RNA-binding protein 
YUELAO1, which activates MYC2 in jasmonate signaling.

Wang J(1), Li Y(1), Hu Y(1), Zhu S(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Hunan Key 
Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics and Developmental Regulation, College of 
Biology, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, PR China.

Jasmonate is ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and regulates multiple 
physiological processes. Although jasmonate signaling has been thoroughly 
investigated in Arabidopsis thaliana, most studies have focused on the 
transcriptional mechanisms underlying various jasmonate responses. It remains 
unclear whether (and how) translation-related pathways help improve 
transcription efficiency to modulate jasmonate signaling, which may enable 
plants to respond to stressful conditions effectively. Here, we demonstrate that 
jasmonate induces translation of the transfer RNA (tRNA)-binding protein YUELAO 
1 (YL1) via a specific region in its 3' untranslated region (3' UTR). YL1 and 
its homolog YL2 redundantly stimulate jasmonate responses such as anthocyanin 
accumulation and root growth inhibition, with the YL1 3' UTR being critical for 
YL1-promoted jasmonate responses. Once translated, YL1 acts as an activator of 
the MYC2 transcription factor through direct interaction, and disrupting YL1 3' 
UTR impairs the YL1-mediated transcriptional activation of MYC2. YL1 enhances 
jasmonate responses mainly in a MYC2-dependent manner. Together, these findings 
reveal a translational mechanism involved in jasmonate signaling and advance our 
understanding of the transcriptional regulation of jasmonate signaling. The YL1 
3' UTR acts as a crucial signal transducer that integrates translational and 
transcriptional regulation, allowing plants to respond to jasmonate in a timely 
fashion.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of American 
Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please 
contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All 
other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the 
Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information please 
contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/plcell/koae294
PMCID: PMC11663558
PMID: 39489485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that all data and experiments in this research were conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Jasmonate is ubiquitous in the plant kingdom and regulates multiple physiological processes. Although jasmonate signaling has been thoroughly investigated in Arabidopsis thaliana , most studies have focused on the transcriptional mechanisms underlying various jasmonate responses. It remains unclear whether (and how) translation-related pathways help improve transcription efficiency to modulate jasmonate signaling, which may enable plants to respond to stressful conditions effectively. Here, we demonstrate that jasmonate induces translation of the transfer RNA (tRNA)-binding protein YUELAO 1 (YL1) via a specific region in its 3′ untranslated region (3′ UTR). YL1 and its homolog YL2 redundantly stimulate jasmonate responses such as anthocyanin accumulation and root growth inhibition, with the YL1 3′ UTR being critical for YL1-promoted jasmonate responses. Once translated, YL1 acts as an activator of the MYC2 transcription factor through direct interaction, and disrupting YL1 3′ UTR impairs the YL1-mediated transcriptional activation of MYC2. YL1 enhances jasmonate responses mainly in a MYC2-dependent manner. Together, these findings reveal a translational mechanism involved in jasmonate signaling and advance our understanding of the transcriptional regulation of jasmonate signaling. The YL1 3′ UTR acts as a crucial signal transducer that integrates translational and transcriptional regulation, allowing plants to respond to jasmonate in a timely fashion.

Introduction

Untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNAs regulate mRNA translation, stability, and localization ( Mayr 2019 ). The functions and underlying mechanisms of UTRs have been predominantly described in animal cells, fungi, prokaryotes, and viruses, where they play critical roles in modulating physiological processes such as synaptic plasticity and hyphae growth ( Morita et al. 1999 ; Kortmann and Narberhaus 2012 ; Donlin-Asp et al. 2017 ; Mofatteh and Bullock 2017 ; Dai et al. 2019 ). In Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ), recent studies have shed light on how UTRs contribute to translation in response to various intracellular and environmental signals ( Wachter et al. 2007 ; Li et al. 2015 ; Merchante et al. 2015 ; Xu et al. 2017 ; Yang et al. 2018 ; Chung et al. 2020 ). For example, a riboswitch in the 3′ UTR of the thiamin biosynthetic gene THIAMINC ( THIC ) senses the vitamin B1 derivative thiamine pyrophosphate and controls the formation of THIC transcripts with alternative 3′ UTR lengths, which influence mRNA translation ( Wachter et al. 2007 ). Two studies showed that ethylene affects the translation of several transcripts ( Li et al. 2015 ; Merchante et al. 2015 ). The 3′ UTRs of EIN3-BINDING F-BOX 1 ( EBF1 ) and EBF2 transcripts are responsible for the ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE 2 (EIN2)-directed translational repression of their own mRNAs, with ethylene inducing the association between EIN2 and these 3′ UTRs to target EBF1 and EBF2 mRNA to cytoplasmic processing bodies (P-bodies) ( Li et al. 2015 ; Merchante et al. 2015 ). The 3′ UTR of EIN4 mediates increased elf18 (an 18-amino acid [aa] peptide production from bacterial elongation factor Tu [EF-Tu])-induced translational activity, providing a 3′ UTR-mediated molecular mechanism for global translational reprogramming during pattern-triggered immunity ( Xu et al. 2017 ). Furthermore, transcripts encoding the basic helix–loop‒helix (bHLH) transcription factor PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR7 (PIF7) undergo a translation increase in response to warmer temperature via the PIF7 5′ UTR, acting as an RNA thermometer that allows plants to respond and rapidly acclimate to higher temperatures ( Chung et al. 2020 ). These examples suggest that the molecular mechanisms underlying how different environmental and phytohormonal signals regulate various steps in the mRNA lifecycle via UTRs in plants are of significance and should be further investigated.

Phytohormones integrate various environmental signals and cellular responses to regulate plant growth and stress tolerance ( Ruan et al. 2019 ). Initially identified as a stress-related hormone, jasmonate (JA) is crucial for various aspects of plant physiology, such as root growth inhibition and anthocyanin biosynthesis ( Dombrecht et al. 2007 ; Chen et al. 2012 ; Qi et al. 2015 ; Chini et al. 2016 ; Hu et al. 2017 ; Guo et al. 2018 ; Howe et al. 2018 ; Liu et al. 2019 ; You et al. 2019 ; Zhou et al. 2019 ; Wasternack 2020 ; Cao et al. 2022 ; He et al. 2023 ). Plants perceive stimuli from the environment and generate jasmonoyl-isoleucine, which promotes the physical associations between CORONATINE INSENSITIVE1 (COI1) and JASMONATE ZIM-DOMAIN (JAZ) proteins ( Xie et al. 1998 ; Xu et al. 2002 ; Chini et al. 2007 ; Thines et al. 2007 ; Yan et al. 2009 ; Sheard et al. 2010 ). Following these interactions, JAZ proteins are degraded via the 26S proteasome pathway, which alleviates the repression imposed onto downstream transcription factors (e.g. MYC2), thus mediating the expression of JA-responsive genes ( Lorenzo et al. 2004 ; Boter et al. 2004 ; Dombrecht et al. 2007 ; Chini et al. 2007 , 2016 ; Thines et al. 2007 ; Yan et al. 2009 ; Sheard et al. 2010 ; Fernández-Calvo et al. 2011 ; Hong et al. 2012 ; Schweizer et al. 2013 ; Yan et al. 2013 ; Zhai et al. 2020 ; He et al. 2023 ). The JA signaling network has been thoroughly investigated in the context of the regulation of gene expression by transcription factors. Nevertheless, changes in transcription typically occur over longer time frames than would be adequate for quick plant responses to stressful conditions ( Gutierrez-Beltran et al. 2015 ). Modulating mRNA translation may help overcome this limitation by acting as a rapidly tunable bridge between environmental responses and transcriptional outputs. One study previously identified a gene in barley ( Hordeum vulgare ) that encodes jasmonate-induced protein 60 (JIP60), which reprograms protein translation to increase stress tolerance and regulate senescence ( Rustgi et al. 2014 ). However, it has been largely unclear whether translation-related pathways help improve transcription efficiency, which would enable plants to respond more effectively to JA. Moreover, whether JA signaling regulates mRNA translation via the UTRs of transcripts also remains unknown.

RNA metabolic steps, such as RNA splicing, translation, and stability, are crucial for various cellular responses in eukaryotes ( Mitchell and Parker 2014 ; Pereira et al. 2017 ; Marondedze 2020 ). RNAs are tightly bound to and controlled by diverse RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), dictating the fate and function of each transcript in the cell and ensuring that cellular homeostasis is maintained ( Anantharaman et al. 2002 ; Matia-González et al. 2015 ; Pereira et al. 2017 ; Cho et al. 2019 ). The Arabidopsis genome contains 836 RBP genes and 1,865 candidate RBP genes ( Marondedze 2020 ); these numbers are in the range of, or even exceed, those for other classes of proteins, such as transcription factors, suggesting the existence of previously unknown RNA recognition modes and functions for RBPs ( Gerstberger et al. 2014 ; Albihlal and Gerber 2018 ). We recently identified a class of tRNA-binding proteins named YUELAOs (YLs: YL1, YL2, and YL3), which regulate reproduction and development in Arabidopsis ( Zhu et al. 2023 ). YLs physically interact with the Catharanthus roseus RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE1-LIKE ( Cr RLK1L) family member FERONIA (FER) and regulate tRNA fragment (tRF) abundance ( Zhu et al. 2023 ). Interestingly, during our previous study of YL-related plant growth and tolerance ( Zhu et al. 2023 ), we noticed that YL1 positively regulates the expression of multiple phytohormone-responsive genes (especially those induced by JA) and enhances JA-induced anthocyanin accumulation and inhibition of root growth, suggesting that YLs might function in selective transcriptional regulation.

To uncover the unexpected involvement of the tRNA-binding proteins YLs in gene expression modulation, we used molecular and genetic approaches to reveal the regulatory functions and underlying molecular mechanisms of YLs in transcription in response to JA. We observed that YL1 synthesis is enhanced by JA at the translation level via YL1 3′ UTR. Phenotypic examination showed that YL1 and YL2 exhibit redundant positive effects on JA-induced root growth inhibition and anthocyanin accumulation. Similar to yl1 yl2 mutants, mutating the 3′ UTR of YL1 also attenuated JA responses. Further mechanistic investigations demonstrated that YL1 acts as a transcriptional activator of MYC2 through direct protein–protein interaction. Disrupting the 3′ UTR of YL1 impairs the YL1-mediated transcriptional activation of MYC2. Genetic analysis indicated that the myc2-2 background blocks the hypersensitivity caused by YL1 overexpression, and the yl1 yl2 background suppresses the high JA sensitivity phenotype of MYC2 overexpression. Taken together, our results indicate that JA induces the translation of the tRNA-binding protein YL1 via the 3′ UTR of its encoding transcript, which in turn interacts with MYC2 and activates transcription of JA-responsive genes. The findings of this study provide a mechanistic understanding of how the well-known transcription regulatory processes are coordinated with 3′ UTR-mediated translational events to precisely control JA signaling. This study also improves our understanding of tRNA-binding protein functions, highlighting the multifaceted nature of RBPs.

Discussion

The phytohormone JA is an essential signaling molecule involved in a complex network that undergoes crosstalk with other phytohormone signaling pathways and transmits crucial environmental signals in the plant ( Spoel et al. 2003 , 2007 ; Navarro et al. 2008 ; Cheng et al. 2009 ; Grant and Jones 2009 ; Sun et al. 2009 ; Wasternack and Hause 2013 ; Guo et al. 2018 ; Howe et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2019 ; Mei et al. 2023 ; He et al. 2023 ). For example, JA works synergistically with auxin to enhance the ABA-induced delay of seed germination ( Mei et al. 2023 ). The core phosphate (Pi) signaling-related transcription factor PHOSPHATE STARVATION RESPONSE 1 (PHR1) positively regulates JA-mediated anthocyanin accumulation and root growth inhibition ( He et al. 2023 ). Despite recent advances, numerous studies of JA signaling have focused on the regulation of gene expression by various transcription factors. In this study, we demonstrated the JA-induced translation of YL1 ( Fig. 1 ). In addition, JA also affected CONSTANS (CO) abundance at the translation level ( Han et al. 2023 ). These results indicate that JA signaling also modulates the translation of mRNA from specific genes besides their transcriptional regulation.

Although we reported the JA-induced translation of YL1 here, it has been largely unclear the mechanisms by which MeJA promotes the translation of YL1 mRNA by regulating its 3′ UTR. Our result showed that treatment with MeJA did not trigger the rapid accumulation of YL1 in mutants coi1-1 and coi1-2 , suggesting the JA-induced translation of YL1 is dependent on the COI1 signaling pathway ( Fig. 1, D–G ). The insensitivity of coi1 mutants denied the possibility of MeJA direct binding to YL1 3′ UTR and the effect on conversion of MeJA to JA and JA-Ile. How are the 2 events of COI1-dependent response and 3′ UTR-mediated YL1 translation connected? We can speculate that JA sensing result in the production or activation of mediators that bind to the YL1 3′ UTR to initiate its translation. The mediators may be RBPs which function in 3′ UTR-regulated mRNA splicing or translation. Furthermore, the YL1 protein levels were similar in the WT and myc2-2 backgrounds before and upon MeJA treatment ( Supplementary Fig. S8, A and B ). Considering the abundance of YL1 was not altered in the myc2-2 mutant, it's possible that the JA-induced translation of YL1 is not relied on MYC2. The possible MYC2-independent mechanism underlying such a rapid accumulation of the putative mediators is also worth deep studying.

For the translation-activating mechanism, our results suggest that the YL1 3′ UTR acts as a signal transducer that relays cellular signals (e.g. JA; Figs. 2 and 3 ), integrating translational and transcriptional regulation that allows a timely response to JA. Hence, the functions of the YL1 3′ UTR that respond to external environmental signals are worth of in-depth studies. Previous studies have shed light on the secondary structures within UTRs that play key roles in mRNA processing in response to endogenous or environmental cues ( Wachter et al. 2007 ; Yang et al. 2018 ; Chung et al. 2020 ). Whether an RNA hairpin forms within the regions 50 to 150 of YL1 3′ UTR and responds to JAJA signaling should be explored using biochemical and RNA structural studies. Furthermore, enhancing studies showed that RBPs harbor conserved domains that bind to specific motifs or secondary structures in RNAs ( Lorković and Barta 2002 ; Lunde et al. 2007 ; Yang et al. 2018 ). The candidate RBPs that bind to the key elements or secondary structures of YL1 3′ UTR that response to the JAJA signaling also need to be investigated and confirmed.

Therefore, in the current study, we looked for key elements that bind to the 3′ UTR of YL1 by performing RNA interactome capture with minor modifications ( Bach-Pages et al. 2020 ; Li et al. 2023 ). We prepared a full-length biotin-labeled YL1 3′ UTR transcript and produced a random synthetic biotin-labeled RNA sequence as a negative control. We identified all proteins associated with the YL1 3′ UTR by quantitative mass spectrometry, revealing 574 proteins that potentially interact with this region ( Supplementary Data Set 1 ). We examined the biological and molecular functions of these proteins using GO enrichment analysis ( Supplementary Fig. S13A ). We determined that the 3′ UTR of YL1 associates with proteins that function in posttranscriptional events, including multiple RNA helicases, translation initiation and elongation factors, and ribosomal proteins ( Supplementary Fig. S13B ). We speculate that a potential RNA hairpin within the YL1 3′ UTR might be unwound by a specific helicase and serve as a response factor of JA signaling. Subsequently, the translational machinery might be recruited to the unwound YL1 3′ UTR to promote translation. The interaction between the RBPs and the YL1 3′ UTR and the mechanism and genetic basis underlying the RBPs-3′ UTR complex in the context of the JA signaling pathway require further exploration.

Translation occurs in the cytoplasm, and the final localization of mature proteins occurs through cytoskeleton-mediated transport or recruitment by interacting proteins ( Vale 2003 ; Wickner and Schekman 2005 ). YL1 possesses intrinsically disordered regions and localizes to multiple regions in the plant cell, suggesting that YL1 exhibits significant conformational flexibility and adaptability for different functions after translation ( Calabretta and Richard 2015 ; Järvelin et al. 2016 ; Pereira et al. 2017 ; Zhu et al. 2023 ). Our Co-IP assays showed that increased YL1 protein levels resulted in an enhanced interaction between YL1 and MYC2 ( Supplementary Fig. S11 ), and the BiFC assay in protoplasts showed that YL1 interacts with MYC2 in the nucleus ( Fig. 5C ). The subcellular fractionation assay suggested that MeJA promotes YL1 accumulation by regulating overall translation in the cytoplasm, but not the transport rate of YL1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus ( Supplementary Fig. S2, A and B ). These results indicate that JAJA-induced YL1 protein accumulation occurs in the cytoplasm and leads to increased binding between YL1 and MYC2 in the nucleus. However, whether YL1 is co-expressed with MYC2 and whether YL1 co-localizes with MYC2 in the nucleus is unclear, and how YL1 is transported from the nucleus and cytoplasm is still unknown.

The central dogma of gene expression comprises transcription and translation. Both steps are tightly regulated by various mechanisms. Given that transcription and translation occur at different timings and in different cellular locations, these two expression programs are mainly regarded as relatively independent. Interestingly, recent studies have revealed a potential association between them in mammalian or plant cells. For example, work in mammals demonstrated that the mRNAs produced with a slow transcription rate contain a relatively higher content of N6-methyladenosine (m 6 A) modification, which, in turn, diminished translation efficiency, uncovering a general and widespread link between transcription and translation that is governed by epigenetic modification of mRNAs ( Slobodin et al. 2017 ). The protein levels of the bHLH transcription factor RHD-6-LIKE 4 (RSL4) are upregulated via the RALF1–FER pathway and high levels of RSL4 suppress RALF1 mRNA expression by directly binding to its promoter, thus negatively affecting the RALF1–FER signaling pathway in Arabidopsis root hairs ( Zhu et al. 2020 ). Together, these mechanisms integrate translational and transcriptional regulation that enables plants to respond and adapt efficiently to environment. The possible connections between translation and transcription need to be clarified in future investigations.

Here, we propose a working model for translation-based activation of JAJA signaling: JAJA induces the translation of the YL1 via the 3′ UTR of its transcript, which in turn interacts with MYC2 and activates transcription of JAJA signaling components ( Fig. 8 ). These findings advance the well-known transcription regulatory mode of JAJA signaling and improve our understanding of tRNA-binding protein functions.
