---
pmid: '11687801'
title: Mutant mitochondrial thymidine kinase in mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy.
authors:
- Saada A
- Shaag A
- Mandel H
- Nevo Y
- Eriksson S
- Elpeleg O
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng751
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutant mitochondrial thymidine kinase in mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy.
**Authors:** Saada A, Shaag A, Mandel H, Nevo Y, Eriksson S, Elpeleg O
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng751](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng751)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2001 Nov;29(3):342-4. doi: 10.1038/ng751.

Mutant mitochondrial thymidine kinase in mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy.

Saada A(1), Shaag A, Mandel H, Nevo Y, Eriksson S, Elpeleg O.

Author information:
(1)The Metabolic Disease Unit, Shaare-Zedek Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine, 
the Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91031, Israel.

The mitochondrial deoxyribonucleotide (dNTP) pool is separated from the 
cytosolic pool because the mitochondria inner membrane is impermeable to charged 
molecules. The mitochondrial pool is maintained by either import of cytosolic 
dNTPs through dedicated transporters or by salvaging deoxynucleosides within the 
mitochondria; apparently, enzymes of the de novo dNTP synthesis pathway are not 
present in the mitochondria. In non-replicating cells, where cytosolic dNTP 
synthesis is down-regulated, mtDNA synthesis depends solely on the mitochondrial 
salvage pathway enzymes, the deoxyribonucleosides kinases. Two of the four human 
deoxyribonucleoside kinases, deoxyguanosine kinase (dGK) and thymidine kinase-2 
(TK2), are expressed in mitochondria. Human dGK efficiently phosphorylates 
deoxyguanosine and deoxyadenosine, whereas TK2 phosphorylates deoxythymidine, 
deoxycytidine and deoxyuridine. Here we identify two mutations in TK2, histidine 
90 to asparagine and isoleucine 181 to asparagine, in four individuals who 
developed devastating myopathy and depletion of muscular mitochondrial DNA in 
infancy. In these individuals, the activity of TK2 in muscle mitochondria is 
reduced to 14-45% of the mean value in healthy control individuals. Mutations in 
TK2 represent a new etiology for mitochondrial DNA depletion, underscoring the 
importance of the mitochondrial dNTP pool in the pathogenesis of mitochondrial 
depletion.

DOI: 10.1038/ng751
PMID: 11687801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
