---
pmid: '20860622'
title: DIP2 disco-interacting protein 2 homolog A (Drosophila) is a candidate receptor
  for follistatin-related protein/follistatin-like 1--analysis of their binding with
  TGF-β superfamily proteins.
authors:
- Tanaka M
- Murakami K
- Ozaki S
- Imura Y
- Tong XP
- Watanabe T
- Sawaki T
- Kawanami T
- Kawabata D
- Fujii T
- Usui T
- Masaki Y
- Fukushima T
- Jin ZX
- Umehara H
- Mimori T
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07816.x
---

# DIP2 disco-interacting protein 2 homolog A (Drosophila) is a candidate receptor for follistatin-related protein/follistatin-like 1--analysis of their binding with TGF-β superfamily proteins.
**Authors:** Tanaka M, Murakami K, Ozaki S, Imura Y, Tong XP, Watanabe T, Sawaki T, Kawanami T, Kawabata D, Fujii T, Usui T, Masaki Y, Fukushima T, Jin ZX, Umehara H, Mimori T
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07816.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07816.x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2010 Oct;277(20):4278-89. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07816.x. Epub 
2010 Sep 22.

DIP2 disco-interacting protein 2 homolog A (Drosophila) is a candidate receptor 
for follistatin-related protein/follistatin-like 1--analysis of their binding 
with TGF-β superfamily proteins.

Tanaka M(1), Murakami K, Ozaki S, Imura Y, Tong XP, Watanabe T, Sawaki T, 
Kawanami T, Kawabata D, Fujii T, Usui T, Masaki Y, Fukushima T, Jin ZX, Umehara 
H, Mimori T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan. masatana@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Follistatin-related protein (FRP)/follistatin-like 1 (FSTL1) is a member of the 
follistatin protein family, all of which share a characteristic structure unit 
found in follistatin, called the FS domain. Developmental studies have suggested 
that FRP regulates organ tissue formation in embryos. Immunological studies 
showed that FRP modifies joint inflammation in arthritic disease, and modulates 
allograft tolerance. However, the principle physiological function of FRP is 
currently unknown. To address this issue, we cloned four FRP-associated proteins 
using a two-hybrid cloning method: disco-interacting protein 2 homolog A from 
Drosophila (DIP2A), CD14, glypican 1 and titin. Only DIP2A was expected to be a 
membrane receptor protein with intracellular regions. Over-expression of FLAG 
epitope-tagged DIP2A augmented the suppressive effect of FRP on FBJ murine 
osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS) expression, and the Fab fragment of 
IgG to FLAG blocked this effect. Knockdown of Dip2a leaded to Fos gene 
up-regulation, and this was not affected by exogenous FRP. These in vitro 
experiments confirmed that DIP2A could be a cell-surface receptor protein and 
mediate a FOS down-regulation signal of FRP. Moreover, molecular interaction 
analyses using Biacore demonstrated that FRP bound to DIP2A and CD14, and also 
with proteins of the TGF-β superfamily, i.e. activin, TGF-β, bone morphogenetic 
protein 2/4 (BMP-2/4), their receptors and follistatin. FRP binding to DIP2A was 
blocked by CD14, follistatin, activin and BMP-2. FRP blocked the ligand-receptor 
binding of activin and BMP-2, but integrated itself with that of BMP-4. This 
multi-specific binding may reflect the broad physiological activity of FRP.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07816.x
PMID: 20860622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
