---
pmid: '25484297'
title: The GTPase regulatory proteins Pix and Git control tissue growth via the Hippo
  pathway.
authors:
- Dent LG
- Poon CL
- Zhang X
- Degoutin JL
- Tipping M
- Veraksa A
- Harvey KF
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5558436
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.041
---

# The GTPase regulatory proteins Pix and Git control tissue growth via the Hippo pathway.
**Authors:** Dent LG, Poon CL, Zhang X, Degoutin JL, Tipping M, Veraksa A, Harvey KF
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.041)
**PMC:** [PMC5558436](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5558436/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 5;25(1):124-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.041. Epub 2014 
Dec 4.

The GTPase regulatory proteins Pix and Git control tissue growth via the Hippo 
pathway.

Dent LG(1), Poon CL(2), Zhang X(3), Degoutin JL(2), Tipping M(4), Veraksa A(5), 
Harvey KF(6).

Author information:
(1)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7 St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia; Department of Pathology, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(2)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7 St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum 
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.
(3)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7 St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum 
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia; 
Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Biology, Providence College, Providence, RI 02918, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA 02125, 
USA.
(6)Cell Growth and Proliferation Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7 St 
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, VIC 3002, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum 
Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia; 
Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, 
Australia. Electronic address: kieran.harvey@petermac.org.

The Salvador-Warts-Hippo (Hippo) pathway is a conserved regulator of organ size 
and is deregulated in human cancers. In epithelial tissues, the Hippo pathway is 
regulated by fundamental cell biological properties, such as polarity and 
adhesion, and coordinates these with tissue growth. Despite its importance in 
disease, development, and regeneration, the complete set of proteins that 
regulate Hippo signaling remain undefined. To address this, we used proteomics 
to identify proteins that bind to the Hippo (Hpo) kinase. Prominent among these 
were PAK-interacting exchange factor (known as Pix or RtGEF) and 
G-protein-coupled receptor kinase-interacting protein (Git). Pix is a conserved 
Rho-type guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF) homologous to Beta-PIX and 
Alpha-PIX in mammals. Git is the single Drosophila melanogaster homolog of the 
mammalian GIT1 and GIT2 proteins, which were originally identified in the search 
for molecules that interact with G-protein-coupled receptor kinases. Pix and Git 
form an oligomeric scaffold to facilitate sterile 20-like kinase activation and 
have also been linked to GTPase regulation. We show that Pix and Git regulate 
Hippo-pathway-dependent tissue growth in D. melanogaster and that they do this 
in parallel to the known upstream regulator Fat cadherin. Pix and Git influence 
activity of the Hpo kinase by acting as a scaffold complex, rather than enzymes, 
and promote Hpo dimerization and autophosphorylation of Hpo's activation loop. 
Therefore, we provide important new insights into an ancient signaling network 
that controls the growth of metazoan tissues.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.041
PMCID: PMC5558436
PMID: 25484297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
