---
pmid: '1655749'
title: The cAMP-regulated enhancer-binding protein ATF-1 activates transcription in
  response to cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.
authors:
- Rehfuss RP
- Walton KM
- Loriaux MM
- Goodman RH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
---

# The cAMP-regulated enhancer-binding protein ATF-1 activates transcription in response to cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.
**Authors:** Rehfuss RP, Walton KM, Loriaux MM, Goodman RH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Oct 5;266(28):18431-4.

The cAMP-regulated enhancer-binding protein ATF-1 activates transcription in 
response to cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.

Rehfuss RP(1), Walton KM, Loriaux MM, Goodman RH.

Author information:
(1)Vollum Institute for Advanced Biomedical Research, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201.

Many promoters respond transcriptionally to elevated levels of cAMP through the 
cAMP-responsive enhancer (CRE). Several proteins have been characterized which 
bind to the CRE and presumably modulate CRE-dependent transcription. Of these 
CRE-binding proteins, only CREB has been shown to be activated by cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase A (PKA), and as such, CREB represents the only basis for our 
understanding of cAMP-regulated transcriptional activity. In this report, we 
describe the complete cDNA sequence of another CRE-binding protein, ATF-1. This 
protein contains a consensus phosphorylation site for PKA and shares extensive 
homology with CREB in the region surrounding and carboxyl-terminal to the PKA 
site. ATF-1 does not contain sequences homologous to the glutamine-rich 
amino-terminal domain found in CREB, however. ATF-1, like CREB, is expressed in 
a wide variety of cell types, and ATF-1 is capable of dimerizing with CREB. Both 
ATF-1 homodimers and ATF-1/CREB heterodimers bind to the CRE but not to the 
related phorbol ester response element. ATF-1 is as active as CREB in its 
ability to mediate the transcriptional effects of PKA, and, because ATF-1 has a 
smaller effect on basal expression, it is actually more responsive than CREB to 
cAMP. These findings indicate that CREB is not unique in its ability to mediate 
cAMP-dependent transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 1655749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
