---
pmid: '22014574'
title: SIRT2 maintains genome integrity and suppresses tumorigenesis through regulating
  APC/C activity.
authors:
- Kim HS
- Vassilopoulos A
- Wang RH
- Lahusen T
- Xiao Z
- Xu X
- Li C
- Veenstra TD
- Li B
- Yu H
- Ji J
- Wang XW
- Park SH
- Cha YI
- Gius D
- Deng CX
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3199577
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.004
---

# SIRT2 maintains genome integrity and suppresses tumorigenesis through regulating APC/C activity.
**Authors:** Kim HS, Vassilopoulos A, Wang RH, Lahusen T, Xiao Z, Xu X, Li C, Veenstra TD, Li B, Yu H, Ji J, Wang XW, Park SH, Cha YI, Gius D, Deng CX
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.004)
**PMC:** [PMC3199577](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3199577/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2011 Oct 18;20(4):487-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.004.

SIRT2 maintains genome integrity and suppresses tumorigenesis through regulating 
APC/C activity.

Kim HS(1), Vassilopoulos A, Wang RH, Lahusen T, Xiao Z, Xu X, Li C, Veenstra TD, 
Li B, Yu H, Ji J, Wang XW, Park SH, Cha YI, Gius D, Deng CX.

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of 
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Members of sirtuin family regulate multiple critical biological processes, yet 
their role in carcinogenesis remains controversial. To investigate the 
physiological functions of SIRT2 in development and tumorigenesis, we disrupted 
Sirt2 in mice. We demonstrated that SIRT2 regulates the anaphase-promoting 
complex/cyclosome activity through deacetylation of its coactivators, APC(CDH1) 
and CDC20. SIRT2 deficiency caused increased levels of mitotic regulators, 
including Aurora-A and -B that direct centrosome amplification, aneuploidy, and 
mitotic cell death. Sirt2-deficient mice develop gender-specific tumorigenesis, 
with females primarily developing mammary tumors, and males developing more 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Human breast cancers and HCC samples exhibited 
reduced SIRT2 levels compared with normal tissues. These data demonstrate that 
SIRT2 is a tumor suppressor through its role in regulating mitosis and genome 
integrity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.09.004
PMCID: PMC3199577
PMID: 22014574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
