---
pmid: '27539859'
title: Peptidase inhibitor 16 is a membrane-tethered regulator of chemerin processing
  in the myocardium.
authors:
- Regn M
- Laggerbauer B
- Jentzsch C
- Ramanujam D
- Ahles A
- Sichler S
- Calzada-Wack J
- Koenen RR
- Braun A
- Nieswandt B
- Engelhardt S
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.08.010
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Peptidase inhibitor 16 is a membrane-tethered regulator of chemerin processing in the myocardium.
**Authors:** Regn M, Laggerbauer B, Jentzsch C, Ramanujam D, Ahles A, Sichler S, Calzada-Wack J, Koenen RR, Braun A, Nieswandt B, Engelhardt S
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.08.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.08.010)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Oct;99:57-64. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.08.010. Epub 
2016 Aug 15.

Peptidase inhibitor 16 is a membrane-tethered regulator of chemerin processing 
in the myocardium.

Regn M(1), Laggerbauer B(1), Jentzsch C(1), Ramanujam D(1), Ahles A(1), Sichler 
S(1), Calzada-Wack J(2), Koenen RR(3), Braun A(4), Nieswandt B(4), Engelhardt 
S(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Technische Universität München, 
Biedersteiner Straße 29, 80802 Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Helmholtz Center Munich, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 
85764 Neuherberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht 
(CARIM), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(4)Rudolf Virchow Center for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg, 
Josef-Schneider Straße 2, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Technische Universität München, 
Biedersteiner Straße 29, 80802 Munich, Germany; DZHK (German Center for 
Cardiovascular Research) partner site Munich Heart Alliance, 80802 Munich, 
Germany. Electronic address: stefan.engelhardt@tum.de.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2016 Nov;100:21-24. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.09.012.

A key response of the myocardium to stress is the secretion of factors with 
paracrine or endocrine function. Intriguing in this respect is peptidase 
inhibitor 16 (PI16), a member of the CAP family of proteins which we found to be 
highly upregulated in cardiac disease. Up to this point, the mechanism of action 
and physiological function of PI16 remained elusive. Here, we show that PI16 is 
predominantly expressed by cardiac fibroblasts, which expose PI16 to the 
interstitium via a glycophosphatidylinositol (-GPI) membrane anchor. Based on a 
reported genetic association of PI16 and plasma levels of the chemokine 
chemerin, we investigated whether PI16 regulates post-translational processing 
of its precursor pro-chemerin. PI16-deficient mice were engineered and found to 
generate higher levels of processed chemerin than wildtype mice. Purified 
recombinant PI16 efficiently inhibited cathepsin K, a chemerin-activating 
protease, in vitro. Moreover, we show that conditioned medium from 
PI16-overexpressing cells impaired the activation of pro-chemerin. Together, our 
data indicate that PI16 suppresses chemerin activation in the myocardium and 
suggest that this circuit may be part of the cardiac stress response.

Copyright © 2016 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2016.08.010
PMID: 27539859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
