---
reference_id: PMID:34792097
title: CFAP61 is required for sperm flagellum formation and male fertility in human and mouse.
authors:
- Liu S
- Zhang J
- Kherraf ZE
- Sun S
- Zhang X
- Cazin C
- Coutton C
- Zouari R
- Zhao S
- Hu F
- Fourati Ben Mustapha S
- Arnoult C
- Ray PF
- Liu M
journal: Development
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1242/dev.199805
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CFAP61 is required for sperm flagellum formation and male fertility in human and mouse.
**Authors:** Liu S, Zhang J, Kherraf ZE, Sun S, Zhang X, Cazin C, Coutton C, Zouari R, Zhao S, Hu F, Fourati Ben Mustapha S, Arnoult C, Ray PF, Liu M
**Journal:** Development (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.199805](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.199805)

## Content

1. Development. 2021 Dec 1;148(23):dev199805. doi: 10.1242/dev.199805. Epub 2021 
Dec 7.

CFAP61 is required for sperm flagellum formation and male fertility in human and 
mouse.

Liu S(1), Zhang J(1), Kherraf ZE(2)(3), Sun S(1), Zhang X(1), Cazin C(2)(3), 
Coutton C(2)(4), Zouari R(5), Zhao S(6), Hu F(7), Fourati Ben Mustapha S(5), 
Arnoult C(2), Ray PF(2)(3), Liu M(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and 
Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, 211166, China.
(2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Institute for Advanced 
Biosciences, Team Genetics Epigenetics and Therapies of Infertility, Grenoble, 
F-38000, France.
(3)CHU de Grenoble, UM GI-DPI, Grenoble, F-38000, France.
(4)CHU de Grenoble, UM de Génétique Chromosomique, Grenoble, F-38000, France.
(5)Polyclinique les Jasmins, Centre d'Aide Médicale à la Procréation, Centre 
Urbain Nord, 1003 Tunis, Tunisia.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Animal Core Facility of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, 211166, China.

Defects in the structure or motility of cilia and flagella may lead to severe 
diseases such as primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a multisystemic disorder with 
heterogeneous manifestations affecting primarily respiratory and reproductive 
functions. We report that CFAP61 is a conserved component of the calmodulin- and 
radial spoke-associated complex (CSC) of cilia. We find that a CFAP61 splice 
variant, c.143+5G>A, causes exon skipping/intron retention in human, inducing a 
multiple morphological abnormalities of the flagella (MMAF) phenotype. We 
generated Cfap61 knockout mice that recapitulate the infertility phenotype of 
the human CFAP61 mutation, but without other symptoms usually observed in PCD. 
We find that CFAP61 interacts with the CSC, radial spoke stalk and head. During 
early stages of Cfap61-/- spermatid development, the assembly of radial spoke 
components is impaired. As spermiogenesis progresses, the axoneme in Cfap61-/- 
cells becomes unstable and scatters, and the distribution of intraflagellar 
transport proteins is disrupted. This study reveals an organ-specific mechanism 
of axoneme stabilization that is related to male infertility.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.199805
PMID: 34792097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.