---
pmid: '14634621'
title: 'The Bcl-2 family: roles in cell survival and oncogenesis.'
authors:
- Cory S
- Huang DC
- Adams JM
journal: Oncogene
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207102
---

# The Bcl-2 family: roles in cell survival and oncogenesis.
**Authors:** Cory S, Huang DC, Adams JM
**Journal:** Oncogene (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1207102](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207102)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2003 Nov 24;22(53):8590-607. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207102.

The Bcl-2 family: roles in cell survival and oncogenesis.

Cory S(1), Huang DC, Adams JM.

Author information:
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, 
Parkville 3050, Victoria, Australia. cory@wehi.edu.au

Apoptosis, the cell-suicide programme executed by caspases, is critical for 
maintaining tissue homeostasis, and impaired apoptosis is now recognized to be a 
key step in tumorigenesis. Whether a cell should live or die is largely 
determined by the Bcl-2 family of anti- and proapoptotic regulators. These 
proteins respond to cues from various forms of intracellular stress, such as DNA 
damage or cytokine deprivation, and interact with opposing family members to 
determine whether or not the caspase proteolytic cascade should be unleashed. 
This review summarizes current views of how these proteins sense stress, 
interact with their relatives, perturb organelles such as the mitochondrion and 
endoplasmic reticulum and govern pathways to caspase activation. It briefly 
explores how family members influence cell-cycle entry and outlines the evidence 
for their involvement in tumour development, both as oncoproteins and tumour 
suppressors. Finally, it discusses the promise of novel anticancer therapeutics 
that target these vital regulators.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1207102
PMID: 14634621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
