---
pmid: '7510285'
title: Membrane topology of the L6 antigen and identification of the protein epitope
  recognized by the L6 monoclonal antibody.
authors:
- Marken JS
- Bajorath J
- Edwards CP
- Farr AG
- Schieven GL
- Hellström I
- Hellström KE
- Aruffo A
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Membrane topology of the L6 antigen and identification of the protein epitope recognized by the L6 monoclonal antibody.
**Authors:** Marken JS, Bajorath J, Edwards CP, Farr AG, Schieven GL, Hellström I, Hellström KE, Aruffo A
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Mar 11;269(10):7397-401.

Membrane topology of the L6 antigen and identification of the protein epitope 
recognized by the L6 monoclonal antibody.

Marken JS(1), Bajorath J, Edwards CP, Farr AG, Schieven GL, Hellström I, 
Hellström KE, Aruffo A.

Author information:
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 
98121.

The murine monoclonal antibody (mAb) L6 recognizes an integral membrane 
glycoprotein that is highly expressed on lung, breast, colon, and ovarian 
carcinomas and is referred to as the L6 antigen. This antigen is an attractive 
target for therapeutic intervention due to its high level expression on 
malignant cells. We have previously reported the isolation of a cDNA encoding 
the human L6 antigen (H-L6). Here, we report the isolation of a cDNA clone 
encoding the murine L6 antigen (M-L6). This cDNA contains one long open reading 
frame, which encodes a 220-amino acid polypeptide that is 78% homologous to 
H-L6. This protein contains short NH2- and COOH-terminal hydrophilic domains and 
four hydrophobic regions, each long enough to span the plasma membrane. Each of 
these hydrophobic domains is separated by a hydrophilic domain, the longest of 
which contains one possible N-linked glycosylation site and is located between 
the third and fourth hydrophobic domains. We have previously demonstrated that 
the murine L6 mAb recognizes a protein epitope expressed on human tumor-derived 
cell lines. Now, using chimeric cDNA constructs encoding human-murine L6 antigen 
hybrids in conjunction with monoclonal antibody binding experiments, we show 
that the 42-residue hydrophilic domain of the L6 antigen, located between the 
third and fourth hydrophobic domains, is outside the cell and that residues in 
the NH2-terminal region of this domain are critical for the binding of the 
murine L6 mAb to H-L6.

PMID: 7510285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
