---
pmid: '10978331'
title: Retrovirally mediated complementation of the glyB phenotype. Cloning of a human
  gene encoding the carrier for entry of folates into mitochondria.
authors:
- Titus SA
- Moran RG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005163200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Retrovirally mediated complementation of the glyB phenotype. Cloning of a human gene encoding the carrier for entry of folates into mitochondria.
**Authors:** Titus SA, Moran RG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M005163200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M005163200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):36811-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005163200.

Retrovirally mediated complementation of the glyB phenotype. Cloning of a human 
gene encoding the carrier for entry of folates into mitochondria.

Titus SA(1), Moran RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and the Massey Cancer Center, 
Medical College of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
Virginia 23298, USA.

The transduction of a human placental cDNA retroviral library into glyB cells, a 
Chinese hamster ovary K1 subline that is deficient in the transport of folates 
into mitochondria, resulted in the complementation of glycine auxotrophy of 
these cells. A 2.6-kilobase pair cDNA insert flanked by retroviral sequences had 
integrated into genomic DNA in rescued cells. An open reading frame in this cDNA 
encoded a 35-kDa protein homologous to several inner mitochondrial wall 
transporters for intermediate metabolites. The subcloned cDNA complemented the 
glycine auxotrophy of glyB cells and reinstated folate accumulation in the 
mitochondria of transfected cells. The human origin, chromosomal location, and 
intron-exon organization of the isolated mitochondrial folate transporter gene 
were deduced from the expressed sequence tag database and human genome project 
data.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M005163200
PMID: 10978331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
