---
pmid: '29332244'
title: Structural insights into the function of Elongator.
authors:
- Dalwadi U
- Yip CK
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11105301
doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2747-6
---

# Structural insights into the function of Elongator.
**Authors:** Dalwadi U, Yip CK
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-018-2747-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2747-6)
**PMC:** [PMC11105301](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11105301/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2018 May;75(9):1613-1622. doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2747-6. 
Epub 2018 Jan 13.

Structural insights into the function of Elongator.

Dalwadi U(1), Yip CK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada. calvin.yip@ubc.ca.

Conserved from yeast to humans, Elongator is a protein complex implicated in 
multiple processes including transcription regulation, α-tubulin acetylation, 
and tRNA modification, and its defects have been shown to cause human diseases 
such as familial dysautonomia. Elongator consists of two copies of six core 
subunits (Elp1, Elp2, Elp3, Elp4, Elp5, and Elp6) that are organized into two 
subcomplexes: Elp1/2/3 and Elp4/5/6 and form a stable assembly of ~ 850 kDa in 
size. Although the catalytic subunit of Elongator is Elp3, which contains a 
radical S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) domain and a putative histone 
acetyltransferase domain, the Elp4/5/6 subcomplex also possesses ATP-modulated 
tRNA binding activity. How at the molecular level, Elongator performs its 
multiple functions and how the different subunits regulate Elongator's 
activities remains poorly understood. Here, we provide an overview of the 
proposed functions of Elongator and describe how recent structural studies 
provide new insights into the mechanism of action of this multifunctional 
complex.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-018-2747-6
PMCID: PMC11105301
PMID: 29332244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
