---
pmid: '28024296'
title: mTORC1 and muscle regeneration are regulated by the LINC00961-encoded SPAR
  polypeptide.
authors:
- Matsumoto A
- Pasut A
- Matsumoto M
- Yamashita R
- Fung J
- Monteleone E
- Saghatelian A
- Nakayama KI
- Clohessy JG
- Pandolfi PP
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature21034
---

# mTORC1 and muscle regeneration are regulated by the LINC00961-encoded SPAR polypeptide.
**Authors:** Matsumoto A, Pasut A, Matsumoto M, Yamashita R, Fung J, Monteleone E, Saghatelian A, Nakayama KI, Clohessy JG, Pandolfi PP
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature21034](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21034)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2017 Jan 12;541(7636):228-232. doi: 10.1038/nature21034. Epub 2016 Dec
 26.

mTORC1 and muscle regeneration are regulated by the LINC00961-encoded SPAR 
polypeptide.

Matsumoto A(1), Pasut A(1), Matsumoto M(2), Yamashita R(3), Fung J(1), 
Monteleone E(1)(4), Saghatelian A(5), Nakayama KI(2), Clohessy JG(1), Pandolfi 
PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of 
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(3)Department of BioBank, Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization (ToMMo), Tohoku 
University, Sendai 980-8573, Japan.
(4)Molecular Biotechnology Center and Department of Molecular Biotechnology and 
Health Sciences, University of Turin, Via Nizza 52, 10126 Turin, Italy.
(5)The Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Helmsley Center for 
Genomic Medicine, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2017 May;27(5):604-605. doi: 10.1038/cr.2017.35.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2017 Apr 6;20(4):428-430. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2017.03.016.

Although long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are non-protein-coding transcripts by 
definition, recent studies have shown that a fraction of putative small open 
reading frames within lncRNAs are translated. However, the biological 
significance of these hidden polypeptides is still unclear. Here we identify and 
functionally characterize a novel polypeptide encoded by the lncRNA LINC00961. 
This polypeptide is conserved between human and mouse, is localized to the late 
endosome/lysosome and interacts with the lysosomal v-ATPase to negatively 
regulate mTORC1 activation. This regulation of mTORC1 is specific to activation 
of mTORC1 by amino acid stimulation, rather than by growth factors. Hence, we 
termed this polypeptide 'small regulatory polypeptide of amino acid response' 
(SPAR). We show that the SPAR-encoding lncRNA is highly expressed in a subset of 
tissues and use CRISPR/Cas9 engineering to develop a SPAR-polypeptide-specific 
knockout mouse while maintaining expression of the host lncRNA. We find that the 
SPAR-encoding lncRNA is downregulated in skeletal muscle upon acute injury, and 
using this in vivo model we establish that SPAR downregulation enables efficient 
activation of mTORC1 and promotes muscle regeneration. Our data provide a 
mechanism by which mTORC1 activation may be finely regulated in a 
tissue-specific manner in response to injury, and a paradigm by which lncRNAs 
encoding small polypeptides can modulate general biological pathways and 
processes to facilitate tissue-specific requirements, consistent with their 
restricted and highly regulated expression profile.

DOI: 10.1038/nature21034
PMID: 28024296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
