---
pmid: '9469939'
title: 'Cloning of a retinally abundant regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS-r/RGS16):
  genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the human gene.'
authors:
- Snow BE
- Antonio L
- Suggs S
- Siderovski DP
journal: Gene
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00593-3
---

# Cloning of a retinally abundant regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS-r/RGS16): genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the human gene.
**Authors:** Snow BE, Antonio L, Suggs S, Siderovski DP
**Journal:** Gene (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00593-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00593-3)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1998 Jan 12;206(2):247-53. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00593-3.

Cloning of a retinally abundant regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS-r/RGS16): 
genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the human gene.

Snow BE(1), Antonio L, Suggs S, Siderovski DP.

Author information:
(1)Quantitative Biology Laboratory, Amgen Institute, 620 University Avenue, M5G 
2C1, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Erratum in
    Gene 1998 Jun 15;213(1-2):223.
    Gene 1998 Sep 14;217(1-2):187.

Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) constitute a family of GTPase-activating 
proteins with varying tissue-specific expression patterns and G-protein alpha 
subunit specificities. Here, we describe the molecular cloning of the human 
RGS-r/RGS16 cDNA, encoding a predicted polypeptide of 23kDa that shows 86% 
identity to mouse RGS-r. Northern blot analysis shows that, like the mouse Rgs-r 
message, hRGS-r mRNA is abundantly expressed in retina, with lower levels of 
expression in most other tissues examined. Characterization of the genomic 
organization of the hRGS-r gene shows that it consists of five exons and four 
introns. We have also mapped the human RGS-r /RGS16 gene to chromosome 1q25-1q31 
by fluorescence in situ hybridzation. Analysis of human ESTs reveals that at 
least five members of the RGS gene family map to chromosome 1q, suggesting that 
at least part of the RGS family arose through gene duplication. The chromosomal 
location, retinal abundance, and presumed function of the human RGS-r protein in 
desensitizing photoreceptor signaling make the RGS-r/RGS16 locus a candidate for 
mutations responsible for retinitis pigmentosa with para-arteriolar preservation 
of retinal pigment epithelium (RP-PPRE or RP12), an autosomal recessive disorder 
previously mapped to 1q31.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00593-3
PMID: 9469939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
