---
pmid: '16227597'
title: A-kinase-anchoring protein 95 functions as a potential carrier for the nuclear
  translocation of active caspase 3 through an enzyme-substrate-like association.
authors:
- Kamada S
- Kikkawa U
- Tsujimoto Y
- Hunter T
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1265837
doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9469-9477.2005
---

# A-kinase-anchoring protein 95 functions as a potential carrier for the nuclear translocation of active caspase 3 through an enzyme-substrate-like association.
**Authors:** Kamada S, Kikkawa U, Tsujimoto Y, Hunter T
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.25.21.9469-9477.2005](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.25.21.9469-9477.2005)
**PMC:** [PMC1265837](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1265837/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;25(21):9469-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9469-9477.2005.

A-kinase-anchoring protein 95 functions as a potential carrier for the nuclear 
translocation of active caspase 3 through an enzyme-substrate-like association.

Kamada S(1), Kikkawa U, Tsujimoto Y, Hunter T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
skamada@kobe-u.ac.jp

Caspase-mediated proteolysis is a critical and central element of the apoptotic 
process, and caspase 3, one of the effector caspases, is proposed to play 
essential roles in the nuclear morphological changes of apoptotic cells. 
Although many substrates for caspase 3 localize in the nucleus and caspase 3 
translocates from the cytoplasm to the nuclei after activation in apoptotic 
cells, the molecular mechanisms of nuclear translocation of active caspase 3 
have been unclear. Recently, we suggested that a substrate-like protein(s) 
served as a carrier to transport caspase 3 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus. 
In the present study, we identified A-kinase-anchoring protein 95 (AKAP95) as a 
caspase 3-binding protein. Small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of AKAP95 
reduced apoptotic nuclear morphological changes, suggesting that AKAP95 is 
involved in the process of apoptotic nuclear morphological changes. The 
association of AKAP95 with active caspase 3 was analogous to an enzyme-substrate 
interaction. Furthermore, overexpression of AKAP95 with nuclear localization 
sequence mutations inhibited nuclear morphological changes in apoptotic cells. 
These results indicate that AKAP95 is a potential carrier protein for active 
caspase 3 from the cytoplasm into the nuclei in apoptotic cells.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.25.21.9469-9477.2005
PMCID: PMC1265837
PMID: 16227597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Caspase-mediated proteolysis is a critical and central element of the apoptotic process, and caspase 3, one of the effector caspases, is proposed to play essential roles in the nuclear morphological changes of apoptotic cells. Although many substrates for caspase 3 localize in the nucleus and caspase 3 translocates from the cytoplasm to the nuclei after activation in apoptotic cells, the molecular mechanisms of nuclear translocation of active caspase 3 have been unclear. Recently, we suggested that a substrate-like protein(s) served as a carrier to transport caspase 3 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus. In the present study, we identified A-kinase-anchoring protein 95 (AKAP95) as a caspase 3-binding protein. Small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of AKAP95 reduced apoptotic nuclear morphological changes, suggesting that AKAP95 is involved in the process of apoptotic nuclear morphological changes. The association of AKAP95 with active caspase 3 was analogous to an enzyme-substrate interaction. Furthermore, overexpression of AKAP95 with nuclear localization sequence mutations inhibited nuclear morphological changes in apoptotic cells. These results indicate that AKAP95 is a potential carrier protein for active caspase 3 from the cytoplasm into the nuclei in apoptotic cells.

RESULTS

Identification of caspase 3-binding proteins is valuable for understanding the molecular mechanisms of apoptotic execution. Therefore, we used the yeast two-hybrid method, which has been successfully used to identify caspase substrates ( 21 , 30 ). In this manner, we identified several potential caspase 3 substrates including gelsolin (clones 1, 9, and 12 in reference 21 ), and a potential binding protein to caspase 3 (clone 13 in reference 21 ). Clone 13 contained residues 6 to 687 of mouse AKAP95, which has bipartite NLSs (see Fig. 5A ) and is suggested to play an essential role in chromatin condensation during mitosis ( 9 , 13 , 36 ).
