---
pmid: '24857657'
title: HuD regulates coding and noncoding RNA to induce APP→Aβ processing.
authors:
- Kang MJ
- Abdelmohsen K
- Hutchison ER
- Mitchell SJ
- Grammatikakis I
- Guo R
- Noh JH
- Martindale JL
- Yang X
- Lee EK
- Faghihi MA
- Wahlestedt C
- Troncoso JC
- Pletnikova O
- Perrone-Bizzozero N
- Resnick SM
- de Cabo R
- Mattson MP
- Gorospe M
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4074355
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.050
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# HuD regulates coding and noncoding RNA to induce APP→Aβ processing.
**Authors:** Kang MJ, Abdelmohsen K, Hutchison ER, Mitchell SJ, Grammatikakis I, Guo R, Noh JH, Martindale JL, Yang X, Lee EK, Faghihi MA, Wahlestedt C, Troncoso JC, Pletnikova O, Perrone-Bizzozero N, Resnick SM, de Cabo R, Mattson MP, Gorospe M
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.050)
**PMC:** [PMC4074355](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4074355/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2014 Jun 12;7(5):1401-1409. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.050. Epub 
2014 May 22.

HuD regulates coding and noncoding RNA to induce APP→Aβ processing.

Kang MJ(1), Abdelmohsen K(1), Hutchison ER(2), Mitchell SJ(3), Grammatikakis 
I(1), Guo R(1), Noh JH(1), Martindale JL(1), Yang X(1), Lee EK(1), Faghihi 
MA(4), Wahlestedt C(4), Troncoso JC(5), Pletnikova O(5), Perrone-Bizzozero N(6), 
Resnick SM(7), de Cabo R(3), Mattson MP(2), Gorospe M(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research 
Program, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research 
Program, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(3)Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging-Intramural 
Research Program, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(4)Center for Therapeutic Innovation, University of Miami, Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(6)Department of Neurosciences, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Behavioral Neuroscience, National Institute on Aging-Intramural 
Research Program, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging-Intramural Research 
Program, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. Electronic address: 
myriam-gorospe@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Aging (Albany NY). 2014 Jun;6(6):428-9. doi: 10.18632/aging.100672.

The primarily neuronal RNA-binding protein HuD is implicated in learning and 
memory. Here, we report the identification of several HuD target transcripts 
linked to Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. HuD interacted with the 3' UTRs 
of APP mRNA (encoding amyloid precursor protein) and BACE1 mRNA (encoding β-site 
APP-cleaving enzyme 1) and increased the half-lives of these mRNAs. HuD also 
associated with and stabilized the long noncoding (lnc)RNA BACE1AS, which partly 
complements BACE1 mRNA and enhances BACE1 expression. Consistent with HuD 
promoting production of APP and APP-cleaving enzyme, the levels of APP, BACE1, 
BACE1AS, and Aβ were higher in the brain of HuD-overexpressing mice. 
Importantly, cortex (superior temporal gyrus) from patients with AD displayed 
significantly higher levels of HuD and, accordingly, elevated APP, BACE1, 
BACE1AS, and Aβ than did cortical tissue from healthy age-matched individuals. 
We propose that HuD jointly promotes the production of APP and the cleavage of 
its amyloidogenic fragment, Aβ.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.04.050
PMCID: PMC4074355
PMID: 24857657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTIONThe post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression underlies many aspects of mammalian physiology and pathology. The two main groups of post-transcriptional regulators, RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and noncoding RNAs (Moore, 2005; Morris et al., 2010), have been implicated in all steps controlling gene expression after transcription: pre-mRNA splicing and maturation, and mRNA transport, editing, stability, storage, and translation.Among the noncoding RNAs that control gene expression post-transcriptionally, the best characterized molecules are microRNAs (miRNAs, 22 nt in length), which typically associate with the 3’-untranslated region (UTR) of target mRNAs and repress their translation and/or stability (Fabian et al., 2010). Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are also gaining recognition as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Through complementary base-pairing, lncRNAs can modulate the turnover and translation rate of target mRNAs; in the absence of complementarity, lncRNAs can suppress precursor mRNA splicing and translation by acting as decoys or competitors of RBPs and miRNAs (Yoon et al., 2012a).RBPs associate with a wide range of coding and noncoding RNAs and thus modulate many critical functions of the cell, including proliferation, survival, differentiation, motility, senescence, and apoptosis (Glisovic et al., 2008). Among them, the elav (embryonic lethal abnormal vision)/Hu (human antigen) group of proteins, has been implicated primarily in controlling the stability and translation of target mRNAs. The Hu family comprises a ubiquitous member (HuR) and three predominantly neuronal members (HuB, HuC, HuD). Elav/Hu proteins generally bind to U- and AU-rich RNA elements in target transcripts with which they associate via three highly conserved RNA recognition motifs (RRMs 1–3) (Hinman and Lou, 2008; Pascale et al., 2008).Unlike HuR, which is primarily nuclear, HuD is abundantly present in the cytoplasm. HuD expression is restricted to a few tissues, mainly neurons, gonads, and pancreatic β cells (Good, 1995, Lee et al., 2012). Several lines of evidence indicate that in cultured neurons, HuD promotes neurite outgrowth (Kasashima et al., 1999; Abdelmohsen et al., 2010), but the physiological role of HuD in animals appears to be complex. While adult HuD-knockout (KO) mice do not exhibit morphological defects, HuD KO embryos display transient impairment in cranial nerve development, and neurospheres derived from these mice generate fewer neurons compared to wild-type mice (Akamatsu et al., 2005). At the same time, expression of HuB, HuC, and HuD specifically increases in areas of mouse and rat brain associated with spatial learning, implicating these Hu proteins in learning and memory. In these tissues, elevated HuD is associated with enhanced production of GAP-43 (growth-associated protein-43), encoded by a HuD target mRNA (Anderson et al., 2001; Pascale et al., 2004). The roles of HuD in neuronal development and memory have been reviewed (Deschênes-Furry et al., 2006; Pascale et al., 2008; Perrone-Bizzozero et al., 2011).HuD targets include many mRNAs that encode proteins preferentially expressed in neurons (e.g., (GAP-43, acetylcholinesterase, tau, PSD-95, neuroserpin, musashi-1, and HuD itself), as well as proteins expressed in other tissues (e.g., c-Myc, N-myc, RhoA, c-Fos, VEGF, p21, p27, Bcl-2, NCAM1, and MARCKS) (Deschênes-Furry et al., 2006; Pascale et al., 2008; Abdelmohsen et al., 2010; Bolognani et al., 2010). With the exception of p27 and insulin mRNAs, whose translation is repressed by HuD (Kullmann et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2010), HuD generally promotes the expression of target mRNAs. A recent survey of HuD target transcripts in human neuroblastoma cells (Abdelmohsen et al., 2010) revealed a number of HuD-interacting mRNAs implicated in the synthesis and processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) into its amyloidogenic fragment, Aβ. HuD binds APP mRNA and BACE1 mRNA, the latter encoding the β-secretase which cleaves APP in the critical first proteolytic processing step that leads to the generation of Aβ. HuD also bound to and increased the abundance of BACE1AS, a lncRNA that stabilizes BACE1 mRNA and promotes BACE1 expression (Faghihi et al., 2008). Our findings indicate that HuD may coordinate the production and cleavage of APP and further suggest that this regulatory paradigm contributes to Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis, characterized by the accumulation of toxic aggregates of Aβ peptide.

INTRODUCTION

The post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression underlies many aspects of mammalian physiology and pathology. The two main groups of post-transcriptional regulators, RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and noncoding RNAs (Moore, 2005; Morris et al., 2010), have been implicated in all steps controlling gene expression after transcription: pre-mRNA splicing and maturation, and mRNA transport, editing, stability, storage, and translation.

Among the noncoding RNAs that control gene expression post-transcriptionally, the best characterized molecules are microRNAs (miRNAs, 22 nt in length), which typically associate with the 3’-untranslated region (UTR) of target mRNAs and repress their translation and/or stability (Fabian et al., 2010). Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are also gaining recognition as post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Through complementary base-pairing, lncRNAs can modulate the turnover and translation rate of target mRNAs; in the absence of complementarity, lncRNAs can suppress precursor mRNA splicing and translation by acting as decoys or competitors of RBPs and miRNAs (Yoon et al., 2012a).

RBPs associate with a wide range of coding and noncoding RNAs and thus modulate many critical functions of the cell, including proliferation, survival, differentiation, motility, senescence, and apoptosis (Glisovic et al., 2008). Among them, the elav (embryonic lethal abnormal vision)/Hu (human antigen) group of proteins, has been implicated primarily in controlling the stability and translation of target mRNAs. The Hu family comprises a ubiquitous member (HuR) and three predominantly neuronal members (HuB, HuC, HuD). Elav/Hu proteins generally bind to U- and AU-rich RNA elements in target transcripts with which they associate via three highly conserved RNA recognition motifs (RRMs 1–3) (Hinman and Lou, 2008; Pascale et al., 2008).

Unlike HuR, which is primarily nuclear, HuD is abundantly present in the cytoplasm. HuD expression is restricted to a few tissues, mainly neurons, gonads, and pancreatic β cells (Good, 1995, Lee et al., 2012). Several lines of evidence indicate that in cultured neurons, HuD promotes neurite outgrowth (Kasashima et al., 1999; Abdelmohsen et al., 2010), but the physiological role of HuD in animals appears to be complex. While adult HuD-knockout (KO) mice do not exhibit morphological defects, HuD KO embryos display transient impairment in cranial nerve development, and neurospheres derived from these mice generate fewer neurons compared to wild-type mice (Akamatsu et al., 2005). At the same time, expression of HuB, HuC, and HuD specifically increases in areas of mouse and rat brain associated with spatial learning, implicating these Hu proteins in learning and memory. In these tissues, elevated HuD is associated with enhanced production of GAP-43 (growth-associated protein-43), encoded by a HuD target mRNA (Anderson et al., 2001; Pascale et al., 2004). The roles of HuD in neuronal development and memory have been reviewed (Deschênes-Furry et al., 2006; Pascale et al., 2008; Perrone-Bizzozero et al., 2011).

HuD targets include many mRNAs that encode proteins preferentially expressed in neurons (e.g., (GAP-43, acetylcholinesterase, tau, PSD-95, neuroserpin, musashi-1, and HuD itself), as well as proteins expressed in other tissues (e.g., c-Myc, N-myc, RhoA, c-Fos, VEGF, p21, p27, Bcl-2, NCAM1, and MARCKS) (Deschênes-Furry et al., 2006; Pascale et al., 2008; Abdelmohsen et al., 2010; Bolognani et al., 2010). With the exception of p27 and insulin mRNAs, whose translation is repressed by HuD (Kullmann et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2010), HuD generally promotes the expression of target mRNAs. A recent survey of HuD target transcripts in human neuroblastoma cells (Abdelmohsen et al., 2010) revealed a number of HuD-interacting mRNAs implicated in the synthesis and processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) into its amyloidogenic fragment, Aβ. HuD binds APP mRNA and BACE1 mRNA, the latter encoding the β-secretase which cleaves APP in the critical first proteolytic processing step that leads to the generation of Aβ. HuD also bound to and increased the abundance of BACE1AS, a lncRNA that stabilizes BACE1 mRNA and promotes BACE1 expression (Faghihi et al., 2008). Our findings indicate that HuD may coordinate the production and cleavage of APP and further suggest that this regulatory paradigm contributes to Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis, characterized by the accumulation of toxic aggregates of Aβ peptide.

RESULTSHuD associates mRNAs involved in APP processingRNAs associated with HuD were identified by immunoprecipitation (IP) of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes using an anti-HuD antibody in parallel with control IgG IP (RIP analysis). The interaction of HuD in the IP material (Fig. 1A) with bound RNAs was assayed by reverse transcription (RT) and subsequent real-time, quantitative (q)PCR amplification. An earlier survey in the human neuroblastoma BE(2)-M17 cells (Abdelmohsen et al., 2010), revealed that APP mRNA was a potential target of HuD. Experiments to investigate this possibility directly revealed that APP mRNA was significantly enriched in HuD IP samples compared with IgG IP samples, and additionally showed that several HuD-bound mRNAs encoded proteases that cleave APP to generate Aβ peptide. Among them, the β-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) mRNA was also significantly enriched, as previously observed (Bolognani et al., 2010), while HuD associated less prominently with mRNAs encoding components of the γ-secretase complex (PSEN1 and PSEN2 mRNAs, encoding presenilins, and APH1A and APH1B mRNAs, encoding presenilin-stabilization factors) (Fig. 1B). The PEN2 mRNA (encoding presenilin enhancer 2) and the NCSTN mRNA (encoding nicastrin, a component of the γ secretase protein complex) showed no significant enrichment in HuD IP (Fig. 1B). We thus focused on analyzing the interaction of HuD with APP and BACE1 mRNAs in human neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells.To identify areas of interaction of HuD with APP mRNA, biotinylated segments spanning the 5’UTR, coding region (CR) and 3’UTR of the APP mRNA were synthesized in vitro and incubated with cytoplasmic lysates of SK-N-F1 cells. After pulldown using streptavidin-coated beads, HuD association with the biotinylated transcripts was assessed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Fig. 1C, several APP 3’UTR segments associated with HuD in vitro, but segments of the APP CR, the APP 5’UTR, or a negative control RNA (GAPDH 3’UTR) did not. Although HuD bound multiple APP 3’UTR segments, the most robust affinity and regulation (Fig. S1) was mapped to segment 3’d. The consequences of the interaction of HuD with the APP mRNA were assessed by silencing HuD; 48 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with a small interfering (si)RNA directed to HuD, the decline in HuD levels caused a marked decrease in the levels of APP protein and APP mRNA, as assessed by WB and RT-qPCR analyses, respectively (Figs. 1D,E).HuD enhances the stability and translation of APP mRNASince HuD was shown to stabilize a number of target mRNAs, we investigated if the loss in APP mRNA after silencing HuD was due at least in part to changes in APP mRNA stability. After silencing HuD expression in SK-N-F1 cells, actinomycin D was used to inhibit de novo transcription; the time needed for APP mRNA to be reduced to 50% of its initial abundance [its half-life (t1/2)] was then calculated by measuring APP mRNA levels using RT-qPCR and normalizing to 18S rRNA levels. As shown in Fig. 1F, APP mRNA half-life in control cells (Ctrl siRNA, >6.0 hours) was much longer than that measured in HuD siRNA cells (~4.0 hours). The half-life of GAPDH mRNA, a stable mRNA that encodes a housekeeping protein, was not shortened by HuD silencing (Fig. 1F). HuD was also shown to promote mRNA translation (Fukao et al., 2009); to investigate if HuD also affected APP translation, we silenced HuD in SK-N-F1 cells and quantified the fraction of APP mRNA associated with the translation machinery in each transfection group. Cytoplasmic extracts from the Ctrl siRNA and HuD siRNA groups were fractionated on sucrose gradients, and the relative abundance of APP mRNA in each fraction indicated the association of APP mRNA with the cellular polysomes and hence its translation status. The polysome fractionation pattern was identical in both groups, suggesting that silencing HuD does not affect translation globally. In Ctrl siRNA cells, APP mRNA levels were very low in non-translating and low-translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 1 to 4, where free RNA and 40S and 60S subunits, as well as 80S monosomes, are found), but it was abundant in the actively translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 5 to 10, spanning low- and high-molecular-weight polysomes) (Fig. 1G) and peaking at fraction 9. However, in HuD siRNA-transfected cells, APP mRNA showed a leftward shift on the gradient, peaking at fraction 8 indicating that APP mRNA formed on average smaller polysomes after silencing HuD. These results agree with a role for HuD both elevating APP mRNA abundance and enhancing the translation of APP mRNA.These effects were further examined using heterologous luciferase reporter vectors that expressed renilla luciferase (RL) lacking or containing the APP 3’UTR [psiCHECK2, psiCHECK2-APP(3’UTR), respectively]. The ratio of RL to firefly luciferase (FL) (encoded by an internal control reporter transcript within the same plasmid) was set as 1 for the parent vector (psiCHECK2). The lower RL/FL ratios for HuD siRNA-transfected cells (~48%) relative to those for Ctrl siRNA-transfected cells indicated that the presence of APP 3’UTR reduced luciferase production when HuD was silenced (Fig. 1H, left). As shown in Fig. 1H
right, there was a parallel reduction in RL mRNA levels compared with FL mRNA levels in HuD silenced cells (~52%), indicating that accelerated decay of the RL-APP(3’UTR) chimeric mRNA contributed to the decrease in RL expression. In sum, HuD enhanced both the stability and translation of APP mRNA.HuD stabilizes BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS RNANext, we examined the interaction of HuD with BACE1 mRNA. HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of the 3’UTR but not the CR or 5’UTR of BACE1 mRNA, showing preferential binding to a distal BACE1 3’UTR segment (3’b) (Fig. 2A, Fig. S2). The levels of BACE1 mRNA were lower in the HuD siRNA group and this reduction was achieved at least in part through a decline in BACE1 mRNA stability (Fig. 2B,C), just as seen for APP mRNA (Fig. 1F); non-targets of HuD, including mRNAs encoding γ-secretases, did not show this trend (Fig. S2). BACE1 protein levels were correspondingly lower, but the translation of BACE1 mRNA did not appear to be affected by HuD silencing (Fig. 2D,E).The stability of BACE1 mRNA was not previously reported to be affected by other RBPs, but it was shown to be stabilized via interaction with the lncRNA BACE1AS (Faghihi et al., 2008). Thus, we asked if the present regulatory paradigm involved BACE1AS. RIP analysis revealed that BACE1AS was robustly present in HuD RNP complexes (Fig. 3A) and that HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of BACE1AS RNA; negative controls GAPDH 3’UTR and the lncRNA 7SL were included (Fig. 3B). This interaction likely stabilized BACE1AS, since silencing HuD lowered the steady-state levels (Fig. 3C) and the half-life of BACE1AS (Fig. 3D). Further evidence that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS interacted in our study system was obtained by engineering a plasmid that expressed a chimeric BACE1AS tagged with MS2 RNA hairpins (pMS2-BACE1AS). By 36 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with pMS2 or pMS2-BACE1AS into along with plasmid pMS2-YFP, which expressed a fluorescent fusion protein, MS2-YFP (Lee et al., 2010; Fig. 3E), RIP analysis was carried out using anti-YFP antibody to bring down the YFP-MS2 protein bound to MS2-bearing RNAs. As shown in Fig. 3F, BACE1 mRNA, as measured by RT-qPCR analysis in the IP samples, was significantly more abundant in MS2-BACE1AS IP than in control IP (pMS2 transfection group), indicating that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS associated physically in SK-N-F1 cells.Collectively, these results suggest a model whereby HuD jointly controls three transcripts on the route to generating amyloidogenic Aβ: (i) HuD binds to APP mRNA and enhances APP levels, (ii) HuD binds to BACE1 mRNA and promotes BACE1 production, and (iii) HuD binds to BACE1AS RNA and increases its levels, further augmenting BACE1 production. By acting on functionally related RNAs, HuD serves as a master coordinator of Aβ production (Fig. 3G).HuD influence on APP→Aβ production in the brainBased on the model proposed presented in Fig. 3G, we hypothesized that HuD may affect Aβ production in the brain. We tested this possibility using two different models. In transgenic mice overexpressing HuD (HuD-Tg mice) as a tagged protein (Myc-HuD; Fig. 4A), the levels of Aβ40, as measured by ELISA (Materials and Methods) were significantly higher than in WT mice (Fig. 4B) and the levels of Elavl4 mRNA (encoding HuD), App mRNA, Bace1 mRNA, and Bace1as RNA were higher in hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum, relative to the levels in age-matched WT mice (Fig. 4C).We also studied the levels of HuD in brains of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients. Brain sections from the superior temporal gyrus (STG) from 10 persons with AD and 10 age-matched healthy individuals were used for RNA and protein analysis. RNA prepared from these samples was analyzed by RT-qPCR; as shown in Fig. 4D, ELAVL4 mRNA, and BACE1AS RNA were markedly higher in AD brains relative to healthy brains, while APP mRNA and BACE1 mRNA were moderately higher in AD patients. The relative levels of protein followed these general differences (Fig. 4E; Faghihi et al., 2008), with greater than twofold higher levels of HuD and BACE1 in AD brains. In keeping with the higher levels of BACE1, Aβ peptide (Aβ40 and Aβ42) was also more abundant in AD brains (Fig. 4F). In summary, in brains of HuD-overexpressing mice, the levels of APP, BACE1, and Aβ40 correlated with the heightened abundance of HuD, while in human AD brains, HuD levels were significantly elevated and correlated with higher levels of BACE1, BACE1AS, and Aβ.

HuD associates mRNAs involved in APP processingRNAs associated with HuD were identified by immunoprecipitation (IP) of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes using an anti-HuD antibody in parallel with control IgG IP (RIP analysis). The interaction of HuD in the IP material (Fig. 1A) with bound RNAs was assayed by reverse transcription (RT) and subsequent real-time, quantitative (q)PCR amplification. An earlier survey in the human neuroblastoma BE(2)-M17 cells (Abdelmohsen et al., 2010), revealed that APP mRNA was a potential target of HuD. Experiments to investigate this possibility directly revealed that APP mRNA was significantly enriched in HuD IP samples compared with IgG IP samples, and additionally showed that several HuD-bound mRNAs encoded proteases that cleave APP to generate Aβ peptide. Among them, the β-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) mRNA was also significantly enriched, as previously observed (Bolognani et al., 2010), while HuD associated less prominently with mRNAs encoding components of the γ-secretase complex (PSEN1 and PSEN2 mRNAs, encoding presenilins, and APH1A and APH1B mRNAs, encoding presenilin-stabilization factors) (Fig. 1B). The PEN2 mRNA (encoding presenilin enhancer 2) and the NCSTN mRNA (encoding nicastrin, a component of the γ secretase protein complex) showed no significant enrichment in HuD IP (Fig. 1B). We thus focused on analyzing the interaction of HuD with APP and BACE1 mRNAs in human neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells.To identify areas of interaction of HuD with APP mRNA, biotinylated segments spanning the 5’UTR, coding region (CR) and 3’UTR of the APP mRNA were synthesized in vitro and incubated with cytoplasmic lysates of SK-N-F1 cells. After pulldown using streptavidin-coated beads, HuD association with the biotinylated transcripts was assessed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Fig. 1C, several APP 3’UTR segments associated with HuD in vitro, but segments of the APP CR, the APP 5’UTR, or a negative control RNA (GAPDH 3’UTR) did not. Although HuD bound multiple APP 3’UTR segments, the most robust affinity and regulation (Fig. S1) was mapped to segment 3’d. The consequences of the interaction of HuD with the APP mRNA were assessed by silencing HuD; 48 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with a small interfering (si)RNA directed to HuD, the decline in HuD levels caused a marked decrease in the levels of APP protein and APP mRNA, as assessed by WB and RT-qPCR analyses, respectively (Figs. 1D,E).

HuD associates mRNAs involved in APP processing

RNAs associated with HuD were identified by immunoprecipitation (IP) of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes using an anti-HuD antibody in parallel with control IgG IP (RIP analysis). The interaction of HuD in the IP material (Fig. 1A) with bound RNAs was assayed by reverse transcription (RT) and subsequent real-time, quantitative (q)PCR amplification. An earlier survey in the human neuroblastoma BE(2)-M17 cells (Abdelmohsen et al., 2010), revealed that APP mRNA was a potential target of HuD. Experiments to investigate this possibility directly revealed that APP mRNA was significantly enriched in HuD IP samples compared with IgG IP samples, and additionally showed that several HuD-bound mRNAs encoded proteases that cleave APP to generate Aβ peptide. Among them, the β-site APP-cleaving enzyme (BACE1) mRNA was also significantly enriched, as previously observed (Bolognani et al., 2010), while HuD associated less prominently with mRNAs encoding components of the γ-secretase complex (PSEN1 and PSEN2 mRNAs, encoding presenilins, and APH1A and APH1B mRNAs, encoding presenilin-stabilization factors) (Fig. 1B). The PEN2 mRNA (encoding presenilin enhancer 2) and the NCSTN mRNA (encoding nicastrin, a component of the γ secretase protein complex) showed no significant enrichment in HuD IP (Fig. 1B). We thus focused on analyzing the interaction of HuD with APP and BACE1 mRNAs in human neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells.

To identify areas of interaction of HuD with APP mRNA, biotinylated segments spanning the 5’UTR, coding region (CR) and 3’UTR of the APP mRNA were synthesized in vitro and incubated with cytoplasmic lysates of SK-N-F1 cells. After pulldown using streptavidin-coated beads, HuD association with the biotinylated transcripts was assessed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Fig. 1C, several APP 3’UTR segments associated with HuD in vitro, but segments of the APP CR, the APP 5’UTR, or a negative control RNA (GAPDH 3’UTR) did not. Although HuD bound multiple APP 3’UTR segments, the most robust affinity and regulation (Fig. S1) was mapped to segment 3’d. The consequences of the interaction of HuD with the APP mRNA were assessed by silencing HuD; 48 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with a small interfering (si)RNA directed to HuD, the decline in HuD levels caused a marked decrease in the levels of APP protein and APP mRNA, as assessed by WB and RT-qPCR analyses, respectively (Figs. 1D,E).

HuD enhances the stability and translation of APP mRNASince HuD was shown to stabilize a number of target mRNAs, we investigated if the loss in APP mRNA after silencing HuD was due at least in part to changes in APP mRNA stability. After silencing HuD expression in SK-N-F1 cells, actinomycin D was used to inhibit de novo transcription; the time needed for APP mRNA to be reduced to 50% of its initial abundance [its half-life (t1/2)] was then calculated by measuring APP mRNA levels using RT-qPCR and normalizing to 18S rRNA levels. As shown in Fig. 1F, APP mRNA half-life in control cells (Ctrl siRNA, >6.0 hours) was much longer than that measured in HuD siRNA cells (~4.0 hours). The half-life of GAPDH mRNA, a stable mRNA that encodes a housekeeping protein, was not shortened by HuD silencing (Fig. 1F). HuD was also shown to promote mRNA translation (Fukao et al., 2009); to investigate if HuD also affected APP translation, we silenced HuD in SK-N-F1 cells and quantified the fraction of APP mRNA associated with the translation machinery in each transfection group. Cytoplasmic extracts from the Ctrl siRNA and HuD siRNA groups were fractionated on sucrose gradients, and the relative abundance of APP mRNA in each fraction indicated the association of APP mRNA with the cellular polysomes and hence its translation status. The polysome fractionation pattern was identical in both groups, suggesting that silencing HuD does not affect translation globally. In Ctrl siRNA cells, APP mRNA levels were very low in non-translating and low-translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 1 to 4, where free RNA and 40S and 60S subunits, as well as 80S monosomes, are found), but it was abundant in the actively translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 5 to 10, spanning low- and high-molecular-weight polysomes) (Fig. 1G) and peaking at fraction 9. However, in HuD siRNA-transfected cells, APP mRNA showed a leftward shift on the gradient, peaking at fraction 8 indicating that APP mRNA formed on average smaller polysomes after silencing HuD. These results agree with a role for HuD both elevating APP mRNA abundance and enhancing the translation of APP mRNA.These effects were further examined using heterologous luciferase reporter vectors that expressed renilla luciferase (RL) lacking or containing the APP 3’UTR [psiCHECK2, psiCHECK2-APP(3’UTR), respectively]. The ratio of RL to firefly luciferase (FL) (encoded by an internal control reporter transcript within the same plasmid) was set as 1 for the parent vector (psiCHECK2). The lower RL/FL ratios for HuD siRNA-transfected cells (~48%) relative to those for Ctrl siRNA-transfected cells indicated that the presence of APP 3’UTR reduced luciferase production when HuD was silenced (Fig. 1H, left). As shown in Fig. 1H
right, there was a parallel reduction in RL mRNA levels compared with FL mRNA levels in HuD silenced cells (~52%), indicating that accelerated decay of the RL-APP(3’UTR) chimeric mRNA contributed to the decrease in RL expression. In sum, HuD enhanced both the stability and translation of APP mRNA.

HuD enhances the stability and translation of APP mRNA

Since HuD was shown to stabilize a number of target mRNAs, we investigated if the loss in APP mRNA after silencing HuD was due at least in part to changes in APP mRNA stability. After silencing HuD expression in SK-N-F1 cells, actinomycin D was used to inhibit de novo transcription; the time needed for APP mRNA to be reduced to 50% of its initial abundance [its half-life (t1/2)] was then calculated by measuring APP mRNA levels using RT-qPCR and normalizing to 18S rRNA levels. As shown in Fig. 1F, APP mRNA half-life in control cells (Ctrl siRNA, >6.0 hours) was much longer than that measured in HuD siRNA cells (~4.0 hours). The half-life of GAPDH mRNA, a stable mRNA that encodes a housekeeping protein, was not shortened by HuD silencing (Fig. 1F). HuD was also shown to promote mRNA translation (Fukao et al., 2009); to investigate if HuD also affected APP translation, we silenced HuD in SK-N-F1 cells and quantified the fraction of APP mRNA associated with the translation machinery in each transfection group. Cytoplasmic extracts from the Ctrl siRNA and HuD siRNA groups were fractionated on sucrose gradients, and the relative abundance of APP mRNA in each fraction indicated the association of APP mRNA with the cellular polysomes and hence its translation status. The polysome fractionation pattern was identical in both groups, suggesting that silencing HuD does not affect translation globally. In Ctrl siRNA cells, APP mRNA levels were very low in non-translating and low-translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 1 to 4, where free RNA and 40S and 60S subunits, as well as 80S monosomes, are found), but it was abundant in the actively translating fractions of the gradient (fractions 5 to 10, spanning low- and high-molecular-weight polysomes) (Fig. 1G) and peaking at fraction 9. However, in HuD siRNA-transfected cells, APP mRNA showed a leftward shift on the gradient, peaking at fraction 8 indicating that APP mRNA formed on average smaller polysomes after silencing HuD. These results agree with a role for HuD both elevating APP mRNA abundance and enhancing the translation of APP mRNA.

These effects were further examined using heterologous luciferase reporter vectors that expressed renilla luciferase (RL) lacking or containing the APP 3’UTR [psiCHECK2, psiCHECK2-APP(3’UTR), respectively]. The ratio of RL to firefly luciferase (FL) (encoded by an internal control reporter transcript within the same plasmid) was set as 1 for the parent vector (psiCHECK2). The lower RL/FL ratios for HuD siRNA-transfected cells (~48%) relative to those for Ctrl siRNA-transfected cells indicated that the presence of APP 3’UTR reduced luciferase production when HuD was silenced (Fig. 1H, left). As shown in Fig. 1H
right, there was a parallel reduction in RL mRNA levels compared with FL mRNA levels in HuD silenced cells (~52%), indicating that accelerated decay of the RL-APP(3’UTR) chimeric mRNA contributed to the decrease in RL expression. In sum, HuD enhanced both the stability and translation of APP mRNA.

HuD stabilizes BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS RNANext, we examined the interaction of HuD with BACE1 mRNA. HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of the 3’UTR but not the CR or 5’UTR of BACE1 mRNA, showing preferential binding to a distal BACE1 3’UTR segment (3’b) (Fig. 2A, Fig. S2). The levels of BACE1 mRNA were lower in the HuD siRNA group and this reduction was achieved at least in part through a decline in BACE1 mRNA stability (Fig. 2B,C), just as seen for APP mRNA (Fig. 1F); non-targets of HuD, including mRNAs encoding γ-secretases, did not show this trend (Fig. S2). BACE1 protein levels were correspondingly lower, but the translation of BACE1 mRNA did not appear to be affected by HuD silencing (Fig. 2D,E).The stability of BACE1 mRNA was not previously reported to be affected by other RBPs, but it was shown to be stabilized via interaction with the lncRNA BACE1AS (Faghihi et al., 2008). Thus, we asked if the present regulatory paradigm involved BACE1AS. RIP analysis revealed that BACE1AS was robustly present in HuD RNP complexes (Fig. 3A) and that HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of BACE1AS RNA; negative controls GAPDH 3’UTR and the lncRNA 7SL were included (Fig. 3B). This interaction likely stabilized BACE1AS, since silencing HuD lowered the steady-state levels (Fig. 3C) and the half-life of BACE1AS (Fig. 3D). Further evidence that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS interacted in our study system was obtained by engineering a plasmid that expressed a chimeric BACE1AS tagged with MS2 RNA hairpins (pMS2-BACE1AS). By 36 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with pMS2 or pMS2-BACE1AS into along with plasmid pMS2-YFP, which expressed a fluorescent fusion protein, MS2-YFP (Lee et al., 2010; Fig. 3E), RIP analysis was carried out using anti-YFP antibody to bring down the YFP-MS2 protein bound to MS2-bearing RNAs. As shown in Fig. 3F, BACE1 mRNA, as measured by RT-qPCR analysis in the IP samples, was significantly more abundant in MS2-BACE1AS IP than in control IP (pMS2 transfection group), indicating that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS associated physically in SK-N-F1 cells.Collectively, these results suggest a model whereby HuD jointly controls three transcripts on the route to generating amyloidogenic Aβ: (i) HuD binds to APP mRNA and enhances APP levels, (ii) HuD binds to BACE1 mRNA and promotes BACE1 production, and (iii) HuD binds to BACE1AS RNA and increases its levels, further augmenting BACE1 production. By acting on functionally related RNAs, HuD serves as a master coordinator of Aβ production (Fig. 3G).

HuD stabilizes BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS RNA

Next, we examined the interaction of HuD with BACE1 mRNA. HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of the 3’UTR but not the CR or 5’UTR of BACE1 mRNA, showing preferential binding to a distal BACE1 3’UTR segment (3’b) (Fig. 2A, Fig. S2). The levels of BACE1 mRNA were lower in the HuD siRNA group and this reduction was achieved at least in part through a decline in BACE1 mRNA stability (Fig. 2B,C), just as seen for APP mRNA (Fig. 1F); non-targets of HuD, including mRNAs encoding γ-secretases, did not show this trend (Fig. S2). BACE1 protein levels were correspondingly lower, but the translation of BACE1 mRNA did not appear to be affected by HuD silencing (Fig. 2D,E).

The stability of BACE1 mRNA was not previously reported to be affected by other RBPs, but it was shown to be stabilized via interaction with the lncRNA BACE1AS (Faghihi et al., 2008). Thus, we asked if the present regulatory paradigm involved BACE1AS. RIP analysis revealed that BACE1AS was robustly present in HuD RNP complexes (Fig. 3A) and that HuD associated in vitro with partial biotinylated segments of BACE1AS RNA; negative controls GAPDH 3’UTR and the lncRNA 7SL were included (Fig. 3B). This interaction likely stabilized BACE1AS, since silencing HuD lowered the steady-state levels (Fig. 3C) and the half-life of BACE1AS (Fig. 3D). Further evidence that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS interacted in our study system was obtained by engineering a plasmid that expressed a chimeric BACE1AS tagged with MS2 RNA hairpins (pMS2-BACE1AS). By 36 h after transfecting SK-N-F1 cells with pMS2 or pMS2-BACE1AS into along with plasmid pMS2-YFP, which expressed a fluorescent fusion protein, MS2-YFP (Lee et al., 2010; Fig. 3E), RIP analysis was carried out using anti-YFP antibody to bring down the YFP-MS2 protein bound to MS2-bearing RNAs. As shown in Fig. 3F, BACE1 mRNA, as measured by RT-qPCR analysis in the IP samples, was significantly more abundant in MS2-BACE1AS IP than in control IP (pMS2 transfection group), indicating that BACE1 mRNA and BACE1AS associated physically in SK-N-F1 cells.

Collectively, these results suggest a model whereby HuD jointly controls three transcripts on the route to generating amyloidogenic Aβ: (i) HuD binds to APP mRNA and enhances APP levels, (ii) HuD binds to BACE1 mRNA and promotes BACE1 production, and (iii) HuD binds to BACE1AS RNA and increases its levels, further augmenting BACE1 production. By acting on functionally related RNAs, HuD serves as a master coordinator of Aβ production (Fig. 3G).

HuD influence on APP→Aβ production in the brainBased on the model proposed presented in Fig. 3G, we hypothesized that HuD may affect Aβ production in the brain. We tested this possibility using two different models. In transgenic mice overexpressing HuD (HuD-Tg mice) as a tagged protein (Myc-HuD; Fig. 4A), the levels of Aβ40, as measured by ELISA (Materials and Methods) were significantly higher than in WT mice (Fig. 4B) and the levels of Elavl4 mRNA (encoding HuD), App mRNA, Bace1 mRNA, and Bace1as RNA were higher in hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum, relative to the levels in age-matched WT mice (Fig. 4C).We also studied the levels of HuD in brains of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients. Brain sections from the superior temporal gyrus (STG) from 10 persons with AD and 10 age-matched healthy individuals were used for RNA and protein analysis. RNA prepared from these samples was analyzed by RT-qPCR; as shown in Fig. 4D, ELAVL4 mRNA, and BACE1AS RNA were markedly higher in AD brains relative to healthy brains, while APP mRNA and BACE1 mRNA were moderately higher in AD patients. The relative levels of protein followed these general differences (Fig. 4E; Faghihi et al., 2008), with greater than twofold higher levels of HuD and BACE1 in AD brains. In keeping with the higher levels of BACE1, Aβ peptide (Aβ40 and Aβ42) was also more abundant in AD brains (Fig. 4F). In summary, in brains of HuD-overexpressing mice, the levels of APP, BACE1, and Aβ40 correlated with the heightened abundance of HuD, while in human AD brains, HuD levels were significantly elevated and correlated with higher levels of BACE1, BACE1AS, and Aβ.

HuD influence on APP→Aβ production in the brain

Based on the model proposed presented in Fig. 3G, we hypothesized that HuD may affect Aβ production in the brain. We tested this possibility using two different models. In transgenic mice overexpressing HuD (HuD-Tg mice) as a tagged protein (Myc-HuD; Fig. 4A), the levels of Aβ40, as measured by ELISA (Materials and Methods) were significantly higher than in WT mice (Fig. 4B) and the levels of Elavl4 mRNA (encoding HuD), App mRNA, Bace1 mRNA, and Bace1as RNA were higher in hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum, relative to the levels in age-matched WT mice (Fig. 4C).

We also studied the levels of HuD in brains of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients. Brain sections from the superior temporal gyrus (STG) from 10 persons with AD and 10 age-matched healthy individuals were used for RNA and protein analysis. RNA prepared from these samples was analyzed by RT-qPCR; as shown in Fig. 4D, ELAVL4 mRNA, and BACE1AS RNA were markedly higher in AD brains relative to healthy brains, while APP mRNA and BACE1 mRNA were moderately higher in AD patients. The relative levels of protein followed these general differences (Fig. 4E; Faghihi et al., 2008), with greater than twofold higher levels of HuD and BACE1 in AD brains. In keeping with the higher levels of BACE1, Aβ peptide (Aβ40 and Aβ42) was also more abundant in AD brains (Fig. 4F). In summary, in brains of HuD-overexpressing mice, the levels of APP, BACE1, and Aβ40 correlated with the heightened abundance of HuD, while in human AD brains, HuD levels were significantly elevated and correlated with higher levels of BACE1, BACE1AS, and Aβ.

DISCUSSIONOur results indicate that HuD controls the expression of three mRNAs affecting APP production and processing into Aβ. The three-pronged actions of HuD include binding to APP mRNA, causing it to be more stable and translated, binding to BACE1 mRNA, increasing its stability and hence BACE1 production, and binding to and stabilizing BACE1AS, which further contributes to the production of BACE1. In keeping with this regulatory paradigm, HuD levels were positively linked to Aβ levels in three systems: in neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells expressing normal versus silenced HuD levels, in the brains of WT and HuD-overexpressing mice, and in the brains from AD and normal subjects.The discovery that HuD influences the production of the key pathogenic peptide Aβ raises the immediate question of what determines the levels of HuD in neuronal tissues. Among the possible transcriptional regulators of HuD expression is FoxO1; the repression of ELAVL4 gene transcription in pancreatic β cells was relieved by exposure to high glucose or insulin (Lee et al., 2012). Whether FoxO1 also suppresses ELAVL4 gene transcription in neuronal tissues, and whether this regulation is dependent on glucose/insulin awaits further study. Post-transcriptional regulators of HuD production include the microRNA miR-375, which binds to ELAVL4 mRNA, lowers its stability, and represses HuD translation (Abdelmohsen et al. 2010; Supplemental Text).The notion that a single RBP, HuD, can jointly control the expression of three transcripts (APP mRNA, BACE1 mRNA, BACE1AS RNA) that are functionally related supports the ‘post-transcriptional operon/regulon’ model put forth by Keene and Tenenbaum (2002). According to this model, a single RBP can associate with and coordinate the expression of multiple mRNAs that share a given RNA sequence with affinity for the RBP and whose encoded gene products are implicated in a specific cellular function. To establish a simple analogy with a ‘transcriptional’ operon/regulon, the RBP functions as the equivalent of a transcription factor which binds to a shared DNA sequence present in the promoter of genes encoding proteins with related functions (as in eukaryotes) or synthesizes a polycistronic RNA whose individual RNA components encode proteins functionally linked. In light of our findings, the traditional post-transcriptional operon/regulon model would help to explain HuD function; we proposed a slightly revised version of the model that includes non-coding RNA.Our studies did not identify a specific RNA element present in the three transcripts. However, most RBPs do not have strict sequence requirements and instead associate with loosely variable RNA elements, often within the context of a given secondary structure. Approaches such as PAR-CLIP identification of HuD-bound RNAs can give us a more precise view of the subset of transcripts with which HuD interacts. A more complete understanding of the collection of HuD-interacting coding and noncoding RNAs will be particularly informative as we strive to understand the underlying causes of Aβ processing in AD.

Our results indicate that HuD controls the expression of three mRNAs affecting APP production and processing into Aβ. The three-pronged actions of HuD include binding to APP mRNA, causing it to be more stable and translated, binding to BACE1 mRNA, increasing its stability and hence BACE1 production, and binding to and stabilizing BACE1AS, which further contributes to the production of BACE1. In keeping with this regulatory paradigm, HuD levels were positively linked to Aβ levels in three systems: in neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells expressing normal versus silenced HuD levels, in the brains of WT and HuD-overexpressing mice, and in the brains from AD and normal subjects.

The discovery that HuD influences the production of the key pathogenic peptide Aβ raises the immediate question of what determines the levels of HuD in neuronal tissues. Among the possible transcriptional regulators of HuD expression is FoxO1; the repression of ELAVL4 gene transcription in pancreatic β cells was relieved by exposure to high glucose or insulin (Lee et al., 2012). Whether FoxO1 also suppresses ELAVL4 gene transcription in neuronal tissues, and whether this regulation is dependent on glucose/insulin awaits further study. Post-transcriptional regulators of HuD production include the microRNA miR-375, which binds to ELAVL4 mRNA, lowers its stability, and represses HuD translation (Abdelmohsen et al. 2010; Supplemental Text).

The notion that a single RBP, HuD, can jointly control the expression of three transcripts (APP mRNA, BACE1 mRNA, BACE1AS RNA) that are functionally related supports the ‘post-transcriptional operon/regulon’ model put forth by Keene and Tenenbaum (2002). According to this model, a single RBP can associate with and coordinate the expression of multiple mRNAs that share a given RNA sequence with affinity for the RBP and whose encoded gene products are implicated in a specific cellular function. To establish a simple analogy with a ‘transcriptional’ operon/regulon, the RBP functions as the equivalent of a transcription factor which binds to a shared DNA sequence present in the promoter of genes encoding proteins with related functions (as in eukaryotes) or synthesizes a polycistronic RNA whose individual RNA components encode proteins functionally linked. In light of our findings, the traditional post-transcriptional operon/regulon model would help to explain HuD function; we proposed a slightly revised version of the model that includes non-coding RNA.

Our studies did not identify a specific RNA element present in the three transcripts. However, most RBPs do not have strict sequence requirements and instead associate with loosely variable RNA elements, often within the context of a given secondary structure. Approaches such as PAR-CLIP identification of HuD-bound RNAs can give us a more precise view of the subset of transcripts with which HuD interacts. A more complete understanding of the collection of HuD-interacting coding and noncoding RNAs will be particularly informative as we strive to understand the underlying causes of Aβ processing in AD.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESCell culture, siRNA, and plasmidsHuman neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and antibiotics. The plasmids and siRNAs used are described in Supplemental Text.Protein analysisWestern blot analysis and fractionation of polyribosomes are explained in Supplemental Text. Aβ levels (Aβ40 and Aβ42) in SK-N-F1 cells were measured in conditioned media and Aβ in human brain samples was assayed directly from protein lysates; human Aβ was measured by ELISA (Invitrogen KHB3481 and KHB3441) and the manufacturer’s protocol included incubation with guanidine; [methyl(phenyl)-λ3-oxidanyl]formic acid solution. Aβ levels in mouse brain lysates were analyzed by ELISA (Invitrogen).RNA AnalysisRNA-binding assays RIP (ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation), biotin pulldown, and mRNA half-life measurements are explained in Supplemental Text. Trizol (Invitrogen) was used to extract total RNA and acidic phenol (Ambion) was used to extract RNA for RIP analysis (Lee et al., 2010). Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using random hexamers and Maxima reverse transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) and real-time, quantitative PCR (qPCR) using gene-specific primers (Supplemental Text). RT-qPCR was performed using SYBR green master mix (Kapa Biosystems) in an Applied Biosystems 7300 instrument.Human subjectsThe sample consists of twenty participants (19 females and 1 male) from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (NIA, NIH); cognitive status was determined based on standardized consensus diagnostic procedures for the BLSA (Driscoll et al., 2012) and eventually came to autopsy. Participants were between 55 and 98 (AD) and between 56 and 95 (normal). All studies were approved by the local institutional review boards, and all participants gave written informed consent prior to each assessment. In addition, next of kin or legally designated power of attorney provided consent for autopsy. Superior temporal gyrus (STG) regions of the brain were used for protein and RNA analysis.AnimalsHuD transgenic [HuD-Tg, a kind gift from Dr. N.I. Perrone-Bizzozero] and wildtype mice in the C57BL/6J background were obtained from inhouse breeding colonies of the NIA, Baltimore MD (details in Supplemental Text).

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Cell culture, siRNA, and plasmidsHuman neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and antibiotics. The plasmids and siRNAs used are described in Supplemental Text.

Cell culture, siRNA, and plasmids

Human neuroblastoma SK-N-F1 cells were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS and antibiotics. The plasmids and siRNAs used are described in Supplemental Text.

Protein analysisWestern blot analysis and fractionation of polyribosomes are explained in Supplemental Text. Aβ levels (Aβ40 and Aβ42) in SK-N-F1 cells were measured in conditioned media and Aβ in human brain samples was assayed directly from protein lysates; human Aβ was measured by ELISA (Invitrogen KHB3481 and KHB3441) and the manufacturer’s protocol included incubation with guanidine; [methyl(phenyl)-λ3-oxidanyl]formic acid solution. Aβ levels in mouse brain lysates were analyzed by ELISA (Invitrogen).

Protein analysis

Western blot analysis and fractionation of polyribosomes are explained in Supplemental Text. Aβ levels (Aβ40 and Aβ42) in SK-N-F1 cells were measured in conditioned media and Aβ in human brain samples was assayed directly from protein lysates; human Aβ was measured by ELISA (Invitrogen KHB3481 and KHB3441) and the manufacturer’s protocol included incubation with guanidine; [methyl(phenyl)-λ3-oxidanyl]formic acid solution. Aβ levels in mouse brain lysates were analyzed by ELISA (Invitrogen).

RNA AnalysisRNA-binding assays RIP (ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation), biotin pulldown, and mRNA half-life measurements are explained in Supplemental Text. Trizol (Invitrogen) was used to extract total RNA and acidic phenol (Ambion) was used to extract RNA for RIP analysis (Lee et al., 2010). Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using random hexamers and Maxima reverse transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) and real-time, quantitative PCR (qPCR) using gene-specific primers (Supplemental Text). RT-qPCR was performed using SYBR green master mix (Kapa Biosystems) in an Applied Biosystems 7300 instrument.

RNA Analysis

RNA-binding assays RIP (ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation), biotin pulldown, and mRNA half-life measurements are explained in Supplemental Text. Trizol (Invitrogen) was used to extract total RNA and acidic phenol (Ambion) was used to extract RNA for RIP analysis (Lee et al., 2010). Reverse transcription (RT) was performed using random hexamers and Maxima reverse transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) and real-time, quantitative PCR (qPCR) using gene-specific primers (Supplemental Text). RT-qPCR was performed using SYBR green master mix (Kapa Biosystems) in an Applied Biosystems 7300 instrument.

Human subjectsThe sample consists of twenty participants (19 females and 1 male) from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (NIA, NIH); cognitive status was determined based on standardized consensus diagnostic procedures for the BLSA (Driscoll et al., 2012) and eventually came to autopsy. Participants were between 55 and 98 (AD) and between 56 and 95 (normal). All studies were approved by the local institutional review boards, and all participants gave written informed consent prior to each assessment. In addition, next of kin or legally designated power of attorney provided consent for autopsy. Superior temporal gyrus (STG) regions of the brain were used for protein and RNA analysis.

Human subjects

The sample consists of twenty participants (19 females and 1 male) from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (NIA, NIH); cognitive status was determined based on standardized consensus diagnostic procedures for the BLSA (Driscoll et al., 2012) and eventually came to autopsy. Participants were between 55 and 98 (AD) and between 56 and 95 (normal). All studies were approved by the local institutional review boards, and all participants gave written informed consent prior to each assessment. In addition, next of kin or legally designated power of attorney provided consent for autopsy. Superior temporal gyrus (STG) regions of the brain were used for protein and RNA analysis.

AnimalsHuD transgenic [HuD-Tg, a kind gift from Dr. N.I. Perrone-Bizzozero] and wildtype mice in the C57BL/6J background were obtained from inhouse breeding colonies of the NIA, Baltimore MD (details in Supplemental Text).

HuD transgenic [HuD-Tg, a kind gift from Dr. N.I. Perrone-Bizzozero] and wildtype mice in the C57BL/6J background were obtained from inhouse breeding colonies of the NIA, Baltimore MD (details in Supplemental Text).

Supplementary Material01

Supplementary Material
