---
pmid: '15928212'
title: Collecting duct-specific knockout of the endothelin A receptor alters renal
  vasopressin responsiveness, but not sodium excretion or blood pressure.
authors:
- Ge Y
- Stricklett PK
- Hughes AK
- Yanagisawa M
- Kohan DE
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00100.2005
---

# Collecting duct-specific knockout of the endothelin A receptor alters renal vasopressin responsiveness, but not sodium excretion or blood pressure.
**Authors:** Ge Y, Stricklett PK, Hughes AK, Yanagisawa M, Kohan DE
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00100.2005](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00100.2005)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):F692-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajprenal.00100.2005. Epub 2005 May 31.

Collecting duct-specific knockout of the endothelin A receptor alters renal 
vasopressin responsiveness, but not sodium excretion or blood pressure.

Ge Y(1), Stricklett PK, Hughes AK, Yanagisawa M, Kohan DE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Univ. of Utah Health Sciences Center, 1900 East, 30 
North, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Collecting duct (CD)-specific knockout (KO) of endothelin-1 (ET-1) causes 
hypertension, impaired ability to excrete a Na load, and enhanced CD sensitivity 
to the hydrosmotic effects of vasopressin (AVP). CD express the two known ET 
receptors, ET(A) and ET(B); in the current study, the role of the CD ET(A) 
receptor in mediating ET-1 actions on this nephron segment was evaluated. The 
ET(A) receptor gene was selectively disrupted in CD (CD ET(A) KO). CD ET(A) KO 
mice had no differences in systemic blood pressure, Na or K excretion, and 
plasma aldosterone or renin activity in response to a normal- or a high-Na diet 
compared with controls. During normal water intake, urinary osmolality (Uosm), 
plasma Na concentration, and plasma osmolality were not affected, but plasma AVP 
concentration was increased in CD ET(A) KO animals (0.57 +/- 0.25 pg/ml in 
controls and 1.30 +/- 0.29 pg/ml in CD ET(A) KO mice). CD ET(A) KO mice had a 
modestly enhanced ability to excrete an acute, but not a chronic, water load. 
DDAVP infusion increased Uosm similarly; however, CD ET(A) KO mice had a more 
rapid subsequent fall in Uosm during sustained DDAVP administration. CD 
suspensions from CD ET(A) KO mice had a 30-40% reduction in AVP- and 
forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation. These data indicate that CD ET(A) KO 
decreases renal sensitivity to the urinary concentrating effects of AVP and 
suggest that activation of the ET(A) receptor downregulates ET-1 inhibition of 
AVP actions in the CD. Furthermore, the CD ET(A) receptor does not appear to be 
involved in modulation of systemic blood pressure or renal Na excretion under 
physiological conditions.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00100.2005
PMID: 15928212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
