---
pmid: '12079377'
title: 'The ATP-operated clamp of human DNA topoisomerase IIalpha: hyperstimulation
  of ATPase by "piggy-back" binding.'
authors:
- Campbell S
- Maxwell A
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00461-8
---

# The ATP-operated clamp of human DNA topoisomerase IIalpha: hyperstimulation of ATPase by "piggy-back" binding.
**Authors:** Campbell S, Maxwell A
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00461-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00461-8)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2002 Jul 5;320(2):171-88. doi: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00461-8.

The ATP-operated clamp of human DNA topoisomerase IIalpha: hyperstimulation of 
ATPase by "piggy-back" binding.

Campbell S(1), Maxwell A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.

We have constructed a series of clones encoding N-terminal fragments of human 
DNA topoisomerase IIalpha. All fragments exhibit DNA-dependent ATPase activity. 
Fragment 1-420 shows hyperbolic dependence of ATPase on DNA concentration, 
whereas fragment 1-453 shows hyperstimulation at low ratios of DNA to enzyme, a 
phenomenon found previously with the full-length enzyme. The minimum length of 
DNA found to stimulate the ATPase activity was approximately 10 bp; fragments 
>or=32 bp manifest the hyperstimulation phenomenon. Molecular mass studies show 
that fragment 1-453 is a monomer in the absence of nucleotides and a dimer in 
the presence of nucleotide triphosphate. The results are consistent with the 
role of the N-terminal domain of topoisomerase II as an ATP-operated clamp that 
dimerises in the presence of ATP. The hyperstimulation effect can be interpreted 
in terms of a "piggy-back binding" model for protein-DNA interaction.

DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00461-8
PMID: 12079377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
