---
pmid: '12444549'
title: Chimaeric HPV E6 proteins allow dissection of the proteolytic pathways regulating
  different E6 cellular target proteins.
authors:
- Pim D
- Thomas M
- Banks L
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206026
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Chimaeric HPV E6 proteins allow dissection of the proteolytic pathways regulating different E6 cellular target proteins.
**Authors:** Pim D, Thomas M, Banks L
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1206026](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1206026)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 21;21(53):8140-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206026.

Chimaeric HPV E6 proteins allow dissection of the proteolytic pathways 
regulating different E6 cellular target proteins.

Pim D(1), Thomas M, Banks L.

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Area Science 
Park, Padriciano-99, I-34012, Trieste, Italy. pim@icgeb.org.it

The ability of HPV E6 oncoproteins to induce the degradation of PDZ 
domain-containing MAGUK proteins correlates with their malignant potential. We 
previously showed that the HPV-6 E6 protein, when provided with the PDZ-binding 
domain from HPV-18 E6, acquires the ability to bind the Discs Large (Dlg) tumour 
suppressor and target it for degradation. Based on this finding we have extended 
this analysis to E6 proteins from a variety of different papillomavirus types. 
Cloning a PDZ-binding sequence onto the C-terminus of E6 proteins derived from 
low-risk mucosal, and low and high-risk cutaneous papillomavirus types, enables 
them to bind Dlg and a second MAGUK family member, MAGI-1. This renders the 
mucosally-derived low-risk chimaeric HPV E6 proteins capable of targeting Dlg 
for degradation, but they are unable to induce significant levels of degradation 
of MAGI-1. In contrast, none of the E6 proteins derived from cutaneous 
papillomavirus types induce significant degradation of either MAGI-1 or Dlg when 
provided with a PDZ-binding domain. These results demonstrate significant 
differences, both between mucosal and cutaneous HPV E6 proteins and in the 
pathways required for Dlg and MAGI-1 degradation.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206026
PMID: 12444549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
