---
pmid: '34818544'
title: Suppression of breast cancer progression by FBXL16 via oxygen-independent regulation
  of HIF1α stability.
authors:
- Kim YJ
- Zhao Y
- Myung JK
- Yi JM
- Kim MJ
- Lee SJ
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109996
---

# Suppression of breast cancer progression by FBXL16 via oxygen-independent regulation of HIF1α stability.
**Authors:** Kim YJ, Zhao Y, Myung JK, Yi JM, Kim MJ, Lee SJ
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109996](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109996)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2021 Nov 23;37(8):109996. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109996.

Suppression of breast cancer progression by FBXL16 via oxygen-independent 
regulation of HIF1α stability.

Kim YJ(1), Zhao Y(1), Myung JK(2), Yi JM(3), Kim MJ(4), Lee SJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang 
University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pathology, Hanyang University Medical Center, 222-1, 
Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Inje 
University, Busan 47392, South Korea.
(4)Laboratory of Radiation Exposure and Therapeutics, National Radiation 
Emergency Medical Center, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical Sciences, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Department of Life Science, Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang 
University, Seoul 04763, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
sj0420@hanyang.ac.kr.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are characterized by high rates of 
recurrence and poor clinical outcomes. Deregulated E3 ligases are involved in 
breast cancer pathogenesis and progression, but the underlying mechanisms are 
unclear. Here, we find that F-box and leucine-rich repeat protein 16 (FBXL16) 
acts as a tumor suppressor in TNBCs. FBXL16 directly binds to HIF1α and induces 
its ubiquitination and degradation, regardless of the tumor microenvironment, 
resulting in blockade of the HIF1α-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
(EMT) and angiogenesis features of breast cancer. In TNBCs, FBXL16 expression is 
downregulated by the p38/miR-135b-3p axis, and loss of FBXL16 expression 
restores HIF1α-mediated metastatic features of breast cancer. Low expression of 
FBXL16 is associated with high-grade and lymph node-positive tumors and poor 
overall survival of breast cancer. Taken together, these findings demonstrate 
that modulation of FBXL16 expression may offer a favorable strategy for 
treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer, including TNBCs.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109996
PMID: 34818544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
