---
pmid: '12885400'
title: Identification of the nuclear receptor CAR:HSP90 complex in mouse liver and
  recruitment of protein phosphatase 2A in response to phenobarbital.
authors:
- Yoshinari K
- Kobayashi K
- Moore R
- Kawamoto T
- Negishi M
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00720-8
---

# Identification of the nuclear receptor CAR:HSP90 complex in mouse liver and recruitment of protein phosphatase 2A in response to phenobarbital.
**Authors:** Yoshinari K, Kobayashi K, Moore R, Kawamoto T, Negishi M
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00720-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00720-8)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 31;548(1-3):17-20. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00720-8.

Identification of the nuclear receptor CAR:HSP90 complex in mouse liver and 
recruitment of protein phosphatase 2A in response to phenobarbital.

Yoshinari K(1), Kobayashi K, Moore R, Kawamoto T, Negishi M.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental 
Toxicology National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The nuclear receptor CAR, a phenobarbital (PB)-responsive transcription factor, 
translocates into the nucleus of hepatocytes after PB induction. In non-induced 
mice, CAR forms a physical complex with heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) in the 
cytoplasm. In response to PB induction, protein phosphatase 2A is recruited to 
the CAR:HSP90 complex. This recruitment may lead CAR to translocate into the 
nucleus, consistent with the inhibitions of nuclear CAR accumulation in 
PB-induced mouse primary hepatocytes by okadaic acid as well as by geldanamycin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00720-8
PMID: 12885400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
