---
pmid: '28438792'
title: Reconstitution of Abscisic Acid Signaling from the Receptor to DNA via bHLH
  Transcription Factors.
authors:
- Takahashi Y
- Ebisu Y
- Shimazaki KI
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5462015
doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01825
---

# Reconstitution of Abscisic Acid Signaling from the Receptor to DNA via bHLH Transcription Factors.
**Authors:** Takahashi Y, Ebisu Y, Shimazaki KI
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.16.01825](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.16.01825)
**PMC:** [PMC5462015](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5462015/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2017 Jun;174(2):815-822. doi: 10.1104/pp.16.01825. Epub 2017
Apr  24.

Reconstitution of Abscisic Acid Signaling from the Receptor to DNA via bHLH 
Transcription Factors.

Takahashi Y(1), Ebisu Y(2), Shimazaki KI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University 744 Motooka, 
Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan yotakahashi@ucsd.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University 744 Motooka, 
Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan.

The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) confers drought tolerance in plants 
through stomatal closure and regulation of gene expression. The complex 
consisting of the ABA receptor PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE/REGULATORY COMPONENTS OF 
ABA RECEPTOR (PYR/RCAR), type 2C protein phosphatase (PP2C), and SNF1-related 
protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) has a key role in ABA signaling. Basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) transcriptional activator ABA-RESPONSIVE KINASE SUBSTRATE1 (AKS1, also 
known as FBH3) is released from DNA by phosphorylation-induced monomerization in 
response to ABA in guard cells. Here we reconstituted the release of AKS1 from 
DNA via the ABA signaling core complex in vitro. We first obtained evidence to 
confirm that AKS1 is an endogenous substrate for SnRK2s. Phosphorylation of AKS1 
and activation of SnRK2 showed the same time course in response to ABA in guard 
cells. AKS1 was bound to SnRK2.6 in vivo. Three ABA-responsive SnRK2s 
(SnRK2.2/SRK2D, SnRK2.3/SRK2I, and SnRK2.6/SRK2E/OST1) phosphorylated AKS1 in 
vitro, and the phosphorylation was eliminated by the triple mutation of SnRK2s 
in plants. We reconstituted the AKS1 phosphorylation in vitro via the signaling 
complex containing the ABA receptor PYR1, a PP2C, HYPERSENSITIVE TO ABA1 (HAB1), 
and a protein kinase, SnRK2.6 in response to ABA We further reconstituted the 
release of AKS1 from the target gene of POTASSIUM CHANNEL IN ARABIDOPSIS 
THALIANA 1 (KAT1) via the complex in response to ABA These results demonstrate 
that AKS1 provides a link between the signaling complex and ABA-responsive genes 
and furnish evidence for a minimal signaling mechanism from ABA perception to 
DNA.

© 2017 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.16.01825
PMCID: PMC5462015
PMID: 28438792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The plant hormone abscisic acid ( ABA ) confers drought tolerance in plants through stomatal closure and regulation of gene expression. The complex consisting of the ABA receptor PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE/REGULATORY COMPONENTS OF ABA RECEPTOR (PYR/RCAR), type 2C protein phosphatase (PP2C), and SNF1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) has a key role in ABA signaling. Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcriptional activator ABA-RESPONSIVE KINASE SUBSTRATE1 (AKS1, also known as FBH3) is released from DNA by phosphorylation-induced monomerization in response to ABA in guard cells. Here we reconstituted the release of AKS1 from DNA via the ABA signaling core complex in vitro. We first obtained evidence to confirm that AKS1 is an endogenous substrate for SnRK2s. Phosphorylation of AKS1 and activation of SnRK2 showed the same time course in response to ABA in guard cells. AKS1 was bound to SnRK2.6 in vivo. Three ABA -responsive SnRK2s (SnRK2.2/SRK2D, SnRK2.3/SRK2I, and SnRK2.6/SRK2E/OST1) phosphorylated AKS1 in vitro, and the phosphorylation was eliminated by the triple mutation of SnRK2s in plants. We reconstituted the AKS1 phosphorylation in vitro via the signaling complex containing the ABA receptor PYR1, a PP2C, HYPERSENSITIVE TO ABA1 (HAB1), and a protein kinase, SnRK2.6 in response to ABA . We further reconstituted the release of AKS1 from the target gene of POTASSIUM CHANNEL IN ARABIDOPSIS THALIANA 1 ( KAT1 ) via the complex in response to ABA . These results demonstrate that AKS1 provides a link between the signaling complex and ABA -responsive genes and furnish evidence for a minimal signaling mechanism from ABA perception to DNA.

DISCUSSION

We recently showed that the activity of bHLH transcriptional factor AKS1 is inhibited by ABA through phosphorylation-dependent release of AKS1 from the target DNA in guard cells ( Takahashi et al., 2013 ; Takahashi et al., 2016 ). Our experiments here reproduce the ABA -induced release of AKS1 via the signaling core complex in vitro. ABA -induced phosphorylation of AREB1, the bZIP transcription factor that enhances the expression of ABA -responsive genes, has been reconstituted in vitro in the signaling core complex ( Fujii et al., 2009 ); however, the signaling from AREB1 to the target genes is yet to be established. Here we reconstituted ABA signaling in vitro from the receptor to a target gene, using PYR1, HAB1, SnRK2.6, AKS1, and KAT1 gene fragments as a minimal set of signaling. We suggested that phosphorylation of AKS1 results in the release of the core complex from DNA ( Fig. 5C ). AKS1 seems to act as a link between the core complex and target DNA and plays a key role in converting ABA signal to regulate gene expression through its phosphorylation.

Since our previous results showed that the ABA -dependent inhibition of KAT1 expression is mediated by AKS1 phosphorylation ( Takahashi et al., 2016 ), these new results provide a relationship between gene expression and protein phosphorylation of AKS1 transcription factor in response to ABA . However, unlike AKS1, which reduces gene expression, AREB/ABFs likely enhance gene expression through phosphorylation in response to ABA . Phosphorylation seems to have opposing effects on the function of AKS1 and AREB/ABFs. Although AREB1, AREB2, and ABF3 form homo- and heterodimers in plant cells ( Yoshida et al., 2010 ), the role of dimerization or the DNA-binding ability of AREB/ABFs has not yet been elucidated with respect to phosphorylation. The N-terminal region of AREB1 is essential for transcriptional activity. An internal inhibitory domain of the AREB1 appears to play an important role in the activation of AREB1 through a conformational change in response to ABA ( Fujita et al., 2005 ). Five phosphorylation sites in AREB1 are distributed across the full-length of AREB1 protein ( Furihata et al., 2006 ), while three phosphorylation sites in AKS1 exist in a clustered state close to the bHLH domain, which facilitates dimerization ( Takahashi et al., 2016 ). These observations imply that AREB/ABFs appear to have different regulatory mechanisms from AKSs with respect to DNA binding. Further investigation is clearly needed to elucidate the mechanisms that lead to such differences.

Components of the core complex exist in the nucleus, cytosol, and plasma membrane in Arabidopsis cells ( Rodriguez et al., 2014 ; Geiger et al., 2009 ; Lee et al., 2009 ; Umezawa et al., 2009 ; Park et al., 2009 ). PYR/RCAR, PP2C, and SnRK2 likely make a core complex in these distinct sites. ABA modulates both ion channel activity and gene expression in guard cells. Previous studies suggested that ABA -dependent activation of anion channels occurs within a nanodomain in the plasma membranes ( Demir et al., 2013 ). By contrast, it remains unclear where the ABA signal is perceived and how the signal is transmitted to the nucleus in the ABA signaling pathway for gene regulation. Our present results demonstrated that ABA -induced AKS1 release from the KAT1 gene can be reconstituted in vitro ( Fig. 5A ) and also showed that AKS1 is bound to SnRK2.6 in plant cells ( Fig. 1C ). Since AKS1 predominantly localizes in the nucleus and is bound to DNA ( Takahashi et al., 2013 ), our results suggest that the ABA signaling core complex also resides adjacent to DNA through AKSs. From these observations, we suggest that ABA signal transduction, from ABA perception to KAT1 transcription inhibition, is likely achieved within the nucleus in guard cells.

Stomatal movement in response to ABA can be categorized as at least two temporally distinct events. Rapid events occur within seconds to promote stomatal closure through physiological cellular responses, including Ca 2+ elevation and regulation of ion channels and pump activities by protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation ( Munemasa et al., 2015 ). Slow events are thought to inhibit stomatal reopening in the late periods after the increase in ABA concentration and are mediated by gene expression, ion channel modifications, and intracellular relocation of the transporter proteins ( Sutter et al., 2006 , 2007 ; Eisenach, et al., 2012 ). AKS1 dissociation from the KAT1 promoter reconstituted in this study most likely mediates late events through a decrease in the population of KAT1 proteins in the plasma membrane in coordination with KAT1 endocytosis in response to ABA ( Sutter et al., 2007 ). Guard cells are shown to have a capability to create “stress memory” to maintain closed stomata, likely through the regulation of gene expression ( Virlouvet and Fromm, 2015 ). Although ABA and SnRK2 kinases are considered to play an important role in this response, the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. It is interesting to elucidate whether the AKS1 phosphorylation acts in the memory response.

Some important components that mediate AKS1-dependent responses in guard cells have not been identified in response to ABA . For example, the phosphatase(s) that dephosphorylates AKS1 is not identified. PP2Cs do not seem to directly dephosphorylate AKS1 ( Fig. 3A ). Dephosphorylation of AKS1 is likely responsible for recovering gene expression that is repressed through the AKS1 phosphorylation. Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) has been reported to dephosphorylate AKSs, with reduced KAT1 expression in a pp2a b'αβ double mutant ( Bu et al., 2017 ). In coordination with AKS1, other components will be required to define the specificity and the expression of target genes, because bHLH transcription factors recognize very short sequences, the E-box (CAXXTG), which are widely distributed throughout the Arabidopsis genome ( Toledo-Ortiz et al., 2003 ; Heim et al., 2003 ). Furthermore, numerous genes are repressed in a tissue-specific manner in response to ABA , and the degree of repression is variable and gene dependent ( Leonhardt et al., 2004 ; Wang et al., 2011 ; Seki et al., 2002 ). Therefore, identification of additional regulatory components that modify the minimal signaling pathway reported here will advance our understanding of the precise gene regulation of ABA signaling.
