---
pmid: '35614130'
title: Acetylation licenses Th1 cell polarization to constrain Listeria monocytogenes
  infection.
authors:
- Zhang YS
- Xin DE
- Wang Z
- Peng W
- Zeng Y
- Liang J
- Xu M
- Chen N
- Zhang J
- Yue J
- Cao M
- Zhang C
- Wang Y
- Chang Z
- Lu XM
- Chang L
- Chinn YE
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9613754
doi: 10.1038/s41418-022-01017-9
---

# Acetylation licenses Th1 cell polarization to constrain Listeria monocytogenes infection.
**Authors:** Zhang YS, Xin DE, Wang Z, Peng W, Zeng Y, Liang J, Xu M, Chen N, Zhang J, Yue J, Cao M, Zhang C, Wang Y, Chang Z, Lu XM, Chang L, Chinn YE
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41418-022-01017-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-022-01017-9)
**PMC:** [PMC9613754](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9613754/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2022 Nov;29(11):2303-2315. doi: 10.1038/s41418-022-01017-9.
 Epub 2022 May 25.

Acetylation licenses Th1 cell polarization to constrain Listeria monocytogenes 
infection.

Zhang YS(#)(1)(2), Xin DE(#)(3), Wang Z(#)(4), Peng W(2), Zeng Y(5), Liang J(2), 
Xu M(2)(6), Chen N(2), Zhang J(2), Yue J(2), Cao M(7), Zhang C(3), Wang Y(2), 
Chang Z(8), Lu XM(9), Chang L(2), Chinn YE(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Institue of Clinical Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital of 
Hangzhou Medical College, 158 Shangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310000, China.
(2)Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, School of Radiation Medicine and 
Protection School of Radiological and Interdisciplinary Science, Soochow 
University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215123, China.
(3)Institue of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510515, China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215006, China.
(6)Department of Pathology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215000, China.
(7)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Shenzhen Longhua 
District Central Hospital, Guangdong Medical University Affiliated Longhua 
District Central Hospital, Shenzhen, 518300, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua University School of 
Medicine, 100084, Beijing, China.
(9)Clinical Medical Research Institute, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang 
Medical University, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, Urumqi, 830011, China.
(10)Institue of Clinical Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital of 
Hangzhou Medical College, 158 Shangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310000, China. 
chinyue@suda.edu.cn.
(11)Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, School of Radiation Medicine and 
Protection School of Radiological and Interdisciplinary Science, Soochow 
University, 199 Ren'ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215123, China. 
chinyue@suda.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

T helper 1 (Th1) immunity is typically viewed as a critical adaptation by 
vertebrates against intracellular pathogens. Identifying novel targets to 
enhance Th1 cell differentiation and function is increasingly important for 
anti-infection immunity. Here, through small-molecule screening focusing on 
epigenetic modifiers during the in vitro Th1 cell differentiation process, we 
identified that the selective histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) inhibitors 
ricolinostat and nexturastat A (Nex A) promoted Th1 cell differentiation. 
HDAC6-depleted mice exhibit elevation of Th1 cell differentiation, and decreased 
severity of Listeria monocytogenes infection. Mechanistically, HDAC6 directly 
deacetylated CBP-catalyzed acetylation of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 4 (STAT4)-lysine (K) 667 via its enzymatic activity. Acetylation 
of STAT4-K667 is required for JAK2-mediated phosphorylation and activation of 
STAT4. Stat4K667R mutant mice lost the ability to normally differentiate into 
Th1 cells and developed severe Listeria infection. Our study identifies 
acetylation of STAT4-K667 as an essential signaling event for Th1 cell 
differentiation and defense against intracellular pathogen infections, and 
highlights the therapeutic potential of HDAC6 inhibitors for controlling 
intracellular pathogen infections.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to ADMC Associazione 
Differenziamento e Morte Cellulare.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-022-01017-9
PMCID: PMC9613754
PMID: 35614130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
