---
pmid: '21673654'
title: EGF signalling activates the ubiquitin proteasome system to modulate C. elegans
  lifespan.
authors:
- Liu G
- Rogers J
- Murphy CT
- Rongo C
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3160178
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.195
---

# EGF signalling activates the ubiquitin proteasome system to modulate C. elegans lifespan.
**Authors:** Liu G, Rogers J, Murphy CT, Rongo C
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.195](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.195)
**PMC:** [PMC3160178](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3160178/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 14;30(15):2990-3003. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.195.

EGF signalling activates the ubiquitin proteasome system to modulate C. elegans 
lifespan.

Liu G(1), Rogers J, Murphy CT, Rongo C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, The Waksman Institute, Rutgers University, 
Piscataway, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Aug 03;30(15):2983-5. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.237.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signalling regulates growth and differentiation. 
Here, we examine the function of EGF signalling in Caenorhabditis elegans 
lifespan. We find that EGF signalling regulates lifespan via the Ras-MAPK 
pathway and the PLZF transcription factors EOR-1 and EOR-2. As animals enter 
adulthood, EGF signalling upregulates the expression of genes involved in the 
ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS), including the Skp1-like protein SKR-5, while 
downregulating the expression of HSP16-type chaperones. Using reporters for 
global UPS activity, protein aggregation, and oxidative stress, we find that EGF 
signalling alters protein homoeostasis in adults by increasing UPS activity and 
polyubiquitination, while decreasing protein aggregation. We show that SKR-5 and 
the E3/E4 ligases that comprise the ubiquitin fusion degradation (UFD) complex 
are required for the increase in UPS activity observed in adults, and that 
animals that lack SKR-5 or the UFD have reduced lifespans and indications of 
oxidative stress. We propose that as animals enter fertile adulthood, EGF 
signalling switches the mechanism for maintaining protein homoeostasis from a 
chaperone-based approach to an approach involving protein elimination via 
augmented UPS activity.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.195
PMCID: PMC3160178
PMID: 21673654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
