---
pmid: '2160973'
title: Alpha-galactosidase A gene rearrangements causing Fabry disease. Identification
  of short direct repeats at breakpoints in an Alu-rich gene.
authors:
- Kornreich R
- Bishop DF
- Desnick RJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
---

# Alpha-galactosidase A gene rearrangements causing Fabry disease. Identification of short direct repeats at breakpoints in an Alu-rich gene.
**Authors:** Kornreich R, Bishop DF, Desnick RJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1990)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jun 5;265(16):9319-26.

Alpha-galactosidase A gene rearrangements causing Fabry disease. Identification 
of short direct repeats at breakpoints in an Alu-rich gene.

Kornreich R(1), Bishop DF, Desnick RJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York 10029.

Fabry disease, an inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism, results from 
mutations in the X-linked gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme, 
alpha-galactosidase A (EC 3.2.1.22). Six alpha-galactosidase A gene 
rearrangements that cause Fabry disease were investigated to assess the role of 
Alu repetitive elements and short direct and/or inverted repeats in the 
generation of these germinal mutations. The breakpoints of five partial gene 
deletions and one partial gene duplication were determined by either cloning and 
sequencing the mutant gene from an affected hemizygote, or by polymerase chain 
reaction amplifying and sequencing the genomic region containing the novel 
junction. Although the alpha-galactosidase A gene contains 12 Alu repetitive 
elements (representing approximately 30% of the 12-kilobase (kb) gene or 
approximately 1 Alu/1.0 kb), only one deletion resulted from an Alu-Alu 
recombination. The remaining five rearrangements involved illegitimate 
recombinational events between short direct repeats of 2 to 6 base pairs (bp) at 
the deletion or duplication breakpoints. Of these rearrangements, one had a 3' 
short direct repeat within an Alu element, while another was unusual having two 
deletions of 1.7 kb and 14 bp separated by a 151-bp inverted sequence. These 
findings suggested that slipped mispairing or intrachromosomal exchanges 
involving short direct repeats were responsible for the generation of most of 
these gene rearrangements. There were no inverted repeat sequences or 
alternating purine-pyrimidine regions which may have predisposed the gene to 
these rearrangements. Intriguingly, the tetranucleotide CCAG and the 
trinucleotide CAG (or their respective complements, CTGG and CTG) occurred 
within or adjacent to the direct repeats at the 5' breakpoints in three and four 
of the five alpha-galactosidase A gene rearrangements, respectively, suggesting 
a possible functional role in these illegitimate recombinational events. These 
studies indicate that short direct repeats are important in the formation of 
gene rearrangements, even in human genes like alpha-galactosidase A that are 
rich in Alu repetitive elements.

PMID: 2160973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
