---
pmid: '10821768'
title: Analysis of the promoter of the cudA gene reveals novel mechanisms of Dictyostelium
  cell type differentiation.
authors:
- Fukuzawa M
- Williams JG
journal: Development
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.127.12.2705
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Analysis of the promoter of the cudA gene reveals novel mechanisms of Dictyostelium cell type differentiation.
**Authors:** Fukuzawa M, Williams JG
**Journal:** Development (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.127.12.2705](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.127.12.2705)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2705-13. doi: 10.1242/dev.127.12.2705.

Analysis of the promoter of the cudA gene reveals novel mechanisms of 
Dictyostelium cell type differentiation.

Fukuzawa M(1), Williams JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, University of Dundee, MSI/WTB Complex, 
Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK.

The cudA gene encodes a nuclear protein that is essential for normal 
multicellular development. At the slug stage cudA is expressed in the prespore 
cells and in a sub-region of the prestalk zone. We show that cap site distal 
promoter sequences direct cudA expression in prespore cells, while proximal 
sequences direct expression in the prestalk sub-region. The promoter domain that 
directs prespore-specific transcription consists of a positively acting region, 
that has the potential to direct expression in all cells within the slug, and a 
negatively acting region that prevents expression in the prestalk cells. 
Dd-STATa is the STAT protein that regulates commitment to stalk cell gene 
expression, where it is known to function as a transcriptional repressor. We 
show that Dd-STATa binds in vitro to the positively acting part of the prespore 
domain of the cudA promoter. However, Dd-STATa cannot be utilised for this 
purpose in vivo, because analysis of a Dd-STATa null mutant strain shows that 
Dd-STATa is not necessary for cudA transcription in prespore cells. In contrast, 
the part of the cudA promoter that directs prestalk-specific expression contains 
a binding site for Dd-STATa that is essential for its biological activity. 
Dd-STATa appears therefore to serve as a direct activator of cudA transcription 
in prestalk cells, while a protein with a DNA binding specificity highly related 
to that of Dd-STATa is utilised to activate cudA transcription in prespore 
cells.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.127.12.2705
PMID: 10821768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
