---
pmid: '9568719'
title: Katanin, a microtubule-severing protein, is a novel AAA ATPase that targets
  to the centrosome using a WD40-containing subunit.
authors:
- Hartman JJ
- Mahr J
- McNally K
- Okawa K
- Iwamatsu A
- Thomas S
- Cheesman S
- Heuser J
- Vale RD
- McNally FJ
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81578-0
---

# Katanin, a microtubule-severing protein, is a novel AAA ATPase that targets to the centrosome using a WD40-containing subunit.
**Authors:** Hartman JJ, Mahr J, McNally K, Okawa K, Iwamatsu A, Thomas S, Cheesman S, Heuser J, Vale RD, McNally FJ
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81578-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81578-0)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1998 Apr 17;93(2):277-87. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81578-0.

Katanin, a microtubule-severing protein, is a novel AAA ATPase that targets to 
the centrosome using a WD40-containing subunit.

Hartman JJ(1), Mahr J, McNally K, Okawa K, Iwamatsu A, Thomas S, Cheesman S, 
Heuser J, Vale RD, McNally FJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, 
San Francisco 94143, USA.

Microtubule disassembly at centrosomes is involved in mitotic spindle function. 
The microtubule-severing protein katanin, a heterodimer of 60 and 80 kDa 
subunits, was previously purified and shown to localize to centrosomes in vivo. 
Here we report the sequences and activities of the katanin subunits. p60 is a 
new member of the AAA family of ATPases, and we show that expressed p60 has 
microtubule-stimulated ATPase and microtubule-severing activities in the absence 
of p80. p80 is a novel protein containing WD40 repeats, which are frequently 
involved in protein-protein interactions. The p80 WD40 domain does not 
participate in p60 dimerization, but localizes to centrosomes in transfected 
mammalian cells. These results indicate katanin's activities are segregated into 
a subunit (p60) that possesses enzymatic activity and a subunit (p80) that 
targets the enzyme to the centrosome.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81578-0
PMID: 9568719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
