---
pmid: '25512509'
title: TORC1 regulators Iml1/GATOR1 and GATOR2 control meiotic entry and oocyte development
  in Drosophila.
authors:
- Wei Y
- Reveal B
- Reich J
- Laursen WJ
- Senger S
- Akbar T
- Iida-Jones T
- Cai W
- Jarnik M
- Lilly MA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4284557
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1419156112
---

# TORC1 regulators Iml1/GATOR1 and GATOR2 control meiotic entry and oocyte development in Drosophila.
**Authors:** Wei Y, Reveal B, Reich J, Laursen WJ, Senger S, Akbar T, Iida-Jones T, Cai W, Jarnik M, Lilly MA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1419156112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1419156112)
**PMC:** [PMC4284557](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4284557/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 30;111(52):E5670-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1419156112. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

TORC1 regulators Iml1/GATOR1 and GATOR2 control meiotic entry and oocyte 
development in Drosophila.

Wei Y(1), Reveal B(1), Reich J(1), Laursen WJ(1), Senger S(1), Akbar T(1), 
Iida-Jones T(1), Cai W(1), Jarnik M(1), Lilly MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.
(2)Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892 mlilly@helix.nih.gov.

In single-cell eukaryotes the pathways that monitor nutrient availability are 
central to initiating the meiotic program and gametogenesis. In Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae an essential step in the transition to the meiotic cycle is the 
down-regulation of the nutrient-sensitive target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) 
by the increased minichromosome loss 1/ GTPase-activating proteins toward Rags 1 
(Iml1/GATOR1) complex in response to amino acid starvation. How metabolic inputs 
influence early meiotic progression and gametogenesis remains poorly understood 
in metazoans. Here we define opposing functions for the TORC1 regulatory 
complexes Iml1/GATOR1 and GATOR2 during Drosophila oogenesis. We demonstrate 
that, as is observed in yeast, the Iml1/GATOR1 complex inhibits TORC1 activity 
to slow cellular metabolism and drive the mitotic/meiotic transition in 
developing ovarian cysts. In iml1 germline depletions, ovarian cysts undergo an 
extra mitotic division before meiotic entry. The TORC1 inhibitor rapamycin can 
suppress this extra mitotic division. Thus, high TORC1 activity delays the 
mitotic/meiotic transition. Conversely, mutations in Tor, which encodes the 
catalytic subunit of the TORC1 complex, result in premature meiotic entry. Later 
in oogenesis, the GATOR2 components Mio and Seh1 are required to oppose 
Iml1/GATOR1 activity to prevent the constitutive inhibition of TORC1 and a block 
to oocyte growth and development. To our knowledge, these studies represent the 
first examination of the regulatory relationship between the Iml1/GATOR1 and 
GATOR2 complexes within the context of a multicellular organism. Our data imply 
that the central role of the Iml1/GATOR1 complex in the regulation of TORC1 
activity in the early meiotic cycle has been conserved from single cell to 
multicellular organisms.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1419156112
PMCID: PMC4284557
PMID: 25512509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
