---
pmid: '21671467'
title: miR-338-3p suppresses invasion of liver cancer cell by targeting smoothened.
authors:
- Huang XH
- Chen JS
- Wang Q
- Chen XL
- Wen L
- Chen LZ
- Bi J
- Zhang LJ
- Su Q
- Zeng WT
journal: J Pathol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/path.2877
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# miR-338-3p suppresses invasion of liver cancer cell by targeting smoothened.
**Authors:** Huang XH, Chen JS, Wang Q, Chen XL, Wen L, Chen LZ, Bi J, Zhang LJ, Su Q, Zeng WT
**Journal:** J Pathol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.2877](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.2877)

## Abstract

1. J Pathol. 2011 Nov;225(3):463-72. doi: 10.1002/path.2877. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

miR-338-3p suppresses invasion of liver cancer cell by targeting smoothened.

Huang XH(1), Chen JS, Wang Q, Chen XL, Wen L, Chen LZ, Bi J, Zhang LJ, Su Q, 
Zeng WT.

Author information:
(1)Surgical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou 510080, China.

MicroRNAs are involved in human carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Our 
previous study has shown that loss of miR-338-3p expression is associated with 
clinical aggressiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the exact 
roles and mechanisms of miR-338-3p remain unknown in HCC. To determine whether 
and how miR-338-3p influences liver cancer cell invasion, we studied miR-338-3p 
in the liver cancer cell lines, and we found that miR-338-3p is down-regulated 
in treated cells. Forced expression of miR-338-3p in SK-HEP-1 cells suppressed 
cell migration and invasion, whereas inhibition of miR-338-3p in SMMC-7721 cells 
induced cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, smoothened (SMO) was 
identified as a direct target of miR-338-3p. Forced expression of miR-338-3p 
down-regulated SMO and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 expression, but 
inhibition of miR-338-3p up-regulated SMO and MMP9 expression. However, small 
interfering RNA targeted SMO reversed the effects induced by blockade of 
miR-338-3p. SMO and MMP9 were overexpressed and associated with invasion and 
metastasis in HCC tissues. These data indicate that miR-338-3p suppresses cell 
invasion by targeting the smoothened gene in liver cancer in vitro and 
miR-338-3p might be a novel potential strategy for liver cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2877
PMID: 21671467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
