---
pmid: '9484486'
title: 'The Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a model system to study mRNA processing in plants.'
authors:
- Marchant A
- Bennett MJ
journal: Plant Mol Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1023/a:1005961303167
---

# The Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a model system to study mRNA processing in plants.
**Authors:** Marchant A, Bennett MJ
**Journal:** Plant Mol Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1005961303167](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1005961303167)

## Abstract

1. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Feb;36(3):463-71. doi: 10.1023/a:1005961303167.

The Arabidopsis AUX1 gene: a model system to study mRNA processing in plants.

Marchant A(1), Bennett MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.

It is advantageous for an organism to be able to remove aberrant mRNAs that have 
either been incorrectly transcribed or processed in order to prevent the 
accumulation of potentially harmful proteins. The selective degradation of 
nonsense containing transcripts has been described in yeast. Caenorhabditis 
elegans and plants. The ease of identification of new mutant alleles in the AUX1 
gene of Arabidopsis thaliana has provided a useful system to study novel 
mutations affecting mRNA stability and pre-mRNA splicing. To date 50 alleles of 
AUX1 have been identified of which 14 have been characterised at the sequence 
level. Eight of the characterised alleles encode missense mutations while the 
others cause nonsense mutations or splicing defects. The 2 splicing mutants 
identified affect the 5' or 3' splice sites and lead to cryptic splicing events 
resulting in premature stop codons. The AUX1 mRNA levels of the nonsense 
containing mutants are reduced compared to the wild-type or missense mutants 
whereas those of a control transcript (SecY) are unaltered. This provides 
further evidence for a nonsense-mediated mRNA degradation mechanism in plants 
and provides a system to study the phenomenon further in Arabidopsis.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1005961303167
PMID: 9484486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
