---
pmid: '8203536'
title: 'Rat pancreatic lipase and two related proteins: enzymatic properties and mRNA
  expression during development.'
authors:
- Payne RM
- Sims HF
- Jennens ML
- Lowe ME
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3523700
doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.1994.266.5.G914
---

# Rat pancreatic lipase and two related proteins: enzymatic properties and mRNA expression during development.
**Authors:** Payne RM, Sims HF, Jennens ML, Lowe ME
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpgi.1994.266.5.G914](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.1994.266.5.G914)
**PMC:** [PMC3523700](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3523700/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1994 May;266(5 Pt 1):G914-21. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.1994.266.5.G914.

Rat pancreatic lipase and two related proteins: enzymatic properties and mRNA 
expression during development.

Payne RM(1), Sims HF, Jennens ML, Lowe ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri 63110.

We report the cDNA sequences of rat colipase, rat pancreatic lipase (rPL), and a 
rat pancreatic lipase-related protein (rPLRP). Comparison to the human PLRP cDNA 
suggests that the isolated clone encodes rPLRP-2. Both cDNA and a third cDNA 
encoding rPLRP-1 are secreted from Sf9 cells infected with recombinant 
baculovirus. rPL and rPLRP-2 hydrolyze triolein, 8.0 and 4.4 
mumol.min-1.microgram-1, respectively. They are inhibited by bile salts, and 
activity is restored by (pro)colipase. PLRP-1 has barely detectable activity 
against triolein, even with (pro)colipase present. The pattern of mRNA 
expression during development in the rat reveals that all mRNA are low in the 
fetal rat pancreas. Both PLRP mRNA rise just before birth to a maximum 12 h 
after birth. They fall to low levels in the adult. In contrast, the PL mRNA is 
low at birth and rises rapidly during the suckling-weanling transition. In 
conclusion, the rat has at least three genes encoding different lipases, and 
these related genes have separate regulatory controls.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.1994.266.5.G914
PMCID: PMC3523700
PMID: 8203536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We report the cDNA sequences of rat colipase, rat pancreatic lipase (rPL), and a rat pancreatic lipase-related protein (rPLRP). Comparison to the human PLRP cDNA suggests that the isolated clone encodes rPLRP-2. Both cDNA and a third cDNA encoding rPLRP-1 are secreted from Sf9 cells infected with recombinant baculovirus. rPL and rPLRP-2 hydrolyze triolein, 8.0 and 4.4 µmol · min −1 · µg −1 , respectively. They are inhibited by bile salts, and activity is restored by (pro)colipase. PLRP-1 has barely detectable activity against triolein, even with (pro)colipase present. The pattern of mRNA expression during development in the rat reveals that all mRNA are low in the fetal rat pancreas. Both PLRP mRNA rise just before birth to a maximum 12 h after birth. They fall to low levels in the adult. In contrast, the PL mRNA is low at birth and rises rapidly during the suckling-weanling transition. In conclusion, the rat has at least three genes encoding different lipases, and these related genes have separate regulatory controls.
