---
pmid: '21802064'
title: 'Why boys will be boys: two pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis
  are needed for male sexual differentiation.'
authors:
- Flück CE
- Meyer-Böni M
- Pandey AV
- Kempná P
- Miller WL
- Schoenle EJ
- Biason-Lauber A
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3155178
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.009
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Why boys will be boys: two pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed for male sexual differentiation.
**Authors:** Flück CE, Meyer-Böni M, Pandey AV, Kempná P, Miller WL, Schoenle EJ, Biason-Lauber A
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.009)
**PMC:** [PMC3155178](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3155178/)

## Abstract

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):201-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.009.
Epub  2011 Jul 28.

Why boys will be boys: two pathways of fetal testicular androgen biosynthesis 
are needed for male sexual differentiation.

Flück CE(1), Meyer-Böni M, Pandey AV, Kempná P, Miller WL, Schoenle EJ, 
Biason-Lauber A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, University 
Children's Hospital Bern, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Aug 12;89(2):347.

Human sexual determination is initiated by a cascade of genes that lead to the 
development of the fetal gonad. Whereas development of the female external 
genitalia does not require fetal ovarian hormones, male genital development 
requires the action of testicular testosterone and its more potent derivative 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The "classic" biosynthetic pathway from cholesterol 
to testosterone in the testis and the subsequent conversion of testosterone to 
DHT in genital skin is well established. Recently, an alternative pathway 
leading to DHT has been described in marsupials, but its potential importance to 
human development is unclear. AKR1C2 is an enzyme that participates in the 
alternative but not the classic pathway. Using a candidate gene approach, we 
identified AKR1C2 mutations with sex-limited recessive inheritance in four 46,XY 
individuals with disordered sexual development (DSD). Analysis of the 
inheritance of microsatellite markers excluded other candidate loci. Affected 
individuals had moderate to severe undervirilization at birth; when recreated by 
site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in bacteria, the mutant AKR1C2 had 
diminished but not absent catalytic activities. The 46,XY DSD individuals also 
carry a mutation causing aberrant splicing in AKR1C4, which encodes an enzyme 
with similar activity. This suggests a mode of inheritance where the severity of 
the developmental defect depends on the number of mutations in the two genes. An 
unrelated 46,XY DSD patient carried AKR1C2 mutations on both alleles, confirming 
the essential role of AKR1C2 and corroborating the hypothesis that both the 
classic and alternative pathways of testicular androgen biosynthesis are needed 
for normal human male sexual differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.06.009
PMCID: PMC3155178
PMID: 21802064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
