---
pmid: '8668148'
title: Human enhancer of filamentation 1, a novel p130cas-like docking protein, associates
  with focal adhesion kinase and induces pseudohyphal growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Law SF
- Estojak J
- Wang B
- Mysliwiec T
- Kruh G
- Golemis EA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC231327
doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.7.3327
---

# Human enhancer of filamentation 1, a novel p130cas-like docking protein, associates with focal adhesion kinase and induces pseudohyphal growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Law SF, Estojak J, Wang B, Mysliwiec T, Kruh G, Golemis EA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.16.7.3327](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.16.7.3327)
**PMC:** [PMC231327](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC231327/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3327-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.7.3327.

Human enhancer of filamentation 1, a novel p130cas-like docking protein, 
associates with focal adhesion kinase and induces pseudohyphal growth in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Law SF(1), Estojak J, Wang B, Mysliwiec T, Kruh G, Golemis EA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Science, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Budding in Saccharomyces cerevisiae follows a genetically programmed pattern of 
cell division which can be regulated by external signals. On the basis of the 
known functional conservation between a number of mammalian oncogenes and 
antioncogenes with genes in the yeast budding pathway, we used enhancement of 
pseudohyphal budding in S. cerevisiae by human proteins expressed from a HeLa 
cDNA library as a morphological screen to identify candidate genes that 
coordinate cellular signaling and morphology. In this report, we describe the 
isolation and characterization of human enhancer of filamentation 1 (HEF1), an 
SH3-domain-containing protein that is similar in structure to pl30cas, a 
recently identified docking protein that is a substrate for phosphorylation by a 
number of oncogenic tyrosine kinases. In contrast to p130cas, the expression of 
HEF1 appears to be tissue specific. Further, whereas p130cas is localized 
predominantly at focal adhesions, immunofluorescence indicates that HEF1 
localizes to both the cell periphery and the cell nucleus and is differently 
localized in fibroblasts and epithelial cells, suggesting a more complex role in 
cell signalling. Through immunoprecipitation and two-hybrid analysis, we 
demonstrate a direct physical interaction between HEF1 and p130cas, as well as 
an interaction of the SH3 domain of HEF1 with two discrete proline-rich regions 
of focal adhesion kinase. Finally, we demonstrate that as with p130cas, 
transformation with the oncogene v-abl results in an increase in tyrosine 
phosphorylation on HEF1, mediated by a direct association between HEF1 and 
v-Abl. We anticipate that HEF1 may prove to be an important linking element 
between extracellular signalling and regulation of the cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.16.7.3327
PMCID: PMC231327
PMID: 8668148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
