---
pmid: '17721995'
title: Role of high-molecular weight tropomyosins in TGF-beta-mediated control of
  cell motility.
authors:
- Zheng Q
- Safina A
- Bakin AV
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.23025
---

# Role of high-molecular weight tropomyosins in TGF-beta-mediated control of cell motility.
**Authors:** Zheng Q, Safina A, Bakin AV
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.23025](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.23025)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jan 1;122(1):78-90. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23025.

Role of high-molecular weight tropomyosins in TGF-beta-mediated control of cell 
motility.

Zheng Q(1), Safina A, Bakin AV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 
14263, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) suppresses tumor development at 
early stages of cancer, but enhances tumor invasion and formation of metastasis. 
TGF-beta1-mediated tumor invasion is associated with epithelial to mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) and matrix proteolysis. The mechanisms of these TGF-beta1 
responses in normal and tumor cells are not well understood. Recently, we have 
reported that TGF-beta1 increases expression of high-molecular weight 
tropomyosins (HMW-tropomyosins) and formation of actin stress fibers in normal 
epithelial cells. The present study investigated the role of tropomyosin in 
TGF-beta1-mediated cell motility and invasion. We found that TGF-beta1 restricts 
motility of normal epithelial cells although it promotes EMT and formation of 
actin stress fibers and focal adhesions. Cell motility was enhanced by 
siRNA-mediated suppression of HMW-tropomyosins. TGF-beta1 stimulated migration 
and matrix proteolysis in breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells that express low levels 
of HMW-tropomyosins. Tet-Off-regulated expression of HMW-tropomyosin inhibited 
cell migration and matrix proteolysis without affecting expression of matrix 
metalloproteinases. Tropomyosin increased cell adhesion to matrix by enhancing 
actin fibers and focal adhesions. Finally, tropomyosin impaired the ability of 
tumor cells to form lung metastases in SCID mice. Thus, these results suggest 
that HMW-tropomyosins are important for TGF-beta-mediated control of cell 
motility and acquisition of the metastatic potential.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.23025
PMID: 17721995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
