---
pmid: '25437913'
title: Crystal structure of a BRAF kinase domain monomer explains basis for allosteric
  regulation.
authors:
- Thevakumaran N
- Lavoie H
- Critton DA
- Tebben A
- Marinier A
- Sicheri F
- Therrien M
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2924
---

# Crystal structure of a BRAF kinase domain monomer explains basis for allosteric regulation.
**Authors:** Thevakumaran N, Lavoie H, Critton DA, Tebben A, Marinier A, Sicheri F, Therrien M
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2924](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2924)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 Jan;22(1):37-43. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2924. Epub 2014
Dec  1.

Crystal structure of a BRAF kinase domain monomer explains basis for allosteric 
regulation.

Thevakumaran N(1), Lavoie H(2), Critton DA(3), Tebben A(3), Marinier A(2), 
Sicheri F(4), Therrien M(5).

Author information:
(1)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. [2] Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Molecular Structure &Design Group, Molecular Discovery Technologies 
Department, Bristol-Myers Squibb Research, Princeton, New Jersey, USA.
(4)1] Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. [2] Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. [3] Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)1] Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. [2] Département de Pathologie et Biologie Cellulaire, 
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Reported RAF kinase domain structures adopt a side-to-side dimer configuration 
reflective of an 'on' state that underpins an allosteric mechanism of 
regulation. Atomic details of the monomer 'off' state have been elusive. 
Reinspection of the BRAF kinase domain structures revealed that sulfonamide 
inhibitors induce features of an off state, primarily a laterally displaced 
helix αC stabilized by the activation segment helix 1 (AS-H1). These features 
correlated with the ability of sulfonamides to disrupt human BRAF homodimers in 
cells, in vitro and in crystals yielding a structure of BRAF in a monomer state. 
The crystal structure revealed exaggerated, nonproductive positions of helix αC 
and AS-H1, the latter of which is the target of potent BRAF oncogenic mutations. 
Together, this work provides formal proof of an allosteric link between the RAF 
dimer interface, the activation segment and the catalytic infrastructure.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2924
PMID: 25437913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
