---
pmid: '10366450'
title: Characterization of MAD2B and other mitotic spindle checkpoint genes.
authors:
- Cahill DP
- da Costa LT
- Carson-Walter EB
- Kinzler KW
- Vogelstein B
- Lengauer C
journal: Genomics
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1999.5831
---

# Characterization of MAD2B and other mitotic spindle checkpoint genes.
**Authors:** Cahill DP, da Costa LT, Carson-Walter EB, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Lengauer C
**Journal:** Genomics (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1999.5831](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1999.5831)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1999 Jun 1;58(2):181-7. doi: 10.1006/geno.1999.5831.

Characterization of MAD2B and other mitotic spindle checkpoint genes.

Cahill DP(1), da Costa LT, Carson-Walter EB, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Lengauer 
C.

Author information:
(1)Program in Human Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, 21231, USA.

Aneuploidy is a characteristic of the majority of human cancers, and recent work 
has suggested that mitotic checkpoint defects play a role in its development. To 
further explore this issue, we isolated a novel human gene, MAD2B (MAD2L2), 
which is homologous to the spindle checkpoint gene MAD2 (MAD2L1). We determined 
the chromosomal localization of it and other spindle checkpoint genes, including 
MAD1L1, MAD2, BUB3, TTK (MPS1L1), and CDC20. In addition, we resolved the 
genomic intron-exon structure of the human BUB1 gene. We then searched for 
mutations in these genes in a panel of 19 aneuploid colorectal tumors. No new 
mutations were identified, suggesting that genes yet to be discovered are 
responsible for most of the checkpoint defects observed in aneuploid cancers.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1999.5831
PMID: 10366450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
