---
pmid: '19011241'
title: Two endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ER Golgi intermediate compartment-based lysine
  acetyltransferases post-translationally regulate BACE1 levels.
authors:
- Ko MH
- Puglielli L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2629114
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804901200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Two endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ER Golgi intermediate compartment-based lysine acetyltransferases post-translationally regulate BACE1 levels.
**Authors:** Ko MH, Puglielli L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M804901200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M804901200)
**PMC:** [PMC2629114](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2629114/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 23;284(4):2482-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804901200. Epub
2008  Nov 14.

Two endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ER Golgi intermediate compartment-based lysine 
acetyltransferases post-translationally regulate BACE1 levels.

Ko MH(1), Puglielli L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison and Geriatric 
Research Education Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53705, USA.

We have recently identified a novel form of post-translational regulation of 
BACE1 (beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1), a membrane 
protein that acts as the rate-limiting enzyme in the generation of the Alzheimer 
disease amyloid beta-peptide. Specifically, nascent BACE1 is transiently 
acetylated in seven lysine residues clustered in a highly disordered region of 
the protein that faces the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)/ER Golgi 
intermediate compartment (ER/ERGIC). The acetylation protects the nascent 
protein from degradation by PCSK9/NARC-1 in the ERGIC and allows it to reach the 
Golgi apparatus. Here we report the identification of two ER/ERGIC-based 
acetyltransferases, ATase1 and ATase2. Both proteins display acetyl-CoA:lysine 
acetyltransferase activity, can interact with and acetylate BACE1, and display 
an ER/ERGIC localization with the catalytic site facing the lumen of the 
organelle. Both ATase1 and ATase2 regulate the steady-state levels of BACE1 and 
the rate of amyloid beta-peptide generation. Finally, their transcripts are 
up-regulated by ceramide treatment. In conclusion, our studies have identified 
two new enzymes that may be involved in the pathogenesis of late-onset Alzheimer 
disease. The biochemical characterization of the above events could lead to the 
identification of novel pharmacological strategies for the prevention of this 
form of dementia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M804901200
PMCID: PMC2629114
PMID: 19011241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
