---
pmid: '22006324'
title: Anoctamin 6 is an essential component of the outwardly rectifying chloride
  channel.
authors:
- Martins JR
- Faria D
- Kongsuphol P
- Reisch B
- Schreiber R
- Kunzelmann K
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3207678
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1108094108
---

# Anoctamin 6 is an essential component of the outwardly rectifying chloride channel.
**Authors:** Martins JR, Faria D, Kongsuphol P, Reisch B, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1108094108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1108094108)
**PMC:** [PMC3207678](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3207678/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 1;108(44):18168-72. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1108094108. Epub 2011 Oct 17.

Anoctamin 6 is an essential component of the outwardly rectifying chloride 
channel.

Martins JR(1), Faria D, Kongsuphol P, Reisch B, Schreiber R, Kunzelmann K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Universität Regensburg, D-93053 Regensburg, 
Germany.

Outwardly rectifying chloride channels (ORCC, ICOR) of intermediate 
single-channel conductance of around 50 pS, are ubiquitously expressed, but have 
remained a mystery since their description more than 25 y ago. These channels 
have been shown to be activated on membrane excision and depolarization of the 
membrane voltage and by cAMP in the presence of the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator. We show that anoctamin 6 (Ano6), a member 
of the recently identified family of putative Cl(-) channels, is the crucial 
component of ORCC single-channel and whole-cell currents in airway epithelial 
cells and Jurkat T lymphocytes. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator augmented ORCC produced by Ano6 in A549 airway epithelial cells. Ano6 
is activated during membrane depolarization or apoptosis of Jurkat T lymphocytes 
and epithelial cells, and is inhibited by 5-nitro-2-(3-phenylpropylamino) 
benzoic acid, 4,4'-diisothio-cyanostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid, or AO1. Ano6 
belongs to the basic equipment of any cell type, including colonic surface 
epithelial cells. It forms the essential component of ORCC and seems to have a 
role for cell shrinkage and programmed cell death.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1108094108
PMCID: PMC3207678
PMID: 22006324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Outwardly rectifying chloride channels (ORCC, ICOR) of intermediate single-channel conductance of around 50 pS, are ubiquitously expressed, but have remained a mystery since their description more than 25 y ago. These channels have been shown to be activated on membrane excision and depolarization of the membrane voltage and by cAMP in the presence of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. We show that anoctamin 6 (Ano6), a member of the recently identified family of putative Cl − channels, is the crucial component of ORCC single-channel and whole-cell currents in airway epithelial cells and Jurkat T lymphocytes. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator augmented ORCC produced by Ano6 in A549 airway epithelial cells. Ano6 is activated during membrane depolarization or apoptosis of Jurkat T lymphocytes and epithelial cells, and is inhibited by 5-nitro-2-(3-phenylpropylamino) benzoic acid, 4,4′-diisothio-cyanostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid, or AO1. Ano6 belongs to the basic equipment of any cell type, including colonic surface epithelial cells. It forms the essential component of ORCC and seems to have a role for cell shrinkage and programmed cell death.
