---
pmid: '30213940'
title: SNX3-retromer requires an evolutionary conserved MON2:DOPEY2:ATP9A complex
  to mediate Wntless sorting and Wnt secretion.
authors:
- McGough IJ
- de Groot REA
- Jellett AP
- Betist MC
- Varandas KC
- Danson CM
- Heesom KJ
- Korswagen HC
- Cullen PJ
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6137200
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06114-3
---

# SNX3-retromer requires an evolutionary conserved MON2:DOPEY2:ATP9A complex to mediate Wntless sorting and Wnt secretion.
**Authors:** McGough IJ, de Groot REA, Jellett AP, Betist MC, Varandas KC, Danson CM, Heesom KJ, Korswagen HC, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-018-06114-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06114-3)
**PMC:** [PMC6137200](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6137200/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Commun. 2018 Sep 13;9(1):3737. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06114-3.

SNX3-retromer requires an evolutionary conserved MON2:DOPEY2:ATP9A complex to 
mediate Wntless sorting and Wnt secretion.

McGough IJ(1)(2), de Groot REA(3), Jellett AP(1), Betist MC(3), Varandas 
KC(4)(5), Danson CM(1), Heesom KJ(6), Korswagen HC(7), Cullen PJ(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Rd, London, NW1 1AT, UK.
(3)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CT, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Program in Cell Biology, University of California, San Francisco, 16th 
Street, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York 
Avenue, New York, NY, 10065, USA.
(6)Proteomics Facility, School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, 
BS8 1TD, UK.
(7)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CT, The 
Netherlands. r.korswagen@hubrecht.eu.
(8)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 1TD, UK. 
pete.cullen@bristol.ac.uk.

Wntless transports Wnt morphogens to the cell surface and is required for Wnt 
secretion and morphogenic gradients formation. Recycling of endocytosed Wntless 
requires the sorting nexin-3 (SNX3)-retromer-dependent endosome-to-Golgi 
transport pathway. Here we demonstrate the essential role of SNX3-retromer 
assembly for Wntless transport and report that SNX3 associates with an 
evolutionary conserved endosome-associated membrane re-modelling complex 
composed of MON2, DOPEY2 and the putative aminophospholipid translocase, ATP9A. 
In vivo suppression of Ce-mon-2, Ce-pad-1 or Ce-tat-5 (respective MON2, DOPEY2 
and ATP9A orthologues) phenocopy a loss of SNX3-retromer function, leading to 
enhanced lysosomal degradation of Wntless and a Wnt phenotype. Perturbed Wnt 
signalling is also observed upon overexpression of an ATPase-inhibited 
TAT-5(E246Q) mutant, suggesting a role for phospholipid flippase activity during 
SNX3-retromer-mediated Wntless sorting. Together, these findings provide in 
vitro and in vivo mechanistic details to describe SNX3-retromer-mediated 
transport during Wnt secretion and the formation of Wnt-morphogenic gradients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06114-3
PMCID: PMC6137200
PMID: 30213940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
