---
pmid: '15024738'
title: Biochemical characterization of two GALK1 mutations in patients with galactokinase
  deficiency.
authors:
- Sangiuolo F
- Magnani M
- Stambolian D
- Novelli G
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.9223
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical characterization of two GALK1 mutations in patients with galactokinase deficiency.
**Authors:** Sangiuolo F, Magnani M, Stambolian D, Novelli G
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.9223](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.9223)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2004 Apr;23(4):396. doi: 10.1002/humu.9223.

Biochemical characterization of two GALK1 mutations in patients with 
galactokinase deficiency.

Sangiuolo F(1), Magnani M, Stambolian D, Novelli G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biopathology, Human Genetics Unit, Tor Vergata University of 
Rome, Italy.

Galactokinase (GALK1) deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, which 
causes cataract formation in children not maintained on a lactose-free diet. 
Galactokinase deficiency results from mutation in the GALK1 gene mapped on 
17q24. Since GK1 cDNA was cloned about 20 mutations (prevalently deletions and 
missense) have been reported to date. Most of these reported mutations are 
confined to single families, and only one of them, P28T, has been referred as 
the founder Romani mutation. In this paper we report two novel missense 
mutations in GALK1 gene, identified in two unrelated patients with galactokinase 
deficiency. One mutation, g.575G>A, substitutes a valine for a methionine at 
amino acid 32 (p.V32M), while the other mutation, g.2839G>A, results in the 
arginine to glutamine substitution p.R239Q (GenBank sequence L76927). 
Biochemical studies demonstrate that these mutations led to a drastic 
modification in GALK activity when individual mutant cDNAs were expressed in an 
E. coli system. These findings indicate the pathogeneticity of these mutations 
causing GALK deficiency.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.9223
PMID: 15024738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
