---
pmid: '24001769'
title: SORLA-dependent and -independent functions for PACS1 in control of amyloidogenic
  processes.
authors:
- Burgert T
- Schmidt V
- Caglayan S
- Lin F
- Füchtbauer A
- Füchtbauer EM
- Nykjaer A
- Carlo AS
- Willnow TE
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3811889
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00628-13
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# SORLA-dependent and -independent functions for PACS1 in control of amyloidogenic processes.
**Authors:** Burgert T, Schmidt V, Caglayan S, Lin F, Füchtbauer A, Füchtbauer EM, Nykjaer A, Carlo AS, Willnow TE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00628-13](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00628-13)
**PMC:** [PMC3811889](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3811889/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(21):4308-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00628-13. Epub 2013
Sep  3.

SORLA-dependent and -independent functions for PACS1 in control of amyloidogenic 
processes.

Burgert T(1), Schmidt V, Caglayan S, Lin F, Füchtbauer A, Füchtbauer EM, Nykjaer 
A, Carlo AS, Willnow TE.

Author information:
(1)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Sorting-related receptor with A-type repeats (SORLA) is a sorting receptor for 
the amyloid precursor protein (APP) that prevents breakdown of APP into Aβ 
peptides, a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Several cytosolic adaptors 
have been shown to interact with the cytoplasmic domain of SORLA, thereby 
controlling intracellular routing of SORLA/APP complexes in cell lines. However, 
the relevance of adaptor-mediated sorting of SORLA for amyloidogenic processes 
in vivo remained unexplored. We focused on the interaction of SORLA with 
phosphofurin acidic cluster sorting protein 1 (PACS1), an adaptor that shuttles 
proteins between the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and endosomes. By studying PACS1 
knockdown in neuronal cell lines and investigating transgenic mice expressing a 
PACS1-binding-defective mutant form of SORLA, we found that disruption of SORLA 
and PACS1 interaction results in the inability of SORLA/APP complexes to sort to 
the TGN in neurons and in increased APP processing in the brain. Loss of PACS1 
also impairs the proper expression of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate 
receptor and its target cathepsin B, a protease that breaks down Aβ. Thus, our 
data identified the importance of PACS1-dependent protein sorting for 
amyloidogenic-burden control via both SORLA-dependent and SORLA-independent 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00628-13
PMCID: PMC3811889
PMID: 24001769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
