---
pmid: '25533956'
title: Meikin is a conserved regulator of meiosis-I-specific kinetochore function.
authors:
- Kim J
- Ishiguro K
- Nambu A
- Akiyoshi B
- Yokobayashi S
- Kagami A
- Ishiguro T
- Pendas AM
- Takeda N
- Sakakibara Y
- Kitajima TS
- Tanno Y
- Sakuno T
- Watanabe Y
journal: Nature
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature14097
---

# Meikin is a conserved regulator of meiosis-I-specific kinetochore function.
**Authors:** Kim J, Ishiguro K, Nambu A, Akiyoshi B, Yokobayashi S, Kagami A, Ishiguro T, Pendas AM, Takeda N, Sakakibara Y, Kitajima TS, Tanno Y, Sakuno T, Watanabe Y
**Journal:** Nature (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature14097](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14097)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2015 Jan 22;517(7535):466-71. doi: 10.1038/nature14097. Epub 2014 Dec 
24.

Meikin is a conserved regulator of meiosis-I-specific kinetochore function.

Kim J(1), Ishiguro K(1), Nambu A(1), Akiyoshi B(1), Yokobayashi S(1), Kagami 
A(1), Ishiguro T(1), Pendas AM(2), Takeda N(3), Sakakibara Y(4), Kitajima TS(4), 
Tanno Y(1), Sakuno T(1), Watanabe Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Chromosome Dynamics, Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1Yayoi, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
(2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer (CSIC-USAL), 37007 
Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Center for Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 
Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811 Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Chromosome Segregation, RIKEN Center for Developmental 
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2018 Nov;563(7731):E23. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0530-3.

Comment in
    Nature. 2015 Jan 22;517(7535):441-2. doi: 10.1038/nature14087.

The kinetochore is the crucial apparatus regulating chromosome segregation in 
mitosis and meiosis. Particularly in meiosis I, unlike in mitosis, sister 
kinetochores are captured by microtubules emanating from the same spindle pole 
(mono-orientation) and centromeric cohesion mediated by cohesin is protected in 
the following anaphase. Although meiotic kinetochore factors have been 
identified only in budding and fission yeasts, these molecules and their 
functions are thought to have diverged earlier. Therefore, a conserved mechanism 
for meiotic kinetochore regulation remains elusive. Here we have identified in 
mouse a meiosis-specific kinetochore factor that we termed MEIKIN, which 
functions in meiosis I but not in meiosis II or mitosis. MEIKIN plays a crucial 
role in both mono-orientation and centromeric cohesion protection, partly by 
stabilizing the localization of the cohesin protector shugoshin. These functions 
are mediated mainly by the activity of Polo-like kinase PLK1, which is enriched 
to kinetochores in a MEIKIN-dependent manner. Our integrative analysis indicates 
that the long-awaited key regulator of meiotic kinetochore function is Meikin, 
which is conserved from yeasts to humans.

DOI: 10.1038/nature14097
PMID: 25533956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
