---
pmid: '7665581'
title: Cloning and functional characterization of human selenophosphate synthetase,
  an essential component of selenoprotein synthesis.
authors:
- Low SC
- Harney JW
- Berry MJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.37.21659
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and functional characterization of human selenophosphate synthetase, an essential component of selenoprotein synthesis.
**Authors:** Low SC, Harney JW, Berry MJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.37.21659](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.37.21659)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 15;270(37):21659-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.37.21659.

Cloning and functional characterization of human selenophosphate synthetase, an 
essential component of selenoprotein synthesis.

Low SC(1), Harney JW, Berry MJ.

Author information:
(1)Thyroid Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Selenocysteine is co-translationally incorporated into prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic selenoproteins at in-frame UGA codons. However, the only component of 
the eukaryotic selenocysteine incorporation machinery identified to date is the 
selenocysteine-specific tRNA(Sec). In prokaryotes, selenocysteine is synthesized 
from seryl-tRNA(Sec) and the active selenium donor, selenophosphate. 
Selenophosphate is synthesized from selenide and ATP by the selD gene product, 
selenophosphate synthetase, and is required for selenocysteine synthesis and 
incorporation into bacterial selenoproteins. We have now cloned human selD and 
shown that transfection of the human selD cDNA into mammalian cells results in 
increased selenium labeling of a mammalian selenoprotein, type 1 iodothyronine 
deiodinase. Despite significant differences between the mechanisms of 
selenoprotein synthesis in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, human selD weakly 
complements a bacterial selD mutation, partially restoring selenium 
incorporation into bacterial selenoproteins. Human selenophosphate synthetase 
has only 32% homology with the bacterial protein, although a highly homologous 
region that has similarity to a consensus ATP/GTP binding domain has been 
identified. Point mutations within this region result in decreased incorporation 
of selenium into type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase in all but one case. Further 
analysis revealed that reduced selenium labeling was due to altered ATP binding 
properties of the mutant selenophosphate synthetases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.37.21659
PMID: 7665581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
