---
pmid: '34402513'
title: Phosphorylation in the intrinsically disordered region of F-BAR protein Imp2
  regulates its contractile ring recruitment.
authors:
- Willet AH
- Igarashi MG
- Chen JS
- Bhattacharjee R
- Ren L
- Cullati SN
- Elmore ZC
- Roberts-Galbraith RH
- Johnson AE
- Beckley JR
- Gould KL
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2021'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC8435286
doi: 10.1242/jcs.258645
---

# Phosphorylation in the intrinsically disordered region of F-BAR protein Imp2 regulates its contractile ring recruitment.
**Authors:** Willet AH, Igarashi MG, Chen JS, Bhattacharjee R, Ren L, Cullati SN, Elmore ZC, Roberts-Galbraith RH, Johnson AE, Beckley JR, Gould KL
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.258645](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.258645)
**PMC:** [PMC8435286](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8435286/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2021 Aug 15;134(16):jcs258645. doi: 10.1242/jcs.258645. Epub 2021 
Aug 17.

Phosphorylation in the intrinsically disordered region of F-BAR protein Imp2 
regulates its contractile ring recruitment.

Willet AH(1), Igarashi MG(1), Chen JS(1), Bhattacharjee R(1), Ren L(1), Cullati 
SN(1), Elmore ZC(1), Roberts-Galbraith RH(1), Johnson AE(1), Beckley JR(1), 
Gould KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37240, USA.

The F-BAR protein Imp2 is an important contributor to cytokinesis in the fission 
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Because cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation of 
the central intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of the Imp2 paralog Cdc15 
controls Cdc15 oligomerization state, localization and ability to bind protein 
partners, we investigated whether Imp2 is similarly phosphoregulated. We found 
that Imp2 is endogenously phosphorylated on 28 sites within its IDR, with the 
bulk of phosphorylation being constitutive. In vitro, the casein kinase 1 (CK1) 
isoforms Hhp1 and Hhp2 can phosphorylate 17 sites, and Cdk1 (also known as Cdc2) 
can phosphorylate the remaining 11 sites. Mutations that prevent Cdk1 
phosphorylation result in precocious Imp2 recruitment to the cell division site, 
and mutations designed to mimic these phosphorylation events delay Imp2 
accumulation at the contractile ring (CR). Mutations that eliminate CK1 
phosphorylation sites allow CR sliding, and phosphomimetic substitutions at 
these sites reduce Imp2 protein levels and slow CR constriction. Thus, like 
Cdc15, the Imp2 IDR is phosphorylated at many sites by multiple kinases. In 
contrast to Cdc15, for which phosphorylation plays a major cell cycle regulatory 
role, Imp2 phosphorylation is primarily constitutive, with milder effects on 
localization and function. This article has an associated First Person interview 
with the first author of the paper.

© 2021. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.258645
PMCID: PMC8435286
PMID: 34402513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.

## Full Text

ABSTRACT

The F-BAR protein Imp2 is an important contributor to cytokinesis in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe . Because cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation of the central intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of the Imp2 paralog Cdc15 controls Cdc15 oligomerization state, localization and ability to bind protein partners, we investigated whether Imp2 is similarly phosphoregulated. We found that Imp2 is endogenously phosphorylated on 28 sites within its IDR, with the bulk of phosphorylation being constitutive. In vitro , the casein kinase 1 (CK1) isoforms Hhp1 and Hhp2 can phosphorylate 17 sites, and Cdk1 (also known as Cdc2) can phosphorylate the remaining 11 sites. Mutations that prevent Cdk1 phosphorylation result in precocious Imp2 recruitment to the cell division site, and mutations designed to mimic these phosphorylation events delay Imp2 accumulation at the contractile ring (CR). Mutations that eliminate CK1 phosphorylation sites allow CR sliding, and phosphomimetic substitutions at these sites reduce Imp2 protein levels and slow CR constriction. Thus, like Cdc15, the Imp2 IDR is phosphorylated at many sites by multiple kinases. In contrast to Cdc15, for which phosphorylation plays a major cell cycle regulatory role, Imp2 phosphorylation is primarily constitutive, with milder effects on localization and function.

This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper .

INTRODUCTION

Dynamic cellular processes such as endocytosis, cytokinesis and motility require reorganization of the plasma membrane in concert with cytoskeletal changes. The Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (BAR) family of proteins are central players in these events (reviewed in Carman and Dominguez, 2018 ; Salzer et al., 2017 ). BAR domains are membrane-binding modules that fold as crescent-shaped dimers. A subset of the BAR domain superfamily, Fer/Cip4 homology (FCH) BAR domains (F-BARs) form more elongated, less curved structures (reviewed in Carman and Dominguez, 2018 ; Salzer et al., 2017 ; Almeida-Souza et al., 2018 ; Hanawa-Suetsugu et al., 2019 ; Snider et al., 2020 ). By oligomerizing via their F-BAR domains, F-BAR proteins can concentrate on membranes to scaffold protein assemblies that may result in membrane deformation (reviewed in McDonald and Gould, 2016b ; Snider et al., 2021 ). Interestingly, several biological processes, such as endocytosis and cytokinesis, involve multiple BAR proteins ( Taylor et al., 2011 ), but why cells deploy multiple family members and whether each plays unique or redundant roles is unclear.

Two paralogous F-BAR proteins contribute to Schizosaccharomyces pombe cytokinesis. Cdc15 and Imp2 share domain organization – an N-terminal F-BAR domain, C-terminal SH3 domain and central predicted intrinsically disordered region (IDR) – but they have distinct functions. Cdc15 localizes to the division site prior to contractile ring (CR) formation and serves as a scaffold essential for stability and organization of the CR ( Arasada and Pollard, 2014 ; Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ; Fankhauser et al., 1995 ; McDonald et al., 2015 ; Roberts-Galbraith et al., 2009 ; Snider et al., 2020 ; Wachtler et al., 2006 ; Wu et al., 2003 ). The F-BAR domain of Cdc15 directly binds to the formin Cdc12 ( Carnahan and Gould, 2003 ; Willet et al., 2015 ) and paxillin-like Pxl1 ( Snider et al., 2020 ), while the SH3 domain of Cdc15 binds multiple partners ( Ren et al., 2015 ; Roberts-Galbraith et al., 2009 ).

Imp2 arrives at the CR after Cdc15 but prior to CR constriction ( Ren et al., 2011 ). The CR forms normally in the absence of Imp2, but CR constriction and septation are severely compromised ( Demeter and Sazer, 1998 ). The SH3 domains of Cdc15 and Imp2 are functionally interchangeable ( Ren et al., 2015 ; Roberts-Galbraith et al., 2009 ). The F-BAR domain of Cdc15 can also substitute for that of Imp2 ( McDonald et al., 2016 ), and the Imp2 F-BAR domain can substitute for the essential function of the Cdc15 F-BAR domain ( Mangione et al., 2019 ). Thus, we reasoned that the remaining domains, which are predicted IDRs, must provide unique function or regulation. Extensive phosphorylation of the Cdc15 IDR inhibits its membrane binding, oligomerization and binding to Pxl1 ( Bhattacharjee et al., 2020 ; Lee et al., 2018 ; Magliozzi et al., 2020 ; Roberts-Galbraith et al., 2010 ). Thus, we asked whether Imp2 is similarly phosphoregulated.

We identified Imp2 in a pilot phosphoproteomic screen designed to identify substrates of the S. pombe casein kinase 1 (CK1) protein kinases Hhp1 and Hhp2 (referred to collectively as Hhp1/2; Dhillon and Hoekstra, 1994 ). In all, we identified 28 phosphorylation sites matching the CK1 consensus sequence and the Cdk1 (also known as Cdc2) consensus sequence, all of which cluster within the Imp2 IDR. Our genetic, cell biological and biochemical analysis of phosphoeliminating and phosphomimetic mutants indicate a strikingly different role for phosphorylation in Imp2 compared with that in Cdc15.

Yeast methods

All S. pombe strains used in this study ( Table S1 ) were cultured using standard methods in YE medium, at 32°C unless otherwise noted ( Moreno et al., 1991 ). Strain construction was accomplished through tetrad analysis using standard methods ( Moreno et al., 1991 ). Cells were fixed with 70% ethanol for DAPI and Methyl Blue staining as described previously ( Roberts-Galbraith et al., 2009 ). For cdc25-22 block-and-release experiments, cells were arrested in G2 at 36°C for 3.5 h and released to 25°C at the 0 time point before sample collection. For other cell cycle arrests, except for nda3-KM311 , cells were arrested for 3 h at 36°C. For the nda3-KM311 arrest, cells were shifted to 18°C for 6 h. For phosphoproteomic experiments, overnight cultures were diluted to 0.2 OD 595 and shifted to 18°C for 6 h to block cells in prometaphase with the cold sensitive β-tubulin allele nda3-KM311 ( Hiraoka et al., 1984 ) prior to chemical inhibition of the Hhp1 kinase. To inhibit the hhp1-as allele ( Gregan et al., 2007 ) in the phosphoproteomic experiments, cells were treated with 10 μM of the ATP analog 1-NM-PP1 (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h. In other experiments to inhibit the hhp1-as, hhp2-as and cdc2-as alleles ( Dischinger et al., 2008 ), cells were treated with 25 μM 1-NM-PP1 (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min.

hhp1 + and hhp2 + genes [including 500 bp upstream and downstream of the open reading frames (ORFs)] were amplified from genomic DNA by PCR, ligated into a PCR-Blunt vector (Life Technologies) and subcloned into pIRT2 ( Hindley et al., 1987 ). The hhp1 and hhp2 analog-sensitive mutants used in Fig. 2 were created by mutagenizing the predicted gatekeeper residues to glycine ( http://shokatlab.ucsf.edu/ksd/ ) ( hhp1-M84G; hhp2-M85G ) using a site-directed mutagenesis kit (QuikChange kit, Agilent Technologies). The imp2 phosphomutants were ordered as gene fragments from Life Technologies and subcloned into PCRblunt or pIRT2. To integrate the hhp1-M84G , hhp2-M85G and imp2 alleles into the genome, haploid hhp1::ura4 + , hhp2::ura4 + and imp2::ura4 + strains, respectively, were transformed with the linear gene fragments (digested with BamHI and PstI from pIRT2- hhp1 and pIRT2- hhp2 , or with PstI and Sac1 from pIRT2- imp2-28A and PCRblunt- imp2-11A , 11E , 17A or 17E ) using standard lithium acetate transformations ( Keeney and Boeke, 1994) . Integrants were selected based on resistance to 1.5 mg/ml 5-fluoroorotic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and validated by colony PCR using primers homologous to endogenous sequences that flank the genomic clones within the vectors in combination with those within the ORF. All constructs and integrants were sequenced to ensure their accuracy. The Imp2-11A and Imp2-11E mutants contained substitutions at residues 346, 367, 384, 397, 402, 426, 451, 467, 490, 511 and 531. The Imp2-17A and Imp2-17E mutants contained substitutions at residues 383, 396, 438, 454, 456, 469, 480, 503, 520, 524, 554, 560, 564, 565, 584, 595 and 596. The 28-site mutations combined the 11 and 17 sites.

Tagged strains were generated by endogenously tagging the 3′ end of ORFs with sequences encoding the appropriate epitope tag or fluorescent protein and/or resistance or auxotrophic selection cassette ( kan R , nat R , ura4 + or hyg R ) using pFA6 cassettes, as previously described ( Bähler et al., 1998 ), using lithium acetate transformations ( Keeney and Boeke, 1994 ). G418, hygromycin or nourseothiricin (clonNAT) (100 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) were used for selection of kan R , hyg R , or nat R cells, respectively. All fusion proteins were expressed from their native promoters at their chromosomal loci.

Other biochemistry methods

Cell pellets (20–30 OD 595 ) were snap frozen and lysed by bead disruption in NP-40 lysis buffer ( Gould et al., 1991 ) or urea buffer (8 M urea, 300 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaPO 4 , 0.5% NP40 and 4 mM imidazole, pH 8) containing protease inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail; Roche). A FastPrep cell homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) was used for bead beating for 20–30 s. For immunoprecipitation, anti-Imp2 antibody (VU484; McDonald et al., 2016 ) conjugated to protein A beads was added to cleared cell lysates, then beads were washed three times with NP-40 buffer and proteins were eluted with SDS sample buffer. Proteins were separated on 10% Bis-Tris or 8% Tris-glycine gels, transferred to Immobilon-P PVDF (Millipore) membranes, and immunoblotted with anti-Imp2 (VU484; 1:1000) or anti-α-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich; T5168; 1:5000) followed by fluorescently labeled anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies (LI-COR Biosciences), used according to the manufacturer's instructions. HA 3 - and FLAG 3 -tagged proteins were immunoprecipitated from NP-40 lysates with 4 μg of 12CA5 antibody (Vanderbilt Antibody and Protein Resource Core) or 4 μg anti-FLAG M2 antibody (Sigma-Aldrich) and detected by immunoblotting with the 12CA5 (1:1000) and anti-FLAG M2 antibodies (1:1000), respectively, followed by fluorescently labeled anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies (LI-COR Biosciences). For phosphatase treatments, immunoprecipitated Imp2 was incubated with λ phosphatase (New England Biolabs) in 25 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl and 1 mM MnCl 2 for 30 min at 30°C prior to addition of SDS sample buffer, boiling, and separation by SDS–PAGE.
