---
pmid: '10830904'
title: Characterization of the human complex I NDUFB7 and 17.2-kDa cDNAs and mutational
  analysis of 19 genes of the HP fraction in complex I-deficient-patients.
authors:
- Triepels R
- Smeitink J
- Loeffen J
- Smeets R
- Trijbels F
- van den Heuvel L
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s004390000278
---

# Characterization of the human complex I NDUFB7 and 17.2-kDa cDNAs and mutational analysis of 19 genes of the HP fraction in complex I-deficient-patients.
**Authors:** Triepels R, Smeitink J, Loeffen J, Smeets R, Trijbels F, van den Heuvel L
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390000278](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390000278)

## Abstract

1. Hum Genet. 2000 Apr;106(4):385-91. doi: 10.1007/s004390000278.

Characterization of the human complex I NDUFB7 and 17.2-kDa cDNAs and mutational 
analysis of 19 genes of the HP fraction in complex I-deficient-patients.

Triepels R(1), Smeitink J, Loeffen J, Smeets R, Trijbels F, van den Heuvel L.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, 
University Medical Center Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Deficiency of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase, the first enzyme complex of the 
mitochondrial respiratory chain, is one of the most frequent causes of human 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. A relatively small percentage of human 
complex I deficiency is associated with mitochondrial DNA mutations. cDNA 
characterization and mutational analysis of the structural complex I genes in 19 
complex I-deficient patients, in whom common mtDNA mutations have been excluded, 
has so far revealed five patients with alterations in evolutionary conserved 
nuclear-encoded proteins. In order to complete our knowledge about the expected 
36 structural nuclear complex I genes, we characterized the NDUFB7 and the 
17.2-kDa cDNA sequences of the hydrophobic (HP) fraction of the complex. 
Subsequently, we screened all subunits of this fraction for the presence of 
mutations in those 14 patients of our initial patient cohort in whom the 
underlying genetic cause had not been elucidated. Strikingly, no pathogenic 
mutations were found in the HP subunits that would explain the complex I 
deficiency in our patients. Other strategies are needed to unravel proteins 
involved in the pathogenesis of the complicated cellular network of 
transcription until correct assemblage of complex I.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390000278
PMID: 10830904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
