---
pmid: '17620598'
title: Quaternary structures of tumor suppressor p53 and a specific p53 DNA complex.
authors:
- Tidow H
- Melero R
- Mylonas E
- Freund SM
- Grossmann JG
- Carazo JM
- Svergun DI
- Valle M
- Fersht AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1941468
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705069104
---

# Quaternary structures of tumor suppressor p53 and a specific p53 DNA complex.
**Authors:** Tidow H, Melero R, Mylonas E, Freund SM, Grossmann JG, Carazo JM, Svergun DI, Valle M, Fersht AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0705069104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0705069104)
**PMC:** [PMC1941468](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1941468/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 24;104(30):12324-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0705069104. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Quaternary structures of tumor suppressor p53 and a specific p53 DNA complex.

Tidow H(1), Melero R, Mylonas E, Freund SM, Grossmann JG, Carazo JM, Svergun DI, 
Valle M, Fersht AR.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Protein Engineering, Hills Road, 
Cambridge CB2 0QH, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 24;104(30):12231-2. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0705319104.

The homotetrameric tumor suppressor p53 consists of folded core and 
tetramerization domains, linked and flanked by intrinsically disordered segments 
that impede structure analysis by x-ray crystallography and NMR. Here, we solved 
the quaternary structure of human p53 in solution by a combination of 
small-angle x-ray scattering, which defined its shape, and NMR, which identified 
the core domain interfaces and showed that the folded domains had the same 
structure in the intact protein as in fragments. We combined the solution data 
with electron microscopy on immobilized samples that provided medium resolution 
3D maps. Ab initio and rigid body modeling of scattering data revealed an 
elongated cross-shaped structure with a pair of loosely coupled core domain 
dimers at the ends, which are accessible for binding to DNA and partner 
proteins. The core domains in that open conformation closed around a specific 
DNA response element to form a compact complex whose structure was independently 
determined by electron microscopy. The structure of the DNA complex is 
consistent with that of the complex of four separate core domains and response 
element fragments solved by x-ray crystallography and contacts identified by 
NMR. Electron microscopy on the conformationally mobile, unbound p53 selected a 
minor compact conformation, which resembled the closed conformation, from the 
ensemble of predominantly open conformations. A multipronged structural approach 
could be generally useful for the structural characterization of the rapidly 
growing number of multidomain proteins with intrinsically disordered regions.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0705069104
PMCID: PMC1941468
PMID: 17620598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The homotetrameric tumor suppressor p53 consists of folded core and tetramerization domains, linked and flanked by intrinsically disordered segments that impede structure analysis by x-ray crystallography and NMR. Here, we solved the quaternary structure of human p53 in solution by a combination of small-angle x-ray scattering, which defined its shape, and NMR, which identified the core domain interfaces and showed that the folded domains had the same structure in the intact protein as in fragments. We combined the solution data with electron microscopy on immobilized samples that provided medium resolution 3D maps. Ab initio and rigid body modeling of scattering data revealed an elongated cross-shaped structure with a pair of loosely coupled core domain dimers at the ends, which are accessible for binding to DNA and partner proteins. The core domains in that open conformation closed around a specific DNA response element to form a compact complex whose structure was independently determined by electron microscopy. The structure of the DNA complex is consistent with that of the complex of four separate core domains and response element fragments solved by x-ray crystallography and contacts identified by NMR. Electron microscopy on the conformationally mobile, unbound p53 selected a minor compact conformation, which resembled the closed conformation, from the ensemble of predominantly open conformations. A multipronged structural approach could be generally useful for the structural characterization of the rapidly growing number of multidomain proteins with intrinsically disordered regions.

Methods

Human p53 CTetD, CTetCD, and full-length p53 were expressed in Escherichia coli and purified as described ( 23 ). SAXS data were collected at the X33 beamline at European Molecular Biology Laboratory/Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron (EMBL/DESY), Hamburg and at station 2.1 of the Daresbury Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) following standard procedures. Electron microscopy using negative staining involved manual selection of particles and reference-free classification (see SI Fig. 11 ). TROSY NMR spectra were acquired on 800 MHz and 900 MHz spectrometers by using perdeuterated, isotopically 2 H, 15 N-labeled samples. Details of sample preparation, SAXS measurements and modeling, electron microscopy, image processing and domain fitting, and NMR spectroscopy are given in SI Materials and Methods .
