---
pmid: '16498403'
title: The role of receptor internalization in CD95 signaling.
authors:
- Lee KH
- Feig C
- Tchikov V
- Schickel R
- Hallas C
- Schütze S
- Peter ME
- Chan AC
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1409734
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601016
---

# The role of receptor internalization in CD95 signaling.
**Authors:** Lee KH, Feig C, Tchikov V, Schickel R, Hallas C, Schütze S, Peter ME, Chan AC
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601016](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601016)
**PMC:** [PMC1409734](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1409734/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Mar 8;25(5):1009-23. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601016. Epub 2006 Feb
 23.

The role of receptor internalization in CD95 signaling.

Lee KH(1), Feig C, Tchikov V, Schickel R, Hallas C, Schütze S, Peter ME, Chan 
AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Activation of the cell surface CD95 receptor triggers a cascade of signaling 
events, including assembly of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC), that 
culminate in cellular apoptosis. In this study, we demonstrate a general 
requirement of receptor internalization for CD95 ligand-mediated DISC 
amplification, caspase activation and apoptosis in type I cells. Recruitment of 
DISC components to the activated receptor predominantly occurs after the 
receptor has moved into an endosomal compartment and blockade of CD95 
internalization impairs DISC formation and apoptosis. In contrast, CD95 ligand 
stimulation of cells unable to internalize CD95 results in activation of 
proliferative Erk and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. Hence, the subcellular 
localization and internalization pathways of CD95 play important roles in 
controlling activation of distinct signaling cascades to determine divergent 
cellular fates.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601016
PMCID: PMC1409734
PMID: 16498403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
