---
pmid: '11641275'
title: The hairless gene mutated in congenital hair loss disorders encodes a novel
  nuclear receptor corepressor.
authors:
- Potter GB
- Beaudoin GM 3rd
- DeRenzo CL
- Zarach JM
- Chen SH
- Thompson CC
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC312820
doi: 10.1101/gad.916701
---

# The hairless gene mutated in congenital hair loss disorders encodes a novel nuclear receptor corepressor.
**Authors:** Potter GB, Beaudoin GM 3rd, DeRenzo CL, Zarach JM, Chen SH, Thompson CC
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.916701](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.916701)
**PMC:** [PMC312820](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC312820/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2001 Oct 15;15(20):2687-701. doi: 10.1101/gad.916701.

The hairless gene mutated in congenital hair loss disorders encodes a novel 
nuclear receptor corepressor.

Potter GB(1), Beaudoin GM 3rd, DeRenzo CL, Zarach JM, Chen SH, Thompson CC.

Author information:
(1)Kennedy Krieger Research Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The mammalian hairless (hr) gene plays a critical role in the maintenance of 
hair growth. Although the hr gene has been identified, the biochemical function 
of its encoded protein (Hr) has remained obscure. Here, we show that Hr 
functions as a transcriptional corepressor for thyroid hormone receptors (TRs). 
We find that two independent regions of Hr mediate TR binding and that 
interaction requires a cluster of hydrophobic residues similar to the binding 
motifs proposed for nuclear receptor corepressors (N-CoR and SMRT). Similarly, 
we show that Hr binds to the same region of TR as known corepressors. We show 
that Hr interacts with histone deacetylases (HDACs) and is localized to 
matrix-associated deacetylase (MAD) bodies, indicating that the mechanism of 
Hr-mediated repression is likely through associated HDAC activity. Thus, Hr is a 
component of the corepressor machinery, and despite its lack of sequence 
identity with previously described corepressors, its mode of action is 
remarkably conserved. On the basis of its thyroid hormone-inducible and tissue- 
and developmental-specific expression, Hr likely defines a new class of nuclear 
receptor corepressors that serve a more specialized role than ubiquitous 
corepressors. The discovery that Hr is a corepressor provides a molecular basis 
for specific hair loss syndromes in both humans and mice.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.916701
PMCID: PMC312820
PMID: 11641275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
