---
pmid: '24457100'
title: Angiogenin interacts with the plasminogen activation system at the cell surface
  of breast cancer cells to regulate plasmin formation and cell migration.
authors:
- Dutta S
- Bandyopadhyay C
- Bottero V
- Veettil MV
- Wilson L
- Pins MR
- Johnson KE
- Warshall C
- Chandran B
journal: Mol Oncol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5528647
doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.017
---

# Angiogenin interacts with the plasminogen activation system at the cell surface of breast cancer cells to regulate plasmin formation and cell migration.
**Authors:** Dutta S, Bandyopadhyay C, Bottero V, Veettil MV, Wilson L, Pins MR, Johnson KE, Warshall C, Chandran B
**Journal:** Mol Oncol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.017)
**PMC:** [PMC5528647](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5528647/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Oncol. 2014 May;8(3):483-507. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.017. Epub 2014
 Jan 4.

Angiogenin interacts with the plasminogen activation system at the cell surface 
of breast cancer cells to regulate plasmin formation and cell migration.

Dutta S(1), Bandyopadhyay C(2), Bottero V(2), Veettil MV(2), Wilson L(2), Pins 
MR(3), Johnson KE(2), Warshall C(2), Chandran B(2).

Author information:
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA. Electronic address: 
sujoy.dutta@rosalindfranklin.edu.
(2)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Advocate Lutheran General Hospital, Park Ridge, IL, 
USA.

Angiogenin (ANG), a 14-kDa pro-angiogenic secreted protein, has been shown to 
play a role in cell migration and tumor invasion, which involve proteolytic 
cleavage of plasminogen to generate plasmin. However, the mechanism by which ANG 
regulates plasmin formation and cell migration was not known. Our studies here 
detected elevated levels of secreted and cell surface-bound ANG in highly 
invasive metastatic breast cancer cells. ANG was also detected at very high 
levels in the tumor cells in infiltrating ductal carcinomas. By 
immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation analysis, ANG was detected at the 
leading edges of the cell surfaces where it colocalized and interacted with 
members of the plasminogen activation system (PAS) such as annexin A2 (A2), 
calpactin (S100-A10) and urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR). 
Analysis of lipid raft (LR) and non-lipid raft (NLR) regions of the cell 
membranes showed the predominance of ANG, A2 and S100-A10 in the LR regions. In 
contrast, uPAR was detected predominantly in the NLR fractions, suggesting that 
ANG interacts with uPAR at the junctions of LR and NLR regions. ANG knockdown in 
T47D and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell lines did not affect the cellular 
expression of A2, S100-A10 and uPAR but decreased cell migration and plasmin 
formation. Neutralization of ANG with monoclonal antibodies similarly decreased 
the migration of MDA-MB-231 cells. In the presence of ANG, uPAR was observed to 
interact with uPA, which is necessary for plasmin formation. Conversely, in the 
absence of ANG, uPAR did not interact with uPA and FAK and Src kinases were 
observed to be dephosphorylated. Exogenous addition of recombinant ANG to ANG 
knocked down MDA-MB-231 cells restored FAK phosphorylation, uPAR interactions 
with uPA, plasmin formation as well as migration of these cells. Taken together, 
our results identified a novel role for ANG as a member of the uPAR interactome 
that facilitates the interaction of uPAR with uPA, leading to plasmin formation 
and cell migration necessary for tumor invasion and metastasis of breast cancer 
cells.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.017
PMCID: PMC5528647
PMID: 24457100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
