---
pmid: '15530424'
title: A new putative cyclic nucleotide-gated channel gene, cng-3, is critical for
  thermotolerance in Caenorhabditis elegans.
authors:
- Cho SW
- Choi KY
- Park CS
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.060
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A new putative cyclic nucleotide-gated channel gene, cng-3, is critical for thermotolerance in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Cho SW, Choi KY, Park CS
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.060](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.060)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 10;325(2):525-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.060.

A new putative cyclic nucleotide-gated channel gene, cng-3, is critical for 
thermotolerance in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Cho SW(1), Choi KY, Park CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology 
(GIST), Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea.

Cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels encoded by tax-4 and tax-2 genes are 
required for chemo- and thermo-sensation in Caenorhabditis elegans. Here we 
report the identification and the characterization of cng-3, a new CNG channel 
gene, found in C. elegans. CNG-3 contains six putative transmembrane regions and 
a cyclic nucleotide-binding domain that show high homology with CNG channels of 
higher animals as well as TAX-4. The expression of cng-3 is detected from early 
stages in worm development and restricted in five sensory neurons of amphid 
including AFD neuron. While a cng-3 null mutant displays normal chemotaxis to 
volatile odorants, the mutant worms exhibit impaired thermal tolerance. These 
results indicate that CNG-3, a new member of CNG channel subunits, may play a 
critical role in sensation or response of thermal stress in C. elegans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2004.10.060
PMID: 15530424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
