---
pmid: '16407161'
title: Role of Src in C3 transient receptor potential channel function and evidence
  for a heterogeneous makeup of receptor- and store-operated Ca2+ entry channels.
authors:
- Kawasaki BT
- Liao Y
- Birnbaumer L
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1326167
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0508030102
---

# Role of Src in C3 transient receptor potential channel function and evidence for a heterogeneous makeup of receptor- and store-operated Ca2+ entry channels.
**Authors:** Kawasaki BT, Liao Y, Birnbaumer L
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0508030102](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0508030102)
**PMC:** [PMC1326167](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1326167/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 10;103(2):335-40. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0508030102. Epub 2006 Jan 3.

Role of Src in C3 transient receptor potential channel function and evidence for 
a heterogeneous makeup of receptor- and store-operated Ca2+ entry channels.

Kawasaki BT(1), Liao Y, Birnbaumer L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

Receptor-operated Ca2+ entry (ROCE) and store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) are 
known to be inhibited by tyrosine kinase inhibitors and activation of C-type 
transient receptor potential channel (TRPC) isoform 3 (TRPC3), a cation channel 
thought to be involved in SOCE and/or ROCE, was recently shown to depend on src 
tyrosine kinase activity. What is not known is the step at which src acts on 
TRPC3 and whether the role for tyrosine kinases in ROCE or SOCE is a general 
phenomenon. Using in vitro and in cell protein-protein interaction assays we now 
report that src phosphorylates TRPC3 at Y226 and that formation of phospho-Y226 
is essential for TRPC3 activation. This requirement is unique for TRPC3 because 
(i) mutation of the cognate tyrosines of the closely related TRPC6 and TRPC7 had 
no effect; (ii) TRPC6 and TRPC7 were activated in src-, yes-, and fyn-deficient 
cells; and (iii) src, but not yes or fyn, rescued TRPC3 activation in src-, 
yes-, and fyn-deficient cells. The Src homology 2 domain of src was found to 
interact with either the N or the C termini of all TRPCs, suggesting that other 
tyrosine kinases may play a role in ion fluxes mediated by TRPCs other than 
TRPC3. A side-by-side comparison of the effects of genistein (a general tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor) on endogenous ROCE and SOCE in mouse fibroblasts, HEK and 
COS-7 cells, and ROCE in HEK cells mediated by TRPC3, TRPC6, TRPC7, and TRPC5 
showed differences that argue for ROCE and SOCE channels to be heterogeneous.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0508030102
PMCID: PMC1326167
PMID: 16407161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
