---
pmid: '17020880'
title: Atypical polyproline recognition by the CMS N-terminal Src homology 3 domain.
authors:
- Moncalián G
- Cárdenes N
- Deribe YL
- Spínola-Amilibia M
- Dikic I
- Bravo J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M606411200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Atypical polyproline recognition by the CMS N-terminal Src homology 3 domain.
**Authors:** Moncalián G, Cárdenes N, Deribe YL, Spínola-Amilibia M, Dikic I, Bravo J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M606411200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M606411200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 15;281(50):38845-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M606411200. Epub 
2006 Oct 3.

Atypical polyproline recognition by the CMS N-terminal Src homology 3 domain.

Moncalián G(1), Cárdenes N, Deribe YL, Spínola-Amilibia M, Dikic I, Bravo J.

Author information:
(1)Signal Transduction Group, Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, 
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 
E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

The CIN85/CMS (human homologs of mouse SH3KBP1/CD2AP) family of endocytic 
adaptor proteins has the ability to engage multiple effectors and couple cargo 
trafficking with the cytoskeleton. CIN85 and CMS (Cas ligand with multiple Src 
homology 3 (SH3) domains) facilitate the formation of large multiprotein 
complexes required for an efficient internalization of cell surface receptors. 
It has recently been shown that c-Cbl/Cbl-b could mediate the formation of a 
ternary complex between one c-Cbl/Cbl-b molecule and two SH3 domains of CIN85, 
important for the ability of Cbl to promote epidermal growth factor receptor 
down-regulation. To further investigate whether multimerization is conserved 
within the family of adaptor proteins, we have solved the crystal structures of 
the CMS N-terminal SH3 domain-forming complexes with Cbl-b- and CD2-derived 
peptides. Together with biochemical evidence, the structures support the notion 
that, despite clear differences in the interaction surface, both Cbl-b and CD2 
can mediate multimerization of N-terminal CMS SH3 domains. Detailed analyses on 
the interacting surfaces also provide the basis for a differential Cbl-b 
molecular recognition of CMS and CIN85.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M606411200
PMID: 17020880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
