---
pmid: '30431240'
title: FANCD2 protects genome stability by recruiting RNA processing enzymes to resolve
  R-loops during mild replication stress.
authors:
- Okamoto Y
- Abe M
- Itaya A
- Tomida J
- Ishiai M
- Takaori-Kondo A
- Taoka M
- Isobe T
- Takata M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.14700
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# FANCD2 protects genome stability by recruiting RNA processing enzymes to resolve R-loops during mild replication stress.
**Authors:** Okamoto Y, Abe M, Itaya A, Tomida J, Ishiai M, Takaori-Kondo A, Taoka M, Isobe T, Takata M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.14700](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.14700)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2019 Jan;286(1):139-150. doi: 10.1111/febs.14700. Epub 2018 Nov 27.

FANCD2 protects genome stability by recruiting RNA processing enzymes to resolve 
R-loops during mild replication stress.

Okamoto Y(1)(2), Abe M(1), Itaya A(1), Tomida J(1)(3), Ishiai M(1)(4), 
Takaori-Kondo A(2), Taoka M(5), Isobe T(5), Takata M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of DNA Damage Signaling, Department of Late Effects Studies, 
Radiation Biology Center, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Japan.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, 
9201 University City Blvd, Charlotte, NC, 28223, USA.
(4)National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Japan.

R-loops, which consist of DNA : RNA hybrids and displaced single-strand DNA, are 
a major threat to genome stability. We have previously reported that a key 
Fanconi anemia protein, FANCD2, accumulates on large fragile genes during mild 
replication stress in a manner depending on R-loops. In this study, we found 
that FANCD2 suppresses R-loop levels. Furthermore, we identified FANCD2 
interactions with RNA processing factors, including hnRNP U and DDX47. Our data 
suggest that FANCD2, which accumulates with R-loops in chromatin, recruits these 
factors and thereby promotes efficient processing of long RNA transcripts. This 
may lead to a reduction in transcription-replication collisions, as detected by 
PLA between PCNA and RNA Polymerase II, and hence, lowered R-loop levels. We 
propose that this mechanism might contribute to maintenance of genome stability 
during mild replication stress.

© 2018 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14700
PMID: 30431240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
