---
pmid: '11089975'
title: Functional interaction of phytochrome B and cryptochrome 2.
authors:
- Más P
- Devlin PF
- Panda S
- Kay SA
journal: Nature
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35041583
---

# Functional interaction of phytochrome B and cryptochrome 2.
**Authors:** Más P, Devlin PF, Panda S, Kay SA
**Journal:** Nature (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35041583](https://doi.org/10.1038/35041583)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2000 Nov 9;408(6809):207-11. doi: 10.1038/35041583.

Functional interaction of phytochrome B and cryptochrome 2.

Más P(1), Devlin PF, Panda S, Kay SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and National Science Foundation Center for 
Biological Timing, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, 
USA.

Light is a crucial environmental signal that controls many photomorphogenic and 
circadian responses in plants. Perception and transduction of light is achieved 
by at least two principal groups of photoreceptors, phytochromes and 
cryptochromes. Phytochromes are red/far-red light-absorbing receptors encoded by 
a gene family of five members (phyA to phyE) in Arabidopsis. Cryptochrome 1 
(cry1), cryptochrome 2 (cry2) and phototropin are the blue/ultraviolet-A light 
receptors that have been characterized in Arabidopsis. Previous studies showed 
that modulation of many physiological responses in plants is achieved by genetic 
interactions between different photoreceptors; however, little is known about 
the nature of these interactions and their roles in the signal transduction 
pathway. Here we show the genetic interaction that occurs between the 
Arabidopsis photoreceptors phyB and cry2 in the control of flowering time, 
hypocotyl elongation and circadian period by the clock. PhyB interacts directly 
with cry2 as observed in co-immunoprecipitation experiments with transgenic 
Arabidopsis plants overexpressing cry2. Using fluorescent resonance energy 
transfer microscopy, we show that phyB and cry2 interact in nuclear speckles 
that are formed in a light-dependent fashion.

DOI: 10.1038/35041583
PMID: 11089975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
