---
pmid: '22510408'
title: Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with TRADD to induce apoptosis through caspase
  dependent JNK activation.
authors:
- Jang CY
- Kim HD
- Kim J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.020
---

# Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with TRADD to induce apoptosis through caspase dependent JNK activation.
**Authors:** Jang CY, Kim HD, Kim J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.020)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 May 11;421(3):474-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with TRADD to induce apoptosis through caspase 
dependent JNK activation.

Jang CY(1), Kim HD, Kim J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, and 
BioInstitute, Korea University, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

It has been reported that ribosomal protein S3 (rpS3) functions as a ribosomal 
protein, a DNA repair endonuclease, a proapoptotic protein, and an essential 
subunit of the native NF-κB complex. However, it is unknown how rpS3 induces 
apoptosis in response to extracellular stresses. We report here that rpS3 
sensitizes genotoxic stress-induced apoptosis by activating JNK through a 
caspase dependent manner. This apoptotic effect was shown to result from the 
physical interaction between rpS3 and TRADD, as assessed by 
coimmunoprecipitation. Moreover, GFP-rpS3 colocalized with TRADD around the 
plasma membrane and in the cytoplasm during apoptosis. Thus, rpS3 appears to be 
recruited to the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) to induce apoptosis by 
interacting TRADD in response to extracellular stresses. Based on the findings 
of this study, we concluded that rpS3 is recruited to the DISC and plays a 
critical role in both genotoxic stress and cytokine induced apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.04.020
PMID: 22510408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
