---
pmid: '12379132'
title: Effect of mutagenesis on the stereochemistry of enoyl-CoA hydratase.
authors:
- Feng Y
- Hofstein HA
- Zwahlen J
- Tonge PJ
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi020382g
---

# Effect of mutagenesis on the stereochemistry of enoyl-CoA hydratase.
**Authors:** Feng Y, Hofstein HA, Zwahlen J, Tonge PJ
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi020382g](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi020382g)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 22;41(42):12883-90. doi: 10.1021/bi020382g.

Effect of mutagenesis on the stereochemistry of enoyl-CoA hydratase.

Feng Y(1), Hofstein HA, Zwahlen J, Tonge PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony 
Brook, New York 11794-3400, USA.

Enoyl-CoA hydratase catalyzes the hydration of trans-2-crotonyl-CoA to 
3(S)-HB-CoA, 3(S)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA with a stereospecificity (k(S)/k(R)) of 
400000 to 1 [Wu, W. J., Feng, Y., He, X., Hofstein, H. S., Raleigh, D. P., and 
Tonge, P. J. (2000) J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 3987-3994]. Replacement of E164, one 
of the catalytic glutamates in the active site, with either aspartate or 
glutamine reduces the rate of formation of the 3(S) product enantiomer (k(S)) 
without affecting the rate of formation of the 3(R) product (k(R)). 
Consequently, k(S)/k(R) is 1000 and 0.33 for E164D and E164Q, respectively. In 
contrast, mutagenesis of E144, the second catalytic glutamate, reduces the rate 
of formation of both product enantiomers. Thus, only E144 is required for the 
formation of 3(R)-HB-CoA, 3(R)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA. Modeling studies together 
with analysis of alpha-proton exchange rates and experiments with 
crotonyl-oxyCoA, a substrate analogue in which the alpha-proton acidity has been 
reduced 10000-fold, support a mechanism of 3(R)-hydroxybutyryl-CoA formation 
that involves the E144-catalyzed stepwise addition of water to crotonyl-CoA 
which is bound in an s-trans conformation in the active site. Finally, we also 
demonstrate that hydrogen bonds in the oxyanion hole, provided by the backbone 
amide groups of G141 and A98, are important for the formation of both product 
enantiomers.

DOI: 10.1021/bi020382g
PMID: 12379132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
