---
pmid: '9647766'
title: 'cDNA sequence and chromosomal localization of the remaining three human nuclear
  encoded iron sulphur protein (IP) subunits of complex I: the human IP fraction is
  completed.'
authors:
- Loeffen J
- van den Heuvel L
- Smeets R
- Triepels R
- Sengers R
- Trijbels F
- Smeitink J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8882
---

# cDNA sequence and chromosomal localization of the remaining three human nuclear encoded iron sulphur protein (IP) subunits of complex I: the human IP fraction is completed.
**Authors:** Loeffen J, van den Heuvel L, Smeets R, Triepels R, Sengers R, Trijbels F, Smeitink J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1998.8882](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1998.8882)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 29;247(3):751-8. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1998.8882.

cDNA sequence and chromosomal localization of the remaining three human nuclear 
encoded iron sulphur protein (IP) subunits of complex I: the human IP fraction 
is completed.

Loeffen J(1), van den Heuvel L, Smeets R, Triepels R, Sengers R, Trijbels F, 
Smeitink J.

Author information:
(1)Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, University Children's Hospital 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) of the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain can be fragmented in a flavoprotein (FP), iron-sulfur protein (IP), and 
hydrophobic protein (HP) subfraction. The IP subfraction is hypothesized to be 
significant, since it contains important prosthetic groups highly conserved 
among species. We cloned the cDNA of three remaining human NADH:ubiquinone 
oxidoreductase subunits of this IP fraction: the NDUFS2 (49 kDa), NDUFS3 (30 
kDa), and NDUFS6 (13 kDa) subunits. All presented cDNAs include the complete 
open reading frame (ORF), which consist of 1392, 795, and 375 base pairs, coding 
for 463, 264, and 124 amino acids, respectively. The latter show 96, 90, and 83% 
homology with the corresponding bovine translation products. The 3' untranslated 
regions (UTR) are complete in all three cDNAs. Polymerase chain reaction 
performed with DNA isolated from somatic human-rodent cell hybrids containing 
defined human chromosomes as template gave a human-specific signal which mapped 
the NDUFS2 and NDUFS3 subunits to chromosomes 1 and 11, respectively. In the 
case of the NDUFS6 subunit a pseudogene may be present since signals were seen 
in the lanes containing chromosomes 5 and 6. The NDUFS2 contains a highly 
conserved protein kinase C phosphorylation site and the NDUFS3 subunit contains 
a highly conserved casein kinase II phosphorylation site which make them strong 
candidates for future mutation detection studies in enzymatic complex 
I-deficient patients.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8882
PMID: 9647766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
