---
pmid: '8702683'
title: Growth hormone promotes the association of transcription factor STAT5 with
  the growth hormone receptor.
authors:
- Xu BC
- Wang X
- Darus CJ
- Kopchick JJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
---

# Growth hormone promotes the association of transcription factor STAT5 with the growth hormone receptor.
**Authors:** Xu BC, Wang X, Darus CJ, Kopchick JJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Aug 16;271(33):19768-73.

Growth hormone promotes the association of transcription factor STAT5 with the 
growth hormone receptor.

Xu BC(1), Wang X, Darus CJ, Kopchick JJ.

Author information:
(1)Edison Biotechnology Institute, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA.

Members of the cytokine/growth hormone (GH)/prolactin receptor superfamily 
transduce signals by association and activation of JAK tyrosine kinases. For GH 
receptor (GHR), both JAK2 and the GHR undergo tyrosine phosphorylation upon GH 
stimulation. Also, GH has recently been shown to activate the transcription 
factor STAT5 by tyrosine phosphorylation. In the present study, we demonstrate 
that GH induces rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of different isoforms of STAT5 in 
mouse L cells stably transfected with a cDNA encoding porcine GHR (pGHR). In 
this cell system, STAT5 directly interacts with the GHR in a GH-dependent 
manner. Additionally, GH-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 and the 
interaction of STAT5 with GHR can be observed in mouse 3T3-F442A cells which 
express endogenous mouse GHR. Interestingly, when cDNAs encoding the two mouse 
STAT5 homologs (STAT5A and STAT5B) were individually transfected into mouse L 
cells expressing pGHR, only STAT5A demonstrated the ability to interact with the 
pGHR and subsequently underwent GH-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation. STAT5B 
did not. Therefore, the GH-dependent interaction of a particular STAT5 with 
tyrosine-phosphorylated GHR may play an important role in GH-mediated signal 
transduction.

PMID: 8702683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
