---
pmid: '26160915'
title: COA6 is a mitochondrial complex IV assembly factor critical for biogenesis
  of mtDNA-encoded COX2.
authors:
- Stroud DA
- Maher MJ
- Lindau C
- Vögtle FN
- Frazier AE
- Surgenor E
- Mountford H
- Singh AP
- Bonas M
- Oeljeklaus S
- Warscheid B
- Meisinger C
- Thorburn DR
- Ryan MT
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv265
---

# COA6 is a mitochondrial complex IV assembly factor critical for biogenesis of mtDNA-encoded COX2.
**Authors:** Stroud DA, Maher MJ, Lindau C, Vögtle FN, Frazier AE, Surgenor E, Mountford H, Singh AP, Bonas M, Oeljeklaus S, Warscheid B, Meisinger C, Thorburn DR, Ryan MT
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv265](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv265)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 1;24(19):5404-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv265. Epub 2015
Jul  9.

COA6 is a mitochondrial complex IV assembly factor critical for biogenesis of 
mtDNA-encoded COX2.

Stroud DA(1), Maher MJ(2), Lindau C(2), Vögtle FN(3), Frazier AE(4), Surgenor 
E(1), Mountford H(4), Singh AP(2), Bonas M(2), Oeljeklaus S(5), Warscheid B(5), 
Meisinger C(6), Thorburn DR(3), Ryan MT(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton 
3800, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular 
Science, La Trobe University, 3086 Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, ZBMZ, University of Freiburg, 
79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Victorian Clinical Genetics 
Services, Royal Children's Hospital, University of Melbourne and Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, 3052 Melbourne, Australia and.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology 
II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, 
University of Freiburg, Schänzlestrasse 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(6)Institut für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, ZBMZ, University of Freiburg, 
79104 Freiburg, Germany, Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, 
Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological 
Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, Schänzlestrasse 1, 79104 Freiburg, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton 
3800, Melbourne, Australia, michael.ryan@monash.edu.

Biogenesis of complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain requires 
assembly factors for subunit maturation, co-factor attachment and stabilization 
of intermediate assemblies. A pathogenic mutation in COA6, leading to 
substitution of a conserved tryptophan for a cysteine residue, results in a loss 
of complex IV activity and cardiomyopathy. Here, we demonstrate that the complex 
IV defect correlates with a severe loss in complex IV assembly in patient heart 
but not fibroblasts. Complete loss of COA6 activity using gene editing in 
HEK293T cells resulted in a profound growth defect due to complex IV deficiency, 
caused by impaired biogenesis of the copper-bound mitochondrial DNA-encoded 
subunit COX2 and subsequent accumulation of complex IV assembly intermediates. 
We show that the pathogenic mutation in COA6 does not affect its import into 
mitochondria but impairs its maturation and stability. Furthermore, we show that 
COA6 has the capacity to bind copper and can associate with newly translated 
COX2 and the mitochondrial copper chaperone SCO1. Our data reveal that COA6 is 
intricately involved in the copper-dependent biogenesis of COX2.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv265
PMID: 26160915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
