---
pmid: '27573352'
title: TSC22D2 interacts with PKM2 and inhibits cell growth in colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Liang F
- Li Q
- Li X
- Li Z
- Gong Z
- Deng H
- Xiang B
- Zhou M
- Li X
- Li G
- Zeng Z
- Xiong W
journal: Int J Oncol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3599
---

# TSC22D2 interacts with PKM2 and inhibits cell growth in colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Liang F, Li Q, Li X, Li Z, Gong Z, Deng H, Xiang B, Zhou M, Li X, Li G, Zeng Z, Xiong W
**Journal:** Int J Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ijo.2016.3599](https://doi.org/10.3892/ijo.2016.3599)

## Abstract

1. Int J Oncol. 2016 Sep;49(3):1046-56. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3599. Epub 2016 Jul
 4.

TSC22D2 interacts with PKM2 and inhibits cell growth in colorectal cancer.

Liang F(1), Li Q(1), Li X(2), Li Z(1), Gong Z(3), Deng H(2), Xiang B(1), Zhou 
M(1), Li X(1), Li G(1), Zeng Z(1), Xiong W(1).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Translational Radiation Oncology, Hunan Cancer 
Hospital and The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, 
Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. 
China.
(2)Hunan Key Laboratory of Nonresolving Inflammation and Cancer, Disease Genome 
Research Center, The Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, P.R. China.
(3)The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis of The Chinese Ministry of Health and 
The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of The Chinese Ministry 
of Education, Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, 
Hunan, P.R. China.

We previously identified TSC22D2 (transforming growth factor β-stimulated clone 
22 domain family, member 2) as a novel cancer-associated gene in a rare 
multi-cancer family. However, its role in tumor development remains completely 
unknown. In this study, we found that TSC22D2 was significantly downregulated in 
colorectal cancer (CRC) and that TSC22D2 overexpression inhibited cell growth. 
Using a co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assay combined with mass spectrometry 
analysis to identify TSC22D2-interacting proteins, we demonstrated that TSC22D2 
interacts with pyruvate kinase isoform M2 (PKM2). These findings were confirmed 
by the results of immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence assays. Moreover, 
overexpression of TSC22D2 reduced the level of nuclear PKM2 and suppressed 
cyclin D1 expression. Collectively, our study reveals a growth suppressor 
function of TSC22D2 that is at least partially dependent on the 
TSC22D2-PKM2-cyclinD1 regulatory axis. In addition, our data provide important 
clues that might contribute to future studies evaluating the role of TSC22D2.

DOI: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3599
PMID: 27573352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
