---
pmid: '20149798'
title: Structural basis of human CYP51 inhibition by antifungal azoles.
authors:
- Strushkevich N
- Usanov SA
- Park HW
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.075
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis of human CYP51 inhibition by antifungal azoles.
**Authors:** Strushkevich N, Usanov SA, Park HW
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.075)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2010 Apr 9;397(4):1067-78. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.075. Epub
2010  Feb 10.

Structural basis of human CYP51 inhibition by antifungal azoles.

Strushkevich N(1), Usanov SA, Park HW.

Author information:
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College Street, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. natstrush@gmail.com

The obligatory step in sterol biosynthesis in eukaryotes is demethylation of 
sterol precursors at the C14-position, which is catalyzed by CYP51 (sterol 
14-alpha demethylase) in three sequential reactions. In mammals, the final 
product of the pathway is cholesterol, while important intermediates, 
meiosis-activating sterols, are produced by CYP51. Three crystal structures of 
human CYP51, ligand-free and complexed with antifungal drugs ketoconazole and 
econazole, were determined, allowing analysis of the molecular basis for 
functional conservation within the CYP51 family. Azole binding occurs mostly 
through hydrophobic interactions with conservative residues of the active site. 
The substantial conformational changes in the B' helix and F-G loop regions are 
induced upon ligand binding, consistent with the membrane nature of the protein 
and its substrate. The access channel is typical for mammalian 
sterol-metabolizing P450 enzymes, but is different from that observed in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis CYP51. Comparison of the azole-bound structures 
provides insight into the relative binding affinities of human and bacterial 
P450 enzymes to ketoconazole and fluconazole, which can be useful for the 
rational design of antifungal compounds and specific modulators of human CYP51.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.01.075
PMID: 20149798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
