---
pmid: '14871887'
title: Drosophila Topors is a RING finger-containing protein that functions as a ubiquitin-protein
  isopeptide ligase for the hairy basic helix-loop-helix repressor protein.
authors:
- Secombe J
- Parkhurst SM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310097200
---

# Drosophila Topors is a RING finger-containing protein that functions as a ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase for the hairy basic helix-loop-helix repressor protein.
**Authors:** Secombe J, Parkhurst SM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310097200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310097200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 23;279(17):17126-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310097200. Epub 
2004 Feb 9.

Drosophila Topors is a RING finger-containing protein that functions as a 
ubiquitin-protein isopeptide ligase for the hairy basic helix-loop-helix 
repressor protein.

Secombe J(1), Parkhurst SM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Transcriptional repression plays an essential role in many aspects of metazoan 
development. Drosophila hairy is a primary pair-rule gene encoding a basic 
helix-loop-helix class transcriptional repressor that is required for proper 
segmentation. Previous characterization of Hairy-binding proteins has implicated 
two different classes of histone deacetylase as mediators of Hairy repression. 
Here, we present the characterization of a novel Hairy-interacting protein 
(dTopors) that binds specifically to the basic region of Hairy, but does not 
affect the ability of Hairy to bind DNA. By reducing the gene dose of dtopors, 
we demonstrate that it acts genetically as an antagonist of Hairy-mediated 
transcriptional repression. Consistent with this genetic interaction, we show 
that that recombinant dTopors protein possesses ubiquitin-protein isopeptide 
ligase activity in vitro and that dTopors mediates Hairy polyubiquitination and 
can lead to Hairy degradation. This work provides the first evidence that 
regulated proteolysis of Hairy is required for correct segmentation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310097200
PMID: 14871887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
