---
pmid: '8119896'
title: Characterization of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP2. Study of phosphopeptide
  substrates and possible regulatory role of SH2 domains.
authors:
- Dechert U
- Adam M
- Harder KW
- Clark-Lewis I
- Jirik F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Characterization of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP2. Study of phosphopeptide substrates and possible regulatory role of SH2 domains.
**Authors:** Dechert U, Adam M, Harder KW, Clark-Lewis I, Jirik F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 25;269(8):5602-11.

Characterization of protein tyrosine phosphatase SH-PTP2. Study of 
phosphopeptide substrates and possible regulatory role of SH2 domains.

Dechert U(1), Adam M, Harder KW, Clark-Lewis I, Jirik F.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Canada.

The src homology 2 (SH2) domain containing protein-tyrosine-phosphatase SH-PTP2, 
was over-expressed in Escherichia coli for a kinetic study employing a set of 
synthetic 13- to 14-mer phosphopeptide substrates. The full-length SH-PTP2 
protein, as well as a truncated form, lacking the two amino terminus SH2 domains 
(SH-PTP2(delta SH2)), exhibited Michaelis-Menten kinetics, and demonstrated 
striking substrate preferences on phosphopeptides having sequences based on 
sites of intracellular protein tyrosine phosphorylation. For example, while a KM 
of 59 microM and kcat/KM of 1.1 x 10(5) were obtained using SH-PTP2(delta SH2) 
and PDGFRY1021, a phosphorylation site within the platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor, other peptides revealed no detectable phosphate release. PDGFRY1009, 
modeled after a sequence identified as an in vivo binding site for SH-PTP2, was 
also a good substrate for this enzyme. The truncated form, lacking the SH2 
domains demonstrated higher catalytic efficiency than the full-length enzyme. 
Interestingly, soluble SH2 domains were found to inhibit the catalytic activity 
of SH-PTP2 in a concentration-dependent manner. There was also evidence of a 
non-phosphotyrosine-mediated association between the two domains. These 
observations suggested that the SH2 domains have a direct role in regulating the 
catalytic activity of SH-PTP2.

PMID: 8119896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
