---
pmid: '17360970'
title: Dynactin is required for coordinated bidirectional motility, but not for dynein
  membrane attachment.
authors:
- Haghnia M
- Cavalli V
- Shah SB
- Schimmelpfeng K
- Brusch R
- Yang G
- Herrera C
- Pilling A
- Goldstein LS
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1877108
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0695
---

# Dynactin is required for coordinated bidirectional motility, but not for dynein membrane attachment.
**Authors:** Haghnia M, Cavalli V, Shah SB, Schimmelpfeng K, Brusch R, Yang G, Herrera C, Pilling A, Goldstein LS
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0695](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0695)
**PMC:** [PMC1877108](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1877108/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Jun;18(6):2081-9. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0695. Epub 2007 
Mar 14.

Dynactin is required for coordinated bidirectional motility, but not for dynein 
membrane attachment.

Haghnia M(1), Cavalli V, Shah SB, Schimmelpfeng K, Brusch R, Yang G, Herrera C, 
Pilling A, Goldstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0683, USA.

Transport of cellular and neuronal vesicles, organelles, and other particles 
along microtubules requires the molecular motor protein dynein (Mallik and 
Gross, 2004). Critical to dynein function is dynactin, a multiprotein complex 
commonly thought to be required for dynein attachment to membrane compartments 
(Karki and Holzbaur, 1999). Recent work also has found that mutations in 
dynactin can cause the human motor neuron disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(Puls et al., 2003). Thus, it is essential to understand the in vivo function of 
dynactin. To test directly and rigorously the hypothesis that dynactin is 
required to attach dynein to membranes, we used both a Drosophila mutant and RNA 
interference to generate organisms and cells lacking the critical dynactin 
subunit, actin-related protein 1. Contrary to expectation, we found that 
apparently normal amounts of dynein associate with membrane compartments in the 
absence of a fully assembled dynactin complex. In addition, anterograde and 
retrograde organelle movement in dynactin deficient axons was completely 
disrupted, resulting in substantial changes in vesicle kinematic properties. 
Although effects on retrograde transport are predicted by the proposed function 
of dynactin as a regulator of dynein processivity, the additional effects we 
observed on anterograde transport also suggest potential roles for dynactin in 
mediating kinesin-driven transport and in coordinating the activity of opposing 
motors (King and Schroer, 2000).

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e06-08-0695
PMCID: PMC1877108
PMID: 17360970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
