---
pmid: '29954986'
title: Structural basis for the recognition of Sonic Hedgehog by human Patched1.
authors:
- Gong X
- Qian H
- Cao P
- Zhao X
- Zhou Q
- Lei J
- Yan N
journal: Science
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.aas8935
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis for the recognition of Sonic Hedgehog by human Patched1.
**Authors:** Gong X, Qian H, Cao P, Zhao X, Zhou Q, Lei J, Yan N
**Journal:** Science (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.aas8935](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aas8935)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2018 Aug 10;361(6402):eaas8935. doi: 10.1126/science.aas8935. Epub
2018  Jun 28.

Structural basis for the recognition of Sonic Hedgehog by human Patched1.

Gong X(1), Qian H(1), Cao P(1), Zhao X(1), Zhou Q(1), Lei J(2), Yan N(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center 
for Structural Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School 
of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China.
(2)Technology Center for Protein Sciences, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory 
of Protein Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 
100084, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center 
for Structural Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, School 
of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China. nyan@princeton.edu.

The Hedgehog (Hh) pathway involved in development and regeneration is activated 
by the extracellular binding of Hh to the membrane receptor Patched (Ptch). We 
report the structures of human Ptch1 alone and in complex with the N-terminal 
domain of human Sonic hedgehog (ShhN) at resolutions of 3.9 and 3.6 angstroms, 
respectively, as determined by cryo-electron microscopy. Ptch1 comprises two 
interacting extracellular domains, ECD1 and ECD2, and 12 transmembrane segments 
(TMs), with TMs 2 to 6 constituting the sterol-sensing domain (SSD). Two 
steroid-shaped densities are resolved in both structures, one enclosed by ECD1/2 
and the other in the membrane-facing cavity of the SSD. Structure-guided 
mutational analysis shows that interaction between ShhN and Ptch1 is 
steroid-dependent. The structure of a steroid binding-deficient Ptch1 mutant 
displays pronounced conformational rearrangements.

Copyright © 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.aas8935
PMID: 29954986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
