---
reference_id: PMID:37177781
title: The E3 ubiquitin ligase OsRGLG5 targeted by the Magnaporthe oryzae effector AvrPi9 confers basal resistance against rice blast.
authors:
- Liu Z
- Qiu J
- Shen Z
- Wang C
- Jiang N
- Shi H
- Kou Y
journal: Plant Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100626
keywords:
- Disease Resistance/genetics
- Magnaporthe/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Ascomycota
- "Oryza/genetics, metabolism"
- Plant Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# The E3 ubiquitin ligase OsRGLG5 targeted by the Magnaporthe oryzae effector AvrPi9 confers basal resistance against rice blast.
**Authors:** Liu Z, Qiu J, Shen Z, Wang C, Jiang N, Shi H, Kou Y
**Journal:** Plant Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100626](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100626)

## Content

1. Plant Commun. 2023 Sep 11;4(5):100626. doi: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100626. Epub 
2023 May 11.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase OsRGLG5 targeted by the Magnaporthe oryzae effector 
AvrPi9 confers basal resistance against rice blast.

Liu Z(1), Qiu J(1), Shen Z(1), Wang C(1), Jiang N(1), Shi H(1), Kou Y(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, China National Rice Research Institute, 
Hangzhou 311400, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, China National Rice Research Institute, 
Hangzhou 311400, China. Electronic address: kouyanjun@caas.cn.

Rice blast, caused by Magnaporthe oryzae, is one of the most devastating 
diseases of rice. During infection, M. oryzae secretes effectors to facilitate 
blast development. Among these effectors, the avirulence factor AvrPi9 is 
recognized by Pi9, a broad-spectrum blast resistance protein that triggers 
Pi9-mediated resistance in rice. However, little is known about the interaction 
between AvrPi9 and Pi9 and how AvrPi9 exerts virulence to promote infection. In 
this study, we found that ectopic expression of AvrPi9 in the Pi9-lacking 
cultivar TP309 suppressed basal resistance against M. oryzae. Furthermore, we 
identified an AvrPi9-interacting protein in rice, which we named OsRGLG5, 
encoding a functional RING-type E3 ubiquitin ligase. During infection, AvrPi9 
was ubiquitinated and degraded by OsRGLG5. Meanwhile, AvrPi9 affected the 
stability of OsRGLG5. Infection assays revealed that OsRGLG5 is a positive 
regulator of basal resistance against M. oryzae, but it is not essential for 
Pi9-mediated blast resistance in rice. In conclusion, our results revealed that 
OsRGLG5 is targeted by the M. oryzae effector AvrPi9 and positively regulates 
basal resistance against rice blast.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xplc.2023.100626
PMCID: PMC10504590
PMID: 37177781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]