---
pmid: '16886151'
title: Association of polymorphisms of IGF1R and genes in the transforming growth
  factor- beta /bone morphogenetic protein pathway with bacteremia in sickle cell
  anemia.
authors:
- Adewoye AH
- Nolan VG
- Ma Q
- Baldwin C
- Wyszynski DF
- Farrell JJ
- Farrer LA
- Steinberg MH
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1086/506356
---

# Association of polymorphisms of IGF1R and genes in the transforming growth factor- beta /bone morphogenetic protein pathway with bacteremia in sickle cell anemia.
**Authors:** Adewoye AH, Nolan VG, Ma Q, Baldwin C, Wyszynski DF, Farrell JJ, Farrer LA, Steinberg MH
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/506356](https://doi.org/10.1086/506356)

## Abstract

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Sep 1;43(5):593-8. doi: 10.1086/506356. Epub 2006 Jul
14.

Association of polymorphisms of IGF1R and genes in the transforming growth 
factor- beta /bone morphogenetic protein pathway with bacteremia in sickle cell 
anemia.

Adewoye AH(1), Nolan VG, Ma Q, Baldwin C, Wyszynski DF, Farrell JJ, Farrer LA, 
Steinberg MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Infection and bacteremia are common in sickle cell disease. We hypothesized 
that, consistent with evidence for the genetic modulation of other disease 
complications, the risk of developing bacteremia might also be genetically 
modulated. Accordingly, we studied the association of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in candidate genes with the risk of bacteremia in sickle 
cell anemia. We found significant associations with SNPs in IGF1R and genes of 
the TGF-beta /BMP pathway (BMP6, TGFBR3, BMPR1A, SMAD6 and SMAD3). We suggest 
that both IGF1R and the TGF-beta /BMP pathway could play important roles in 
immune function in sickle cell anemia and their polymorphisms may help identify 
a "bacteremia-prone" phenotype.

DOI: 10.1086/506356
PMID: 16886151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
