---
pmid: '9535917'
title: A homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dpm1p is not sufficient for synthesis
  of dolichol-phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells.
authors:
- Tomita S
- Inoue N
- Maeda Y
- Ohishi K
- Takeda J
- Kinoshita T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9249
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dpm1p is not sufficient for synthesis of dolichol-phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Tomita S, Inoue N, Maeda Y, Ohishi K, Takeda J, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.15.9249](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.15.9249)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9249-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9249.

A homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Dpm1p is not sufficient for synthesis of 
dolichol-phosphate-mannose in mammalian cells.

Tomita S(1), Inoue N, Maeda Y, Ohishi K, Takeda J, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Dolichol-phosphate-mannose (Dol-P-Man) serves as a donor of mannosyl residues in 
major eukaryotic glycoconjugates. It donates four mannosyl residues in the 
N-linked oligosaccharide precursor and all three mannosyl residues in the core 
of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor. In yeasts it also donates one 
mannose to the O-linked oligosaccharide. The yeast DPM1 gene encodes a Dol-P-Man 
synthase that is a transmembrane protein expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
We cloned human and mouse homologues of DPM1, termed hDPM1 and mDPM1, 
respectively, both of which encode proteins of 260 amino acids, having 30% amino 
acid identity with yeast Dpm1 protein but lacking a hydrophobic transmembrane 
domain, which exists in the yeast synthase. Human and mouse DPM1 cDNA restored 
Dol-P-Man synthesis in mouse Thy-1-deficient mutant class E cells. Mouse class E 
mutant cells had an inactivating mutation in the mDPM1 gene, indicating that 
mDPM1 is the gene for class E mutant. In contrast, hDPM1 and mDPM1 cDNA did not 
complement another Dol-P-Man synthesis mutant, hamster Lec15 cells, whereas 
yeast DPM1 restored both mutants. Therefore, in contrast to yeast, mammalian 
cells require hDPM1/mDPM1 protein and a product of another gene that is 
defective in Lec15 mutant cells for synthesis of Dol-P-Man.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.15.9249
PMID: 9535917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
