---
pmid: '26618561'
title: Direct High Affinity Interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α Stimulates Hyperphosphorylation
  of Tau. A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer's Disease?
authors:
- Dunning CJ
- McGauran G
- Willén K
- Gouras GK
- O'Connell DJ
- Linse S
journal: ACS Chem Neurosci
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4759616
doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00262
---

# Direct High Affinity Interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α Stimulates Hyperphosphorylation of Tau. A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer's Disease?
**Authors:** Dunning CJ, McGauran G, Willén K, Gouras GK, O'Connell DJ, Linse S
**Journal:** ACS Chem Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00262](https://doi.org/10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00262)
**PMC:** [PMC4759616](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4759616/)

## Abstract

1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):161-70. doi: 10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00262.
 Epub 2015 Dec 15.

Direct High Affinity Interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α Stimulates 
Hyperphosphorylation of Tau. A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer's Disease?

Dunning CJ(1)(2), McGauran G(3), Willén K(2), Gouras GK(2), O'Connell DJ(3), 
Linse S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology, Chemical Centre, Lund 
University , P O Box 124, SE22100 Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University , SE22100 Lund, 
Sweden.
(3)School of Biomolecular & Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University 
College Dublin , Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Amyloid β peptide (Aβ42) assemblies are considered central to the development of 
Alzheimer's disease, but the mechanism of this toxicity remains unresolved. We 
screened protein microarrays with on-pathway oligomeric Aβ42 to identify 
candidate proteins interacting with toxic Aβ42 species. Samples prepared from 
Alexa546-Aβ42 and Aβ42 monomers at 1:5 molar ratio were incubated with the array 
during a time window of the amyloid fibril formation reaction during which the 
maximum number of transient oligomers exist in the reaction flux. A specific 
interaction was detected between Aβ42 and glycogen synthase kinase 3α (GSK3α), a 
kinase previously implicated in the disease pathology. This interaction was 
validated with anti-GSK3α immunoprecipitation assays in neuronal cell lysates. 
Confocal microscopy studies further identified colocalization of Aβ42 and GSK3α 
in neurites of mature primary mouse neurons. A high binding affinity (KD = 1 nM) 
was measured between Alexa488-Aβ42 and GSK3α in solution using thermophoresis. 
An even lower apparent KD was estimated between GSK3α and dextran-immobilized 
Aβ42 in surface plasmon resonance experiments. Parallel experiments with GSK3β 
also identified colocalization and high affinity binding to this isoform. 
GSK3α-mediated hyperphosphorylation of the protein tau was found to be 
stimulated by Aβ42 in in vitro phosphorylation assays and identified a 
functional relationship between the proteins. We uncover a direct and functional 
molecular link between Aβ42 and GSK3α, which opens an important avenue toward 
understanding the mechanism of Aβ42-mediated neuronal toxicity in Alzheimer's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1021/acschemneuro.5b00262
PMCID: PMC4759616
PMID: 26618561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

## Full Text

Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) is the major neurodegenerative disease leading to dementia.
Next to the suffering of those afflicted by the disease, the costs
for society are escalating as the number of affected individuals is
increasing.1 There is a pressing need to
determine the underlying molecular processes of the disease to make
it possible to design early diagnostics and future therapy.2 Brain function is severely perturbed in AD patients
due to dysfunction and loss of neurons, but the molecular mechanisms
leading to these changes are poorly understood. Pathological hallmarks
of AD include neurofibrillar tangles of protein tau and extracellular
plaques containing fibrils of amyloid β peptide (Aβ).
Among the suspect molecular processes leading to AD are hyperphosphorylation
of the protein tau and self-assembly of Aβ into fibrillar and
oligomeric aggregates.3,4

In vivo, proteolysis of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) leads to several
Aβ length variants, including the disease-linked Aβ42
(Figure 1A). Mutations
in APP that affect Aβ42 production rate or aggregation process
cause familial forms of early onset AD,5−7 and a genetic correlation
between AD and the apoε4 allele for apolipoprotein E has been
found.8 Still the majority of AD cases
are sporadic.

Principles of protein array screening to find interaction
partners of on-pathway Aβ42 oligomers. (A) Amino acid sequence
of Aβ(MC1–42) with the Alexa546 chromophore attached
to the cysteine residue added at the N-terminus. Hydrophobic residues
are on yellow background, while t, + , and – indicate residues
that are titrating (t) and positively (+) and negatively (−)
charged around neutral pH. (B) Fibril formation as a function of time
starting from 5 μM monomeric Aβ42 in physiological salt
buffer at pH 8.0. The fibril concentration is shown in blue and monomer
concentration in green. (C) Nucleation rates during the same aggregation
reaction, calculated from concentrations and rate constants determined
in physiological salt (unpublished experiment). The rate of primary
nucleation is shown in black, and the rate of secondary nucleation
in green. The time window during which the solution was incubated
with the protein array is shown as a shaded green area in panels (B)
and (C). (D) Example of a subarray with guiding spots in red, and
the spots of a putative interaction in green. (E) Z-scores of three duplicate spots that were found above the cutoff
when the array was probed with on-pathway Aβ42 assemblies.

In vitro mechanistic
studies have found that the aggregation of Aβ42 peptide into
oligomeric and fibrillar assemblies is governed by an autocatalytic
reaction, in which the dominant route to oligomer formation relies
on nucleation of monomers on fibril surfaces.9,10 At
all time points, the reaction is dominated by monomeric or fibrillar
species, while oligomeric species are transient in nature and represent
a minor fraction9−11 of the total peptide concentration. On a macroscopic
level, the fibril concentration as a function of time displays a sigmoidal
curve with a lag phase, a growth phase and a final plateau (Figure 1B). The monomer concentration
follows an inverse sigmoidal curve (Figure 1B). The oligomer concentration is highest
at the end of the lag phase and toward the midpoint of the growth
phase. The vast majority of these oligomers originate from secondary
nucleation of monomers on fibril surfaces. Primary nucleation dominates
at the very earliest stage of a reaction starting from pure monomer
(black line close to baseline in Figure 1C). Because of rapid elongation, the fibril
concentration is already after a few minutes of the reaction high
enough for secondary nucleation to take over as the dominant nucleation
process (Figure 1C,
ref (12)). Because
the rates of secondary nucleation as well as elongation are dependent
on concentrations of both fibril and monomer, the rates of nucleation
as well as fibril multiplication is highest during the growth phase,
where both species are present at significant concentrations.

With an aim to discern cellular pathways responsible for Aβ42
oligomer toxicity, we here use high-content protein microarrays in
an unbiased search for interaction partners of Aβ42 oligomers
that form during an ongoing aggregation reaction. Searches for molecular
interaction partners of toxic Aβ42 species by affinity chromatography,
yeast-2-hydrid approaches, pull-down assays and protein array screening
are challenged by the high surface activity of Aβ42 and the
transient nature of the toxic species. The surface activity of Aβ42
arises from its amphiphatic amino acid sequence (Figure 1A), and the peptide has a strong
tendency to adsorb to many kinds of surfaces.13 This may lead to strong background signal or false positives, but
can be addressed by careful choices of surface blockers or negative
controls. Another challenge comes from recent insights that the toxicity
is mediated by transient oligomeric species formed during the aggregation
reaction, most prominently in a reaction involving both monomeric
and fibrillar species.9,14 This challenge has been addressed
using trapped oligomers, for example, using a disulfide-linked Aβ42
variant that forms relatively large oligomers (protofibrils) that
do not convert to fibrils.15,16

As an alternative
strategy, we here use on-pathway samples and incubate protein arrays
with these samples during a time-window of the reaction during which
a finite fraction of transient oligomeric species are formed and coexist
with mainly monomers and fibrils in the reaction flux (Figure 1B,C; refs (9−12)). A third challenge arises from the tendency of large aggregates
to sediment, which might lead to false positives in array screening.
We overcome this obstacle by placing the array on top of the liquid
so that only diffusible assemblies may reach its surface. While previous
searches for Aβ target proteins in human plasma, cerebrospinal
fluid, and soluble brain extracts have reported mainly extracellular
proteins,8,15−18 and cell surface receptors,19−21 we identify here an intracellular target of oligomeric Aβ42:
glycogen synthase 3α. A high affinity interaction is validated
by thermophoresis, surface plasmon resonance, and immunoprecipitation.
Colocalization in mature mouse primary neurons is studied by confocal
microscopy, and in vitro kinase assays are used to
study a potential functional consequence of the interaction.

Results
and DiscussionArray Screening with On-Pathway Aβ42We used on-pathway Aβ42 samples to probe protein arrays with
>9000 human proteins (Figure 1D) in an unbiased search for protein interaction partners
of transient Aβ42 oligomers, which may provide new keys toward
the molecular origin of Aβ42 oligomer toxicity. The design of
the study relies on detailed knowledge of the reaction mechanism (refs (9−12); Figure 1B,C), the
high affinity of Aβ42 for many surfaces13 requiring stringent surface blocking, and the recent finding of
unperturbed reaction kinetics when samples are doped with a minor
fraction of Aβ42 with N-terminally incorporated fluorophore.22To enable fluorescence detection, we used
the Aβ(MC1–42) variant with a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling with Alexa546
at the N-terminus. We chose to label the N-terminus because it is
flexible not only in Aβ42 monomers, but also in Aβ42 oligomers
and fibrils.23,24 We used a 1:5 mixture of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)
and Aβ(M1–42) monomers separately isolated by gel filtration
just prior to the array experiment. The monomer mixture was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C to initiate the aggregation reaction, which
was continued for another 15 min in contact with a protein array (Figure 1). The array experiment
was thus designed to sample the end of the lag phase and start of
the growth phase, during which periods a very large number of nucleation
and oligomer formation events occur.11 During
this time window, secondary nucleation totally dominates oligomer
generation (Figure 1C). The microscope slide with the array was placed face-down on top
of the solution to avoid false positives due to sedimenting fibrils.We identify one positive interaction with glycogen synthase kinase
3 alpha (GSK3α) (Figure 1E). Two other proteins were found very close to this statistical
cutoff (Figure 1E, Table 1). The significant
signal for GSK3α combined with lack of signal for the vast majority
of the array spots is a remarkable finding. It suggests that transient
Aβ42 oligomers have relatively few high-affinity targets with
slow enough dissociation to sustain the washing period of 10 min before
imaging. Moreover, it shows that the blocking solution used (5% milk)
is sufficient to prevent unspecific adsorption of Aβ42 monomers,
oligomers, or fibrils. The signal obtained for Aβ42 bound to
GSK3α is relatively weak. However, this is in line with the
low concentration of transient oligomers during the reaction (refs (9,10); Figure 1B). The array experiment was repeated during a later
stage of the reaction, when the sample was dominated by fibrils, in
which case only two other weak signals close to cutoff were detected
(Table 2).Table 1Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above the Intensity
Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation during the Time Window Shown in Figure 1 of the Main TextUniProtgeneproteinintensityno. of residuesP49840GSK3Aglykogen synthase kinase 3α9.86483Q13325IFIT5interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 53.89482Q6P1M8ASXL1ASXL1 protein3.4384Table 2Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above
the Intensity Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation of an Array with a
Fibrillar SampleUniProtgeneproteinintensityno. of residuesQ8IUC8GALNT13polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase 133.40556A6ZKI3FAM127Aprotein FAM127A 3.09113or or orO15255 CAAX
box protein 1 209ValidationThe array study provides a first clue to a direct high affinity
interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. We used four independent
methods to validate this interaction with purified proteins, cell
lysates or in neurons: (1) surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis
with purified proteins (Figure 2), (2) thermophoresis with purified proteins (Figure 3), (3) pull-down assays with
cell lysates, monoclonal antibodies, and IR800-Aβ42 (Figure 4), and (4) confocal
fluorescence microscopy with fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies
(Figure 5).Figure 2SPR analysis
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) SPR data
at 25 °C. GSK3α was injected at 20 nM (red), 10 nM (orange),
5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated CM5
sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer flow
for 24 h (B). The association phase data are baseline subtracted and
normalized relative to curve for the highest concentration, and each
curve shown is the average over three repeats. The dissociation phase
data is the average over three repeats, baseline subtracted and normalized
to start at 1.0. The vertical lines at regular intervals are pump
changes. The fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown in
black.Figure 3Thermophoresis analysis of the interaction between
Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A) Thermophoresis time traces at 37 °C
for the 16 capillaries containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42
alone and varying GSK3α concentrations. The example shown is
recorded after 635 min, and the GSK3α concentrations are listed
in % of the highest (188 nM GSK3α). (B) Normalized thermophoresis
signal (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is shown
for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min (green),
572 min (orange), 635 min (red), and 800 min (black). The fitted curves
for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid lines for KD = 1.0 nM (black), 1.8 nM (red), 18 nM (orange), 51 nM
(green), and 132 nM (blue). (C) The fitted KD values as a function of incubation time. The time points
shown in blue, green, orange, red, and black use the same color codes
as in panel (B).Figure 4Immunoprecipitation study
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) Immunoprecipitation
assay in neuronal cell lysates with IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
and bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α. (A)
Immunoblot scan from experiments with bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies
against GSK3α, GSK3β, or beads alone. IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
is seen in green and the Mw standards
in red. (B) Immunoprecipitation assay in neuronal cell lysates with
bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against Aβ (4G8), and
Western blot using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α or APP.
The cell lines were naïve N2A cells, or cells overexpressing
human APP or human APP with the so-called Swedish mutation (Swe) leading
to 10-fold enhanced production of Aβ42. Probing with 6E10 revealed
the presence of full length APP only. (C) Quantification of IR-800
signal for the 7 and 58 kDa bands relative to intensity obtained with
naked beads (n = 3). Error bars show SEM. (D) Quantification
of GSK3 immunoprecipitation from APP neuroblastoma cell lines. Background
from beads only was subtracted from the IP signal and fold increase
plotted relative to signal in the N2a control line.Figure 5Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3α and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neurites. Scale bar =
10 μm.Surface Plasmon ResonanceThe SPR analysis (Figure 2A,B) indicates a high affinity interaction between purified
GSK3α and Aβ42 immobilized in a dextran matrix of a sensor
chip surface. The dissociation is too slow for its rate constant to
be accurately determined. Although the average data over three repeats
(Figure 2B) can be
fitted using koff = 5 × 10–6 s–1, the baseline is not reached during the 24
h time frame of the experiment, and there are problems with instrument
drift and reproducibility over such long periods, it is more safe
to estimate a limiting value for koff (koff ≤ 2 × 10–5 s–1). Together with the fitted association rate
constant (kon = 2 × 105 M–1 s–1), we estimate a limit
for an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KD ≤ 100 pM). During immobilization Aβ42 was
applied as a monomer; however, after coupling to the dextran matrix,
Aβ42 most likely exists as a mixture of oligomeric and monomeric
species. It is also possible that immobilized peptides exchange between
these states. The measured binding parameters may thus represent binding
to Aβ42 monomer or oligomer or a weighted average over several
species in a dextran matrix. Control experiments were performed with
EF-hand 1 from calbindin D9k coupled to the sensor chip.
This peptide has similar size as Aβ42 and similar net charge,
but no binding was observed during the injection of 20 nM GSK3α
(Figure S1A).ThermophoresisThe thermophoresis data (Figure 3) indicate that a relatively high affinity interaction
(KD = 1 nM) develops over time between
GSK3α and Aβ42 in solution. This suggests that the observed
interaction is with an aggregated form of Aβ42 (oligomer or
fibril). The time frame of oligomer formation is much longer in the
thermophoresis experiment (Figure 3) compared to the array study (Figure 1), due to the difference in total peptide
concentration (60 nM versus 5 μM). Both thermophoresis in solution
and SPR at a surface detect a high affinity interaction between GSK3α
and Aβ42. The lower KD value as
estimated by SPR may be due to surface effects in the SPR measurement,
which typically overestimates binding affinities in comparison with
in-solution assays. Control thermophoresis experiments reveal no high
affinity interaction between calbindin D9k and Aβ42, showing
that the observed changes in thermophoretic properties of Aβ42
are not merely due to the presence of another protein (Figure S1B).ImmunoprecipitationThe pulldown assays utilized a monoclonal antibody against GSK3α
and IR800-labeled Aβ42 to study the interaction in a complex
fluid representing an in-cell environment. After isolating GSK3α
from SH-SY5Y cell lysates using bead-coupled anti-GSK3α antibody,
IR800-labeled Aβ42 was added and a GSK3α -Aβ42 interaction
confirmed using IR fluorescence imaging (Figure 4A). The interaction between Aβ42 and
GSK3α sustains multiple washing steps over a period of ca. 30
min, which means that the interaction is of relatively high affinity
and has a low off-rate. The assay is complicated by the high surface
affinity of Aβ42. The beads were therefore blocked with 5% milk
and control experiments were performed with beads alone and beads
coupled to anti-GSK3β antibody. For GSK3α, two gel bands
of apparent Mw of ca. 7 and ca. 58 kDa
are significantly stronger than other bands, and when the intensity
of the beads alone is subtracted, reveals an increase in IR800 intensity
of 1.4 ± 0.34 for the 7 kDa band and 2.56 ± 0.63 for the
58 kDa band. In contrast, the corresponding band in the GSK3β
lane reveals little to no increased binding of IR800-labeled Aβ42
(7 kDa: 0.93 ± 0.03, 58 kDa: 1.36 ± 0.09) (Figure 4C). The Mw of IR800-labeled Aβ42 is ca. 5.6 kDa and GSK3α
ca. 51 kDa. The higher band is intriguingly sharp and corresponds
to ca. 10 IR800-labeled Aβ42 or one IR800 labeled Aβ42
plus one GSK3α, or may represent some SDS induced oligomer of
a lower Mw state.25In a second set of experiments, beads with a monoclonal antibody
against Aβ (4G8) were used in a coimmunoprecipitation experiment,
where Aβ42 was immunoprecipitated from either control N2a cells
or N2a cells overexpressing amyloid precursor protein wildtype or
with Swedish mutation26 before detecting
GSK3α and GSK3β via Western blot (Figure 4B). Again, higher intensities were found
with GSK3α when compared to either GSK3β or beads alone
(Figure 4D). It is
also apparent that with more amyloid beta production due to the Swedish
mutation, we see increased levels of GSK3α coprecipitating.Confocal MicroscopyConfocal microscopy was used to study
the distribution of Aβ42 and GSK3α in mature primary mouse
neurons (Figure 5),
and we detect both Aβ42 and GSK3α in a punctate pattern
along the neurites. Still, in most parts of the neurons the two proteins
do not coexist, in line with the relatively weak specific signal observed
in the IP experiments. Because of its resolution limit, the confocal
microscopy data does not tell whether there is any direct contact
or high affinity binding between the two proteins, but does provide
evidence of colocalization of Aβ42 and GSK3α.Tau PhosphorylationWe next asked whether Aβ42 directly stimulates GSK3α.
We used an in vitro kinase assay with purified GSK3α
and tau in a buffer system with ATP. The assay was performed in the
absence and presence of 5–500 nM Aβ42, which had been
preincubated at 5 μM for a short time to initiate the formation
of transient oligomers before dilution into the reactions. Tau phosphorylation
by GSK3α was detected by Western blot using a phospho-tau specific
antibody recognizing phosphorylation of Ser396 (Figure 6). In the presence of Aβ42, we find
a factor of 6.3(±2.4) stronger signal with GSK3α compared
to no enzyme, with no variation over the Aβ42 concentration
range studied in line with the high affinity of the interaction. In
the absence of Aβ42 we find a factor of 1.9(±0.8) stronger
signal with GSK3α compared to no enzyme. Thus, Aβ42 was
found to increase GSK3α activity in terms of tau phosphorylation
by a factor of 3 under the conditions of the assay.Figure 6Tau phosphorylation assay.
(A) Examples of tau gel bands from Western blot imaging after kinase
assay reaction in the absence (−) and presence of Aβ42
at 5 nM (+), 50 nM (++), and 500 nM (+++), and absence (−)
or presence of GSK3α (+). (B) Quantification of tau phosphorylation
in the presence (+++) or absence (−) of 500 nM Aβ42,
and absence (−) or presence of GSK3α (+). Levels of
pTau were compared to reactions performed in the absence of GSK3α.
Data shown are Mean ± SEM (n = 3).A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer’s
Disease?The finding of GSK3α as the top candidate
in an unbiased search for putative interaction partners of transient
Aβ42 oligomers, its validation as a high affinity interaction,
and the observed stimulation of tau hyperphosphorylation by GSK3α
in the presence of Aβ42 are striking results given the strong
connection found previously between GSK3 and Alzheimer’s disease;
as recently reviewed.27−30 GSK3 has been investigated by others as a critical molecular link
between the two histopathological hallmarks of the disease: Aβ
plaques and neurofibrillary tau tangles. Hyperactivated GSK3 has been
linked to sporadic as well as familial AD, suggesting a crucial role
of this enzyme in AD pathogenesis. The discovery presented here of
a direct interaction of Aβ42 with GSK3α, leading to stimulation
of kinase activity, provides a new route toward resolving how this
molecular link affects the etiology of the disease.Glycogen Synthase
Kinase 3GSK3 is a central and multifunctional kinase with
important roles in synaptic plasticity, memory, and learning.31,32 Its two isoforms (or rather paralogues27), GSK3α and GSK3β, can phosphorylate over 100 known
substrates in addition to glycogen synthase. One important substrate
is the protein tau, the phosphorylation of which is thought to be
a critical step in AD pathogenesis.3 Indeed,
GSK3β was called tau protein kinase 1 (TPK1) before gene cloning
and sequencing revealed that the two proteins are the same.33 The involvement in AD has been studied most
extensively for GSK3β, but specific contributions of GSK3α
and GSK3β have been inferred from siRNA and knockdown studies.27,29,34,35 GSK3α seems to enhance Aβ production through γ-secretase
stimulation,34,35 which has been proposed to be
due to “interaction with an unidentified protein”.35 Aβ42 uptake and accumulation in neurons,
has been observed to lead to GSK3 activation.36−38 Studies in
primary hippocampal neurons suggest that Aβ42 accumulations
invoke an intracellular cascade that culminates in caspase and GSK3
activation; however, the molecular mechanisms that link toxicity of
Aβ42 oligomers to GSK3 activation remain unknown.38Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3βGSK3α and GSK3β share 83% sequence identity in the 370-residue
kinase domain (Figure S2). In addition
to the kinase domain, GSK3α has a 90 residue N-terminal extension,
in which residues 15–25 of GSK3α are 82% identical to
residues 2–13 of the 27 residue N-terminal extension of GSK3β.
Although GSK3β is present on the protein array, there can be
many reasons for a protein not emerging as a putative hit including
lower amount spotted, lower level of correctly folded protein in the
spot, and so forth. A few control experiments were therefore performed
using SPR (Figure 7A,B), thermophoresis (Figure 7C) and confocal fluorescence microscopy (Figure 8), indicating that oligomeric
Aβ42 interacts and co-localizes also with GSK3β.Figure 7SPR and thermophoresis
analysis of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3β. (A,B)
SPR data at 25 °C. GSK3β was injected at 20 nM (red), 10
nM (orange), 5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated
CM5 sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer
flow for 24 h. (B) Fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown
in black. (C) Normalized thermophoresis signal for 16 capillaries
containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42 alone and varying GSK3α
concentrations (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is
shown for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min
(green), 572 min (orange), and 635 min (red). The fitted curves for
a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid black lines for KD = 2.3, 16, 65, and 110 nM.Figure 8Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3β and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3β (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neuronal structures.
Scale bar = 10 μm.

Results
and Discussion

Array Screening with On-Pathway Aβ42We used on-pathway Aβ42 samples to probe protein arrays with
>9000 human proteins (Figure 1D) in an unbiased search for protein interaction partners
of transient Aβ42 oligomers, which may provide new keys toward
the molecular origin of Aβ42 oligomer toxicity. The design of
the study relies on detailed knowledge of the reaction mechanism (refs (9−12); Figure 1B,C), the
high affinity of Aβ42 for many surfaces13 requiring stringent surface blocking, and the recent finding of
unperturbed reaction kinetics when samples are doped with a minor
fraction of Aβ42 with N-terminally incorporated fluorophore.22To enable fluorescence detection, we used
the Aβ(MC1–42) variant with a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling with Alexa546
at the N-terminus. We chose to label the N-terminus because it is
flexible not only in Aβ42 monomers, but also in Aβ42 oligomers
and fibrils.23,24 We used a 1:5 mixture of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)
and Aβ(M1–42) monomers separately isolated by gel filtration
just prior to the array experiment. The monomer mixture was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C to initiate the aggregation reaction, which
was continued for another 15 min in contact with a protein array (Figure 1). The array experiment
was thus designed to sample the end of the lag phase and start of
the growth phase, during which periods a very large number of nucleation
and oligomer formation events occur.11 During
this time window, secondary nucleation totally dominates oligomer
generation (Figure 1C). The microscope slide with the array was placed face-down on top
of the solution to avoid false positives due to sedimenting fibrils.We identify one positive interaction with glycogen synthase kinase
3 alpha (GSK3α) (Figure 1E). Two other proteins were found very close to this statistical
cutoff (Figure 1E, Table 1). The significant
signal for GSK3α combined with lack of signal for the vast majority
of the array spots is a remarkable finding. It suggests that transient
Aβ42 oligomers have relatively few high-affinity targets with
slow enough dissociation to sustain the washing period of 10 min before
imaging. Moreover, it shows that the blocking solution used (5% milk)
is sufficient to prevent unspecific adsorption of Aβ42 monomers,
oligomers, or fibrils. The signal obtained for Aβ42 bound to
GSK3α is relatively weak. However, this is in line with the
low concentration of transient oligomers during the reaction (refs (9,10); Figure 1B). The array experiment was repeated during a later
stage of the reaction, when the sample was dominated by fibrils, in
which case only two other weak signals close to cutoff were detected
(Table 2).Table 1Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above the Intensity
Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation during the Time Window Shown in Figure 1 of the Main TextUniProtgeneproteinintensityno. of residuesP49840GSK3Aglykogen synthase kinase 3α9.86483Q13325IFIT5interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 53.89482Q6P1M8ASXL1ASXL1 protein3.4384Table 2Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above
the Intensity Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation of an Array with a
Fibrillar SampleUniProtgeneproteinintensityno. of residuesQ8IUC8GALNT13polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase 133.40556A6ZKI3FAM127Aprotein FAM127A 3.09113or or orO15255 CAAX
box protein 1 209

Array Screening with On-Pathway Aβ42

We used on-pathway Aβ42 samples to probe protein arrays with
>9000 human proteins (Figure 1D) in an unbiased search for protein interaction partners
of transient Aβ42 oligomers, which may provide new keys toward
the molecular origin of Aβ42 oligomer toxicity. The design of
the study relies on detailed knowledge of the reaction mechanism (refs (9−12); Figure 1B,C), the
high affinity of Aβ42 for many surfaces13 requiring stringent surface blocking, and the recent finding of
unperturbed reaction kinetics when samples are doped with a minor
fraction of Aβ42 with N-terminally incorporated fluorophore.22

To enable fluorescence detection, we used
the Aβ(MC1–42) variant with a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling with Alexa546
at the N-terminus. We chose to label the N-terminus because it is
flexible not only in Aβ42 monomers, but also in Aβ42 oligomers
and fibrils.23,24 We used a 1:5 mixture of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)
and Aβ(M1–42) monomers separately isolated by gel filtration
just prior to the array experiment. The monomer mixture was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C to initiate the aggregation reaction, which
was continued for another 15 min in contact with a protein array (Figure 1). The array experiment
was thus designed to sample the end of the lag phase and start of
the growth phase, during which periods a very large number of nucleation
and oligomer formation events occur.11 During
this time window, secondary nucleation totally dominates oligomer
generation (Figure 1C). The microscope slide with the array was placed face-down on top
of the solution to avoid false positives due to sedimenting fibrils.

We identify one positive interaction with glycogen synthase kinase
3 alpha (GSK3α) (Figure 1E). Two other proteins were found very close to this statistical
cutoff (Figure 1E, Table 1). The significant
signal for GSK3α combined with lack of signal for the vast majority
of the array spots is a remarkable finding. It suggests that transient
Aβ42 oligomers have relatively few high-affinity targets with
slow enough dissociation to sustain the washing period of 10 min before
imaging. Moreover, it shows that the blocking solution used (5% milk)
is sufficient to prevent unspecific adsorption of Aβ42 monomers,
oligomers, or fibrils. The signal obtained for Aβ42 bound to
GSK3α is relatively weak. However, this is in line with the
low concentration of transient oligomers during the reaction (refs (9,10); Figure 1B). The array experiment was repeated during a later
stage of the reaction, when the sample was dominated by fibrils, in
which case only two other weak signals close to cutoff were detected
(Table 2).

Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above the Intensity
Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation during the Time Window Shown in Figure 1 of the Main Text

Putative Aβ42 Targets Observed above
the Intensity Threshold of 3.0 after Incubation of an Array with a
Fibrillar Sample

ValidationThe array study provides a first clue to a direct high affinity
interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. We used four independent
methods to validate this interaction with purified proteins, cell
lysates or in neurons: (1) surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis
with purified proteins (Figure 2), (2) thermophoresis with purified proteins (Figure 3), (3) pull-down assays with
cell lysates, monoclonal antibodies, and IR800-Aβ42 (Figure 4), and (4) confocal
fluorescence microscopy with fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies
(Figure 5).Figure 2SPR analysis
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) SPR data
at 25 °C. GSK3α was injected at 20 nM (red), 10 nM (orange),
5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated CM5
sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer flow
for 24 h (B). The association phase data are baseline subtracted and
normalized relative to curve for the highest concentration, and each
curve shown is the average over three repeats. The dissociation phase
data is the average over three repeats, baseline subtracted and normalized
to start at 1.0. The vertical lines at regular intervals are pump
changes. The fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown in
black.Figure 3Thermophoresis analysis of the interaction between
Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A) Thermophoresis time traces at 37 °C
for the 16 capillaries containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42
alone and varying GSK3α concentrations. The example shown is
recorded after 635 min, and the GSK3α concentrations are listed
in % of the highest (188 nM GSK3α). (B) Normalized thermophoresis
signal (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is shown
for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min (green),
572 min (orange), 635 min (red), and 800 min (black). The fitted curves
for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid lines for KD = 1.0 nM (black), 1.8 nM (red), 18 nM (orange), 51 nM
(green), and 132 nM (blue). (C) The fitted KD values as a function of incubation time. The time points
shown in blue, green, orange, red, and black use the same color codes
as in panel (B).Figure 4Immunoprecipitation study
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) Immunoprecipitation
assay in neuronal cell lysates with IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
and bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α. (A)
Immunoblot scan from experiments with bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies
against GSK3α, GSK3β, or beads alone. IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
is seen in green and the Mw standards
in red. (B) Immunoprecipitation assay in neuronal cell lysates with
bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against Aβ (4G8), and
Western blot using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α or APP.
The cell lines were naïve N2A cells, or cells overexpressing
human APP or human APP with the so-called Swedish mutation (Swe) leading
to 10-fold enhanced production of Aβ42. Probing with 6E10 revealed
the presence of full length APP only. (C) Quantification of IR-800
signal for the 7 and 58 kDa bands relative to intensity obtained with
naked beads (n = 3). Error bars show SEM. (D) Quantification
of GSK3 immunoprecipitation from APP neuroblastoma cell lines. Background
from beads only was subtracted from the IP signal and fold increase
plotted relative to signal in the N2a control line.Figure 5Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3α and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neurites. Scale bar =
10 μm.

The array study provides a first clue to a direct high affinity
interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. We used four independent
methods to validate this interaction with purified proteins, cell
lysates or in neurons: (1) surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis
with purified proteins (Figure 2), (2) thermophoresis with purified proteins (Figure 3), (3) pull-down assays with
cell lysates, monoclonal antibodies, and IR800-Aβ42 (Figure 4), and (4) confocal
fluorescence microscopy with fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies
(Figure 5).

SPR analysis
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) SPR data
at 25 °C. GSK3α was injected at 20 nM (red), 10 nM (orange),
5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated CM5
sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer flow
for 24 h (B). The association phase data are baseline subtracted and
normalized relative to curve for the highest concentration, and each
curve shown is the average over three repeats. The dissociation phase
data is the average over three repeats, baseline subtracted and normalized
to start at 1.0. The vertical lines at regular intervals are pump
changes. The fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown in
black.

Thermophoresis analysis of the interaction between
Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A) Thermophoresis time traces at 37 °C
for the 16 capillaries containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42
alone and varying GSK3α concentrations. The example shown is
recorded after 635 min, and the GSK3α concentrations are listed
in % of the highest (188 nM GSK3α). (B) Normalized thermophoresis
signal (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is shown
for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min (green),
572 min (orange), 635 min (red), and 800 min (black). The fitted curves
for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid lines for KD = 1.0 nM (black), 1.8 nM (red), 18 nM (orange), 51 nM
(green), and 132 nM (blue). (C) The fitted KD values as a function of incubation time. The time points
shown in blue, green, orange, red, and black use the same color codes
as in panel (B).

Immunoprecipitation study
of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3α. (A,B) Immunoprecipitation
assay in neuronal cell lysates with IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
and bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α. (A)
Immunoblot scan from experiments with bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies
against GSK3α, GSK3β, or beads alone. IR800-labeled Aβ(MC1–42)
is seen in green and the Mw standards
in red. (B) Immunoprecipitation assay in neuronal cell lysates with
bead-conjugated monoclonal antibodies against Aβ (4G8), and
Western blot using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α or APP.
The cell lines were naïve N2A cells, or cells overexpressing
human APP or human APP with the so-called Swedish mutation (Swe) leading
to 10-fold enhanced production of Aβ42. Probing with 6E10 revealed
the presence of full length APP only. (C) Quantification of IR-800
signal for the 7 and 58 kDa bands relative to intensity obtained with
naked beads (n = 3). Error bars show SEM. (D) Quantification
of GSK3 immunoprecipitation from APP neuroblastoma cell lines. Background
from beads only was subtracted from the IP signal and fold increase
plotted relative to signal in the N2a control line.

Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3α and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3α (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neurites. Scale bar =
10 μm.

Surface Plasmon ResonanceThe SPR analysis (Figure 2A,B) indicates a high affinity interaction between purified
GSK3α and Aβ42 immobilized in a dextran matrix of a sensor
chip surface. The dissociation is too slow for its rate constant to
be accurately determined. Although the average data over three repeats
(Figure 2B) can be
fitted using koff = 5 × 10–6 s–1, the baseline is not reached during the 24
h time frame of the experiment, and there are problems with instrument
drift and reproducibility over such long periods, it is more safe
to estimate a limiting value for koff (koff ≤ 2 × 10–5 s–1). Together with the fitted association rate
constant (kon = 2 × 105 M–1 s–1), we estimate a limit
for an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KD ≤ 100 pM). During immobilization Aβ42 was
applied as a monomer; however, after coupling to the dextran matrix,
Aβ42 most likely exists as a mixture of oligomeric and monomeric
species. It is also possible that immobilized peptides exchange between
these states. The measured binding parameters may thus represent binding
to Aβ42 monomer or oligomer or a weighted average over several
species in a dextran matrix. Control experiments were performed with
EF-hand 1 from calbindin D9k coupled to the sensor chip.
This peptide has similar size as Aβ42 and similar net charge,
but no binding was observed during the injection of 20 nM GSK3α
(Figure S1A).

Surface Plasmon Resonance

The SPR analysis (Figure 2A,B) indicates a high affinity interaction between purified
GSK3α and Aβ42 immobilized in a dextran matrix of a sensor
chip surface. The dissociation is too slow for its rate constant to
be accurately determined. Although the average data over three repeats
(Figure 2B) can be
fitted using koff = 5 × 10–6 s–1, the baseline is not reached during the 24
h time frame of the experiment, and there are problems with instrument
drift and reproducibility over such long periods, it is more safe
to estimate a limiting value for koff (koff ≤ 2 × 10–5 s–1). Together with the fitted association rate
constant (kon = 2 × 105 M–1 s–1), we estimate a limit
for an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KD ≤ 100 pM). During immobilization Aβ42 was
applied as a monomer; however, after coupling to the dextran matrix,
Aβ42 most likely exists as a mixture of oligomeric and monomeric
species. It is also possible that immobilized peptides exchange between
these states. The measured binding parameters may thus represent binding
to Aβ42 monomer or oligomer or a weighted average over several
species in a dextran matrix. Control experiments were performed with
EF-hand 1 from calbindin D9k coupled to the sensor chip.
This peptide has similar size as Aβ42 and similar net charge,
but no binding was observed during the injection of 20 nM GSK3α
(Figure S1A).

ThermophoresisThe thermophoresis data (Figure 3) indicate that a relatively high affinity interaction
(KD = 1 nM) develops over time between
GSK3α and Aβ42 in solution. This suggests that the observed
interaction is with an aggregated form of Aβ42 (oligomer or
fibril). The time frame of oligomer formation is much longer in the
thermophoresis experiment (Figure 3) compared to the array study (Figure 1), due to the difference in total peptide
concentration (60 nM versus 5 μM). Both thermophoresis in solution
and SPR at a surface detect a high affinity interaction between GSK3α
and Aβ42. The lower KD value as
estimated by SPR may be due to surface effects in the SPR measurement,
which typically overestimates binding affinities in comparison with
in-solution assays. Control thermophoresis experiments reveal no high
affinity interaction between calbindin D9k and Aβ42, showing
that the observed changes in thermophoretic properties of Aβ42
are not merely due to the presence of another protein (Figure S1B).

Thermophoresis

The thermophoresis data (Figure 3) indicate that a relatively high affinity interaction
(KD = 1 nM) develops over time between
GSK3α and Aβ42 in solution. This suggests that the observed
interaction is with an aggregated form of Aβ42 (oligomer or
fibril). The time frame of oligomer formation is much longer in the
thermophoresis experiment (Figure 3) compared to the array study (Figure 1), due to the difference in total peptide
concentration (60 nM versus 5 μM). Both thermophoresis in solution
and SPR at a surface detect a high affinity interaction between GSK3α
and Aβ42. The lower KD value as
estimated by SPR may be due to surface effects in the SPR measurement,
which typically overestimates binding affinities in comparison with
in-solution assays. Control thermophoresis experiments reveal no high
affinity interaction between calbindin D9k and Aβ42, showing
that the observed changes in thermophoretic properties of Aβ42
are not merely due to the presence of another protein (Figure S1B).

ImmunoprecipitationThe pulldown assays utilized a monoclonal antibody against GSK3α
and IR800-labeled Aβ42 to study the interaction in a complex
fluid representing an in-cell environment. After isolating GSK3α
from SH-SY5Y cell lysates using bead-coupled anti-GSK3α antibody,
IR800-labeled Aβ42 was added and a GSK3α -Aβ42 interaction
confirmed using IR fluorescence imaging (Figure 4A). The interaction between Aβ42 and
GSK3α sustains multiple washing steps over a period of ca. 30
min, which means that the interaction is of relatively high affinity
and has a low off-rate. The assay is complicated by the high surface
affinity of Aβ42. The beads were therefore blocked with 5% milk
and control experiments were performed with beads alone and beads
coupled to anti-GSK3β antibody. For GSK3α, two gel bands
of apparent Mw of ca. 7 and ca. 58 kDa
are significantly stronger than other bands, and when the intensity
of the beads alone is subtracted, reveals an increase in IR800 intensity
of 1.4 ± 0.34 for the 7 kDa band and 2.56 ± 0.63 for the
58 kDa band. In contrast, the corresponding band in the GSK3β
lane reveals little to no increased binding of IR800-labeled Aβ42
(7 kDa: 0.93 ± 0.03, 58 kDa: 1.36 ± 0.09) (Figure 4C). The Mw of IR800-labeled Aβ42 is ca. 5.6 kDa and GSK3α
ca. 51 kDa. The higher band is intriguingly sharp and corresponds
to ca. 10 IR800-labeled Aβ42 or one IR800 labeled Aβ42
plus one GSK3α, or may represent some SDS induced oligomer of
a lower Mw state.25In a second set of experiments, beads with a monoclonal antibody
against Aβ (4G8) were used in a coimmunoprecipitation experiment,
where Aβ42 was immunoprecipitated from either control N2a cells
or N2a cells overexpressing amyloid precursor protein wildtype or
with Swedish mutation26 before detecting
GSK3α and GSK3β via Western blot (Figure 4B). Again, higher intensities were found
with GSK3α when compared to either GSK3β or beads alone
(Figure 4D). It is
also apparent that with more amyloid beta production due to the Swedish
mutation, we see increased levels of GSK3α coprecipitating.

Immunoprecipitation

The pulldown assays utilized a monoclonal antibody against GSK3α
and IR800-labeled Aβ42 to study the interaction in a complex
fluid representing an in-cell environment. After isolating GSK3α
from SH-SY5Y cell lysates using bead-coupled anti-GSK3α antibody,
IR800-labeled Aβ42 was added and a GSK3α -Aβ42 interaction
confirmed using IR fluorescence imaging (Figure 4A). The interaction between Aβ42 and
GSK3α sustains multiple washing steps over a period of ca. 30
min, which means that the interaction is of relatively high affinity
and has a low off-rate. The assay is complicated by the high surface
affinity of Aβ42. The beads were therefore blocked with 5% milk
and control experiments were performed with beads alone and beads
coupled to anti-GSK3β antibody. For GSK3α, two gel bands
of apparent Mw of ca. 7 and ca. 58 kDa
are significantly stronger than other bands, and when the intensity
of the beads alone is subtracted, reveals an increase in IR800 intensity
of 1.4 ± 0.34 for the 7 kDa band and 2.56 ± 0.63 for the
58 kDa band. In contrast, the corresponding band in the GSK3β
lane reveals little to no increased binding of IR800-labeled Aβ42
(7 kDa: 0.93 ± 0.03, 58 kDa: 1.36 ± 0.09) (Figure 4C). The Mw of IR800-labeled Aβ42 is ca. 5.6 kDa and GSK3α
ca. 51 kDa. The higher band is intriguingly sharp and corresponds
to ca. 10 IR800-labeled Aβ42 or one IR800 labeled Aβ42
plus one GSK3α, or may represent some SDS induced oligomer of
a lower Mw state.25

In a second set of experiments, beads with a monoclonal antibody
against Aβ (4G8) were used in a coimmunoprecipitation experiment,
where Aβ42 was immunoprecipitated from either control N2a cells
or N2a cells overexpressing amyloid precursor protein wildtype or
with Swedish mutation26 before detecting
GSK3α and GSK3β via Western blot (Figure 4B). Again, higher intensities were found
with GSK3α when compared to either GSK3β or beads alone
(Figure 4D). It is
also apparent that with more amyloid beta production due to the Swedish
mutation, we see increased levels of GSK3α coprecipitating.

Confocal MicroscopyConfocal microscopy was used to study
the distribution of Aβ42 and GSK3α in mature primary mouse
neurons (Figure 5),
and we detect both Aβ42 and GSK3α in a punctate pattern
along the neurites. Still, in most parts of the neurons the two proteins
do not coexist, in line with the relatively weak specific signal observed
in the IP experiments. Because of its resolution limit, the confocal
microscopy data does not tell whether there is any direct contact
or high affinity binding between the two proteins, but does provide
evidence of colocalization of Aβ42 and GSK3α.

Confocal Microscopy

Confocal microscopy was used to study
the distribution of Aβ42 and GSK3α in mature primary mouse
neurons (Figure 5),
and we detect both Aβ42 and GSK3α in a punctate pattern
along the neurites. Still, in most parts of the neurons the two proteins
do not coexist, in line with the relatively weak specific signal observed
in the IP experiments. Because of its resolution limit, the confocal
microscopy data does not tell whether there is any direct contact
or high affinity binding between the two proteins, but does provide
evidence of colocalization of Aβ42 and GSK3α.

Tau PhosphorylationWe next asked whether Aβ42 directly stimulates GSK3α.
We used an in vitro kinase assay with purified GSK3α
and tau in a buffer system with ATP. The assay was performed in the
absence and presence of 5–500 nM Aβ42, which had been
preincubated at 5 μM for a short time to initiate the formation
of transient oligomers before dilution into the reactions. Tau phosphorylation
by GSK3α was detected by Western blot using a phospho-tau specific
antibody recognizing phosphorylation of Ser396 (Figure 6). In the presence of Aβ42, we find
a factor of 6.3(±2.4) stronger signal with GSK3α compared
to no enzyme, with no variation over the Aβ42 concentration
range studied in line with the high affinity of the interaction. In
the absence of Aβ42 we find a factor of 1.9(±0.8) stronger
signal with GSK3α compared to no enzyme. Thus, Aβ42 was
found to increase GSK3α activity in terms of tau phosphorylation
by a factor of 3 under the conditions of the assay.Figure 6Tau phosphorylation assay.
(A) Examples of tau gel bands from Western blot imaging after kinase
assay reaction in the absence (−) and presence of Aβ42
at 5 nM (+), 50 nM (++), and 500 nM (+++), and absence (−)
or presence of GSK3α (+). (B) Quantification of tau phosphorylation
in the presence (+++) or absence (−) of 500 nM Aβ42,
and absence (−) or presence of GSK3α (+). Levels of
pTau were compared to reactions performed in the absence of GSK3α.
Data shown are Mean ± SEM (n = 3).

Tau Phosphorylation

We next asked whether Aβ42 directly stimulates GSK3α.
We used an in vitro kinase assay with purified GSK3α
and tau in a buffer system with ATP. The assay was performed in the
absence and presence of 5–500 nM Aβ42, which had been
preincubated at 5 μM for a short time to initiate the formation
of transient oligomers before dilution into the reactions. Tau phosphorylation
by GSK3α was detected by Western blot using a phospho-tau specific
antibody recognizing phosphorylation of Ser396 (Figure 6). In the presence of Aβ42, we find
a factor of 6.3(±2.4) stronger signal with GSK3α compared
to no enzyme, with no variation over the Aβ42 concentration
range studied in line with the high affinity of the interaction. In
the absence of Aβ42 we find a factor of 1.9(±0.8) stronger
signal with GSK3α compared to no enzyme. Thus, Aβ42 was
found to increase GSK3α activity in terms of tau phosphorylation
by a factor of 3 under the conditions of the assay.

Tau phosphorylation assay.
(A) Examples of tau gel bands from Western blot imaging after kinase
assay reaction in the absence (−) and presence of Aβ42
at 5 nM (+), 50 nM (++), and 500 nM (+++), and absence (−)
or presence of GSK3α (+). (B) Quantification of tau phosphorylation
in the presence (+++) or absence (−) of 500 nM Aβ42,
and absence (−) or presence of GSK3α (+). Levels of
pTau were compared to reactions performed in the absence of GSK3α.
Data shown are Mean ± SEM (n = 3).

A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer’s
Disease?The finding of GSK3α as the top candidate
in an unbiased search for putative interaction partners of transient
Aβ42 oligomers, its validation as a high affinity interaction,
and the observed stimulation of tau hyperphosphorylation by GSK3α
in the presence of Aβ42 are striking results given the strong
connection found previously between GSK3 and Alzheimer’s disease;
as recently reviewed.27−30 GSK3 has been investigated by others as a critical molecular link
between the two histopathological hallmarks of the disease: Aβ
plaques and neurofibrillary tau tangles. Hyperactivated GSK3 has been
linked to sporadic as well as familial AD, suggesting a crucial role
of this enzyme in AD pathogenesis. The discovery presented here of
a direct interaction of Aβ42 with GSK3α, leading to stimulation
of kinase activity, provides a new route toward resolving how this
molecular link affects the etiology of the disease.

A New Molecular Link in Alzheimer’s
Disease?

The finding of GSK3α as the top candidate
in an unbiased search for putative interaction partners of transient
Aβ42 oligomers, its validation as a high affinity interaction,
and the observed stimulation of tau hyperphosphorylation by GSK3α
in the presence of Aβ42 are striking results given the strong
connection found previously between GSK3 and Alzheimer’s disease;
as recently reviewed.27−30 GSK3 has been investigated by others as a critical molecular link
between the two histopathological hallmarks of the disease: Aβ
plaques and neurofibrillary tau tangles. Hyperactivated GSK3 has been
linked to sporadic as well as familial AD, suggesting a crucial role
of this enzyme in AD pathogenesis. The discovery presented here of
a direct interaction of Aβ42 with GSK3α, leading to stimulation
of kinase activity, provides a new route toward resolving how this
molecular link affects the etiology of the disease.

Glycogen Synthase
Kinase 3GSK3 is a central and multifunctional kinase with
important roles in synaptic plasticity, memory, and learning.31,32 Its two isoforms (or rather paralogues27), GSK3α and GSK3β, can phosphorylate over 100 known
substrates in addition to glycogen synthase. One important substrate
is the protein tau, the phosphorylation of which is thought to be
a critical step in AD pathogenesis.3 Indeed,
GSK3β was called tau protein kinase 1 (TPK1) before gene cloning
and sequencing revealed that the two proteins are the same.33 The involvement in AD has been studied most
extensively for GSK3β, but specific contributions of GSK3α
and GSK3β have been inferred from siRNA and knockdown studies.27,29,34,35 GSK3α seems to enhance Aβ production through γ-secretase
stimulation,34,35 which has been proposed to be
due to “interaction with an unidentified protein”.35 Aβ42 uptake and accumulation in neurons,
has been observed to lead to GSK3 activation.36−38 Studies in
primary hippocampal neurons suggest that Aβ42 accumulations
invoke an intracellular cascade that culminates in caspase and GSK3
activation; however, the molecular mechanisms that link toxicity of
Aβ42 oligomers to GSK3 activation remain unknown.38

Glycogen Synthase
Kinase 3

GSK3 is a central and multifunctional kinase with
important roles in synaptic plasticity, memory, and learning.31,32 Its two isoforms (or rather paralogues27), GSK3α and GSK3β, can phosphorylate over 100 known
substrates in addition to glycogen synthase. One important substrate
is the protein tau, the phosphorylation of which is thought to be
a critical step in AD pathogenesis.3 Indeed,
GSK3β was called tau protein kinase 1 (TPK1) before gene cloning
and sequencing revealed that the two proteins are the same.33 The involvement in AD has been studied most
extensively for GSK3β, but specific contributions of GSK3α
and GSK3β have been inferred from siRNA and knockdown studies.27,29,34,35 GSK3α seems to enhance Aβ production through γ-secretase
stimulation,34,35 which has been proposed to be
due to “interaction with an unidentified protein”.35 Aβ42 uptake and accumulation in neurons,
has been observed to lead to GSK3 activation.36−38 Studies in
primary hippocampal neurons suggest that Aβ42 accumulations
invoke an intracellular cascade that culminates in caspase and GSK3
activation; however, the molecular mechanisms that link toxicity of
Aβ42 oligomers to GSK3 activation remain unknown.38

Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3βGSK3α and GSK3β share 83% sequence identity in the 370-residue
kinase domain (Figure S2). In addition
to the kinase domain, GSK3α has a 90 residue N-terminal extension,
in which residues 15–25 of GSK3α are 82% identical to
residues 2–13 of the 27 residue N-terminal extension of GSK3β.
Although GSK3β is present on the protein array, there can be
many reasons for a protein not emerging as a putative hit including
lower amount spotted, lower level of correctly folded protein in the
spot, and so forth. A few control experiments were therefore performed
using SPR (Figure 7A,B), thermophoresis (Figure 7C) and confocal fluorescence microscopy (Figure 8), indicating that oligomeric
Aβ42 interacts and co-localizes also with GSK3β.Figure 7SPR and thermophoresis
analysis of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3β. (A,B)
SPR data at 25 °C. GSK3β was injected at 20 nM (red), 10
nM (orange), 5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated
CM5 sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer
flow for 24 h. (B) Fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown
in black. (C) Normalized thermophoresis signal for 16 capillaries
containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42 alone and varying GSK3α
concentrations (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is
shown for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min
(green), 572 min (orange), and 635 min (red). The fitted curves for
a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid black lines for KD = 2.3, 16, 65, and 110 nM.Figure 8Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3β and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3β (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neuronal structures.
Scale bar = 10 μm.

Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3β

GSK3α and GSK3β share 83% sequence identity in the 370-residue
kinase domain (Figure S2). In addition
to the kinase domain, GSK3α has a 90 residue N-terminal extension,
in which residues 15–25 of GSK3α are 82% identical to
residues 2–13 of the 27 residue N-terminal extension of GSK3β.
Although GSK3β is present on the protein array, there can be
many reasons for a protein not emerging as a putative hit including
lower amount spotted, lower level of correctly folded protein in the
spot, and so forth. A few control experiments were therefore performed
using SPR (Figure 7A,B), thermophoresis (Figure 7C) and confocal fluorescence microscopy (Figure 8), indicating that oligomeric
Aβ42 interacts and co-localizes also with GSK3β.

SPR and thermophoresis
analysis of the interaction between Aβ42 and GSK3β. (A,B)
SPR data at 25 °C. GSK3β was injected at 20 nM (red), 10
nM (orange), 5 nM (green), and 2.5 nM (blue) for 20 min over a dextran-coated
CM5 sensor chip with immobilized Aβ42 (A) followed by buffer
flow for 24 h. (B) Fitted curves for a 1:1 binding reaction are shown
in black. (C) Normalized thermophoresis signal for 16 capillaries
containing solutions with 60 nM Aβ42 alone and varying GSK3α
concentrations (averages and standard deviations over 5 repeats) is
shown for a selected set of incubation times: 30 min (blue), 385 min
(green), 572 min (orange), and 635 min (red). The fitted curves for
a 1:1 binding reaction are shown as solid black lines for KD = 2.3, 16, 65, and 110 nM.

Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows colocalization
of GSK3β and Aβ42 in primary mouse neurons. Images from
a single z-plane of primary mouse neurons at 19 DIV
using monoclonal antibodies against GSK3β (green, panels A,C,E,G)
and Aβ42 (red, panels B,C,F,G) and nucleus (blue DAPI stain,
panel C). In panels (C) and (G), colocalization of GSK3α and
Aβ42 is observed as yellow areas. Panels (D) and (H) show colocalization
(white) of GSK3α and Aβ42 and was determined by using
ImarisColoc, which shows only pixels with relative colocalization.
(A–D) Overview image of one typical neuron. Scale bar = 20
μm. (E–H) Zoom in images of the neuronal structures.
Scale bar = 10 μm.

Concluding RemarksThe direct interaction discovered
between oligomeric Aβ42 and GSK3α, a kinase at the cross-roads
of many intracellular signaling pathways, provides a new molecular
link that may have implications for toxicity in Alzheimer’s
disease. It is an intriguing finding in light of the reported correlations
between Aβ42 uptake or production and GSK3α activity in
neurons.34−38Our findings of a direct molecular link between Aβ42
and GSK3α may open up new directions for studies of early molecular
events in the disease. Future studies of the interaction between Aβ42
and GSK3α may aim to identify the binding site, to find factors
that modulate the affinity, and to provide a deeper understanding
of kinase activation and its consequences; the results may further
our understanding of Alzheimer’s disease and provide a fundament
for development of future therapeutic intervention or diagnosis.

Concluding Remarks

The direct interaction discovered
between oligomeric Aβ42 and GSK3α, a kinase at the cross-roads
of many intracellular signaling pathways, provides a new molecular
link that may have implications for toxicity in Alzheimer’s
disease. It is an intriguing finding in light of the reported correlations
between Aβ42 uptake or production and GSK3α activity in
neurons.34−38

Our findings of a direct molecular link between Aβ42
and GSK3α may open up new directions for studies of early molecular
events in the disease. Future studies of the interaction between Aβ42
and GSK3α may aim to identify the binding site, to find factors
that modulate the affinity, and to provide a deeper understanding
of kinase activation and its consequences; the results may further
our understanding of Alzheimer’s disease and provide a fundament
for development of future therapeutic intervention or diagnosis.

MethodsChemicalsAll
chemicals were of the highest purity available. Alexa Fluor 488 maleimide
and Alexa Fluor 546 maleimide were purchased from Life Technologies.
IRDye 800RD Infrared Dye maleimide was purchased from LI-COR, and
ATP from Sigma-Adrich.Expression and Purification of Aβ PeptidesAβ(M1–42) and Aβ(MC1–42) were expressed
in Escherichia coli from synthetic genes with E. coli optimized codons. The gene for Aβ(MC1–42)
was produced by PCR using as a template the PetSac vector with Aβ(M1–42)
gene,39 the start primer GCGTAGGGTCGACATATGTGCGACGCTGAATTCCGTCACG with an introduced Cys codon (TGC) and the Aβ42stop
primer.39 The gene was cut with NdeI and
SacI and cloned into PetSac vector, a derivative of Pet3a. Aβ(M1–42)
was purified as described.39 Briefly, E. coli cells were sonicated three times in 10 mM Tris/HCl,
1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5 using centrifugation to pellet the inclusion bodies,
which were then dissolved in 8 M urea, 10 mM Tris/HCl, 1 mM EDTA,
pH 8.5 (buffer A). Anion-exchange chromatography was performed in
batch mode. The urea-dissolved inclusion bodies were diluted four
times with buffer A, and applied to DEAE cellulose resin equilibrated
in buffer A. The resin was washed with 20 mM NaCl in buffer A and
eluted with 75 mM NaCl in buffer A. The eluted peptide was passed
through a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter by centrifugation,
and concentrated using a 5 kDa MWCO filter. The peptide was lyophilized
and dissolved in 6 M GuHCl, pH 8.5, and monomer was isolated using
gel filtration on a 2.6 × 60 cm Superdex75 column (GE Healthcare)
in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer with 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. The monomer
was stored as lyophylized aliquots. Aβ(MC1–42) was purified
in the same manner except that 1 mM DTT was present during the sonication
steps, and 0.1 mM DTT in the following steps.Fluorophore LabelingThe Aβ(MC1–42) variant has a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling at the N-terminus
using maleimide chemistry.22 For each labeling,
one aliquot of purified Aβ(MC1–42) was dissolved in 6
M GuHCl pH 8.0 with 1 mM DTT and monomer isolated by size exclusion
chromatography in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. AlexaFluor488,
AlexaFluor546, or IRDye800 maleimide was dissolved at 5 mM in DMSO,
and added to the freshly collected monomers at 2.0 times the monomer
concentration. The solution was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C, after
which another size exclusion step was performed to eliminate aggregated
species and free dye. The concentration of labeled peptide was estimated
using the absorbance and the following extinction coefficients: 71 000
M–1·cm–1 at 488 nm, 112 000
M–1·cm–1 at 546 nm, and 240 000
M–1·cm–1 at 800 nm.Sample
Preparation for Array Screening with On-Pathway OligomersJust prior to the experiment, purified aliquots of Aβ(M1–42)
and Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and
subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a 1 × 30 cm
Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer,
pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen)
and kept on ice. For Aβ(M1–42), the monomer concentration
was calculated from integration of the collected fraction in the chromatogram
using an extinction coefficient at 280 nm of 1440 M–1cm–1. For Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) the
monomer concentration was estimated by recording the absorbance for
withdrawn samples (3 × 1 μL) using Nanodrop2000 and an
extinction coefficient at of 112 000 M–1cm–1 at 546 nm. The monomers were mixed 1:5 Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
and supplemented with NaCl and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve
5 μM total monomer concentration in 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). The solution was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C in the low-binding tube in a heating block,
and then for an additional 15 min with the array as below.Array
Screening with On-Pathway OligomersHuman protein microarrays
(Protoarray v5.0, Life Technologies) were screened at a constant temperature
of 37 °C. Arrays were blocked in 5% milk solids (w/v) in PBS
for 60 min followed by a 5 min wash in PBS prior to adding the 8 min
preincubated sample on a coverslip, application of a protoarray on
top of the solution, and 15 min incubation at 37 °C. Postincubation
the microarray was washed for 10 min in PBS. The microarray was dried
with centrifugation at 250g for 3 min and imaged
on a Genepix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments). The PMT gain settings
were maintained at 650 and 300 for the 635 and 532 nm lasers, respectively.
The focus position was 10 μm. The microarrays used were all
from the same lot. The .gpr result files from the array scans were
analyzed with Prospector software (Invitrogen) using protein–protein
interaction (PPI) analysis settings.Array Screening with a
Fibrillar SampleArray screening was performed in exactly
the same manner as the on-pathway oligomer sample using a sample with
sample with freshly prepared fibrils at 5 μM total monomer concentration
and a 1:5 ratio of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
in PBS.Expression and Purification of GSK3α and GSK3βHuman embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293 T) were transiently transfected
with pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3α. Cells were lysed 24 h post-transfection
in a high detergent lysis buffer (2 mM CaCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl,
100 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate
hydrate), 0.1% CHS (cholesteryl hydrogen succinate), 1% DDM (n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside), 30% glycerol, and
protease inhibitors (Roche)). Cells were cleared by centrifugation
at 10 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The purification
relies on the Ca2+-dependent high-affinity interaction
between EF-hand 1 (EF1) and EF-hand 2 (EF2) of calbindin D9k. EF2-agarose resin specific to EF1 and control beads were incubated
with 1.5 mg of EF1-N-GSK3α lysate. Following incubation, samples
were collected by centrifugation at 5000g for 1 min
at 4 °C. EF1-N-GSK3α was eluted from the EF2-agarose beads
in elution buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA). GSK3β
was expressed from a pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3β vector and purified
in the same manner as GSK3α. A second sample of GSK3α
was purchased from Origene (TP308698, Rockville) and used in the thermophoresis
and kinase assay. A second sample of GSK3β was purchased from
Sino Biological (10044-H07B, Beijing) and used in the thermophoresis
assay.Expression and Purification of Control ProteinsCalbindin
D9k (bovine minor A with the P43 M mutation) was expressed
in E. coli and purified as described.40 EF-hand1 of this protein was prepared by CNBr
cleavage followed by ion exchange purification as described.41SPRThe SPR studies were performed
using a Biacore 3000 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) instrument,
and 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.005% Tween20, pH 7.4
as running buffer at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Before immobilization,
CM5 carboxymethylated dextran sensor chips (GE Healthcare, Uppsala,
Sweden) were activated by injecting a mixture of 0.2 M 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-carbodiimide
and 0.02 M N-hydroxysuccinimide in water in all four
flow channels. To couple Aβ42, 100 μL of a freshly prepared
solution of 10 μM monomers in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer pH
3 was injected in channels 2–4. All flow channel were blocked
by injecting 70 μL of 1 M ethanolamine; thus, channel 1 was
prepared to serve as negative control. To study the association of
GSK3α or GSK3β, the kinase was injected at concentration
ranging from 1 to 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer flow for up
to 24 h. To remove background signal the recorded response of the
control channel was subtracted from the values obtained from channels
with immobilized Aβ42. The presented data are then averaged
over channels 2–4. In a control experiment, EF-hand 1 of bovine
calbindin D9k (43 residues, net charge −2) was immobilized
on a CM5 sensorchip using the same procedure as above. GSK3α
was injected over this chip at 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer
flow.The dissociation phase data minus baseline were fitted
to a single exponential decay:where A is the amplitude and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.The association phase data minus baseline were
fitted to a single exponential decay:where A
is the amplitude, C is the GSK3α concentration
in the flow, kon is the association rate
constant, and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.ThermophoresisJust prior to the
experiment, purified aliquots of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42)
were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The monomer fraction
was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen), supplemented with NaCl
and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). Two samples were prepared with
60 nM Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) monomer, one without GSK3α
and one with 188 nM GSK3α in PBS. These two samples were used
to prepare 15 samples with logarithmic spacing of the GKS3α
concentration between 3.4 and 188 nM. These samples, plus the sample
with no GKS3α, were placed in low-binding capillaries (MST Premium
Coated from Nanotemper Technologies, München) and mounted in
a Monolith NT.115 Instrument (Nanotemper Technologies, München)
operated at 37 °C. Thermophoresis measurements were repeated
70 times over a time period of 800 min using LED power 50%, themorophoresis
80%. The data presented in Figure 3A of the main text are from one time point in this
series. The therophoresis signal, as a function of total GSK3α
concentration, C, in nM, were fitted using a 1:1
binding equation:where Y is the calculated signal, Yfree is its
contribution from free Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42), and Ybound is its contribution from bound Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42). X is the free GSK3α concentration, C is the total GSK3α concentration in nM, and 60 is the total
Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) concentration in nM. The potential
interactions of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with GSK3β
and Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with calbindin D9k were studied
in the exact same manner.Primary NeuronsThe primary mouse
neuronal cultures were prepared from cortices and hippocampi of embryonic
day 15 mouse embryos as previously described (Takahashi et al. 2004).
In brief E15 brain tissue was dissociated by trypsinization and trituration
in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco). Dissociated neurons were
cultured on poly-d-lysine (Sigma) coated glass coverslips
and were maintained in neurobasal medium (Gibco), B27 supplement (Gibco),
glutamine (Invitrogen) and antibiotics (ThermoScientific). All animal
experiments were approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of Lund
University.Confocal MicroscopyThe cultured
primary mouse neurons were fixed at 19 days in vitro
(DIV) in 4% formaldehyde in PBS with 0.12 M sucrose for 20 min, permeabilized
and blocked in PBS containing 2% normal goat serum (NGS), 1% bovine
serum albumin (BSA), and 0.1% saponin (room temperature, 1 h), and
then immunolabeled in 2% NGS in PBS overnight at 4 °C with monoclonal
anti-Aβ42 antibody 12F4 (Biolegend) and anti-GSKα (Cell
Signaling) or anti-GSKβ (Cell Signaling). After labeling with
secondary antibodies and appropriate washing, coverslips were mounted
with SlowfadeGold (Invitrogen). Images were taken with confocal laser
scanning microscopy (Leica TCS SP8) and analyzed with ImageJ and ImarisColoc
7.6. Channels were imaged sequentially to avoid bleed-through.Cell
Culture and Cell Lines for ImmunoprecipitationAll cells
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 units/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a humidified
incubator set at 5% CO2, and 37 °C.ImmunoprecipitationCells were lysed in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS before centrifugation,
and lysates were then clarified by spinning at 20 000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cleared lysates were then incubated
overnight with relevant antibodies (GSK3α, GSK3β (Cell
Signaling Technologies) or Aβ (4G8) (Covance)) overnight at
4 °C. Protein A magnetic beads (Cell Signaling Technologies)
or Dynabeads M-280 with Sheep anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen) were washed
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and then blocked for 30 min in 5% skim
milk powder before incubation with lysate solution for 1 h at 4 °C.
Beads were subsequently isolated on a magnetic rack and washed 6×
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and 3× in PBS. For IR800-Aβ42
experiments, IR800-Aβ42 was mixed 1:10 with unlabeled Aβ42
and added to washed beads in PBS to a final concentration of 1 μM,
and incubated with the beads for 1 h at 4 °C before washing as
described above.Western BlotSamples
were boiled in Laemmli buffer for 5 min before being applied to 10–20%
polyacrylamide gels (BioRad) and subsequent transfer to PVDF membrane
using TransBlot Turbo transfer packs (BioRad). Membranes were blocked
in 5% skim milk powder. The membranes were incubated in primary antibody
(GSK3α, Aβ, Tau (Tau46) (Cell Signaling Technologies),
Tau Phospho Ser396 (BD-Bioscience), and Amyloidβ (6E10) (Covance))
solutions overnight. HRP conjugated secondary antibodies were from
Cell Signaling Technologies. Protein bands were detected using Signal
Fire ECL reagent (Cell Signaling Technologies) and imaged on BioRad
ChemiDoc XRS+. Quantification was performed using Image Lab Software
(BioRad). Blots with IR labeled proteins were processed using Odyssey
CLx Imager (LI-COR Biosciences).Phosphorylation AssayTau phosphorylation assays were performed at 37 °C in 20 mM
Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTT, pH
7.5 with 10 μM ATP, and 150 nM tau (T08-54H from SignalChem,
Richmond, Canada). For these assays, we used GSK3α from Origene,
at a final concentration of 0.2 nM. Just prior to each experiment,
a purified aliquot of Aβ(M1–42) was dissolved in 6 M
GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected
in low-binding tubes (Axygen) and kept on ice during adjustment of
pH to 7.5, dilution to 5 μM in the reaction buffer. The monomer
was incubated at 37 °C for 8 min before adding to the phosphorylation
reactions at final concentration of 5, 50, and 500 nM. A control reaction
with no Aβ42 was performed in parallel. Another control reaction
contained 500 nM Aβ42 but no GSK3α. All solutions were
incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. The reactions were stopped by
mixing with 2× SDS gel loading buffer and separated on SDS PAGE,
followed by Western blots using antibodies against total tau or tau
with phospho-Ser396.

ChemicalsAll
chemicals were of the highest purity available. Alexa Fluor 488 maleimide
and Alexa Fluor 546 maleimide were purchased from Life Technologies.
IRDye 800RD Infrared Dye maleimide was purchased from LI-COR, and
ATP from Sigma-Adrich.

All
chemicals were of the highest purity available. Alexa Fluor 488 maleimide
and Alexa Fluor 546 maleimide were purchased from Life Technologies.
IRDye 800RD Infrared Dye maleimide was purchased from LI-COR, and
ATP from Sigma-Adrich.

Expression and Purification of Aβ PeptidesAβ(M1–42) and Aβ(MC1–42) were expressed
in Escherichia coli from synthetic genes with E. coli optimized codons. The gene for Aβ(MC1–42)
was produced by PCR using as a template the PetSac vector with Aβ(M1–42)
gene,39 the start primer GCGTAGGGTCGACATATGTGCGACGCTGAATTCCGTCACG with an introduced Cys codon (TGC) and the Aβ42stop
primer.39 The gene was cut with NdeI and
SacI and cloned into PetSac vector, a derivative of Pet3a. Aβ(M1–42)
was purified as described.39 Briefly, E. coli cells were sonicated three times in 10 mM Tris/HCl,
1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5 using centrifugation to pellet the inclusion bodies,
which were then dissolved in 8 M urea, 10 mM Tris/HCl, 1 mM EDTA,
pH 8.5 (buffer A). Anion-exchange chromatography was performed in
batch mode. The urea-dissolved inclusion bodies were diluted four
times with buffer A, and applied to DEAE cellulose resin equilibrated
in buffer A. The resin was washed with 20 mM NaCl in buffer A and
eluted with 75 mM NaCl in buffer A. The eluted peptide was passed
through a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter by centrifugation,
and concentrated using a 5 kDa MWCO filter. The peptide was lyophilized
and dissolved in 6 M GuHCl, pH 8.5, and monomer was isolated using
gel filtration on a 2.6 × 60 cm Superdex75 column (GE Healthcare)
in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer with 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. The monomer
was stored as lyophylized aliquots. Aβ(MC1–42) was purified
in the same manner except that 1 mM DTT was present during the sonication
steps, and 0.1 mM DTT in the following steps.

Expression and Purification of Aβ Peptides

Aβ(M1–42) and Aβ(MC1–42) were expressed
in Escherichia coli from synthetic genes with E. coli optimized codons. The gene for Aβ(MC1–42)
was produced by PCR using as a template the PetSac vector with Aβ(M1–42)
gene,39 the start primer GCGTAGGGTCGACATATGTGCGACGCTGAATTCCGTCACG with an introduced Cys codon (TGC) and the Aβ42stop
primer.39 The gene was cut with NdeI and
SacI and cloned into PetSac vector, a derivative of Pet3a. Aβ(M1–42)
was purified as described.39 Briefly, E. coli cells were sonicated three times in 10 mM Tris/HCl,
1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5 using centrifugation to pellet the inclusion bodies,
which were then dissolved in 8 M urea, 10 mM Tris/HCl, 1 mM EDTA,
pH 8.5 (buffer A). Anion-exchange chromatography was performed in
batch mode. The urea-dissolved inclusion bodies were diluted four
times with buffer A, and applied to DEAE cellulose resin equilibrated
in buffer A. The resin was washed with 20 mM NaCl in buffer A and
eluted with 75 mM NaCl in buffer A. The eluted peptide was passed
through a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter by centrifugation,
and concentrated using a 5 kDa MWCO filter. The peptide was lyophilized
and dissolved in 6 M GuHCl, pH 8.5, and monomer was isolated using
gel filtration on a 2.6 × 60 cm Superdex75 column (GE Healthcare)
in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer with 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. The monomer
was stored as lyophylized aliquots. Aβ(MC1–42) was purified
in the same manner except that 1 mM DTT was present during the sonication
steps, and 0.1 mM DTT in the following steps.

Fluorophore LabelingThe Aβ(MC1–42) variant has a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling at the N-terminus
using maleimide chemistry.22 For each labeling,
one aliquot of purified Aβ(MC1–42) was dissolved in 6
M GuHCl pH 8.0 with 1 mM DTT and monomer isolated by size exclusion
chromatography in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. AlexaFluor488,
AlexaFluor546, or IRDye800 maleimide was dissolved at 5 mM in DMSO,
and added to the freshly collected monomers at 2.0 times the monomer
concentration. The solution was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C, after
which another size exclusion step was performed to eliminate aggregated
species and free dye. The concentration of labeled peptide was estimated
using the absorbance and the following extinction coefficients: 71 000
M–1·cm–1 at 488 nm, 112 000
M–1·cm–1 at 546 nm, and 240 000
M–1·cm–1 at 800 nm.

Fluorophore Labeling

The Aβ(MC1–42) variant has a cysteine residue incorporated
just prior to Asp1 to allow for site-specific labeling at the N-terminus
using maleimide chemistry.22 For each labeling,
one aliquot of purified Aβ(MC1–42) was dissolved in 6
M GuHCl pH 8.0 with 1 mM DTT and monomer isolated by size exclusion
chromatography in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. AlexaFluor488,
AlexaFluor546, or IRDye800 maleimide was dissolved at 5 mM in DMSO,
and added to the freshly collected monomers at 2.0 times the monomer
concentration. The solution was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C, after
which another size exclusion step was performed to eliminate aggregated
species and free dye. The concentration of labeled peptide was estimated
using the absorbance and the following extinction coefficients: 71 000
M–1·cm–1 at 488 nm, 112 000
M–1·cm–1 at 546 nm, and 240 000
M–1·cm–1 at 800 nm.

Sample
Preparation for Array Screening with On-Pathway OligomersJust prior to the experiment, purified aliquots of Aβ(M1–42)
and Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and
subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a 1 × 30 cm
Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer,
pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen)
and kept on ice. For Aβ(M1–42), the monomer concentration
was calculated from integration of the collected fraction in the chromatogram
using an extinction coefficient at 280 nm of 1440 M–1cm–1. For Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) the
monomer concentration was estimated by recording the absorbance for
withdrawn samples (3 × 1 μL) using Nanodrop2000 and an
extinction coefficient at of 112 000 M–1cm–1 at 546 nm. The monomers were mixed 1:5 Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
and supplemented with NaCl and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve
5 μM total monomer concentration in 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). The solution was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C in the low-binding tube in a heating block,
and then for an additional 15 min with the array as below.

Sample
Preparation for Array Screening with On-Pathway Oligomers

Just prior to the experiment, purified aliquots of Aβ(M1–42)
and Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and
subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a 1 × 30 cm
Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare) in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer,
pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen)
and kept on ice. For Aβ(M1–42), the monomer concentration
was calculated from integration of the collected fraction in the chromatogram
using an extinction coefficient at 280 nm of 1440 M–1cm–1. For Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42) the
monomer concentration was estimated by recording the absorbance for
withdrawn samples (3 × 1 μL) using Nanodrop2000 and an
extinction coefficient at of 112 000 M–1cm–1 at 546 nm. The monomers were mixed 1:5 Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
and supplemented with NaCl and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve
5 μM total monomer concentration in 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). The solution was preincubated
for 8 min at 37 °C in the low-binding tube in a heating block,
and then for an additional 15 min with the array as below.

Array
Screening with On-Pathway OligomersHuman protein microarrays
(Protoarray v5.0, Life Technologies) were screened at a constant temperature
of 37 °C. Arrays were blocked in 5% milk solids (w/v) in PBS
for 60 min followed by a 5 min wash in PBS prior to adding the 8 min
preincubated sample on a coverslip, application of a protoarray on
top of the solution, and 15 min incubation at 37 °C. Postincubation
the microarray was washed for 10 min in PBS. The microarray was dried
with centrifugation at 250g for 3 min and imaged
on a Genepix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments). The PMT gain settings
were maintained at 650 and 300 for the 635 and 532 nm lasers, respectively.
The focus position was 10 μm. The microarrays used were all
from the same lot. The .gpr result files from the array scans were
analyzed with Prospector software (Invitrogen) using protein–protein
interaction (PPI) analysis settings.

Array
Screening with On-Pathway Oligomers

Human protein microarrays
(Protoarray v5.0, Life Technologies) were screened at a constant temperature
of 37 °C. Arrays were blocked in 5% milk solids (w/v) in PBS
for 60 min followed by a 5 min wash in PBS prior to adding the 8 min
preincubated sample on a coverslip, application of a protoarray on
top of the solution, and 15 min incubation at 37 °C. Postincubation
the microarray was washed for 10 min in PBS. The microarray was dried
with centrifugation at 250g for 3 min and imaged
on a Genepix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments). The PMT gain settings
were maintained at 650 and 300 for the 635 and 532 nm lasers, respectively.
The focus position was 10 μm. The microarrays used were all
from the same lot. The .gpr result files from the array scans were
analyzed with Prospector software (Invitrogen) using protein–protein
interaction (PPI) analysis settings.

Array Screening with a
Fibrillar SampleArray screening was performed in exactly
the same manner as the on-pathway oligomer sample using a sample with
sample with freshly prepared fibrils at 5 μM total monomer concentration
and a 1:5 ratio of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
in PBS.

Array Screening with a
Fibrillar Sample

Array screening was performed in exactly
the same manner as the on-pathway oligomer sample using a sample with
sample with freshly prepared fibrils at 5 μM total monomer concentration
and a 1:5 ratio of Alexa546-Aβ(MC1–42)/Aβ(M1–42)
in PBS.

Expression and Purification of GSK3α and GSK3βHuman embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293 T) were transiently transfected
with pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3α. Cells were lysed 24 h post-transfection
in a high detergent lysis buffer (2 mM CaCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl,
100 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate
hydrate), 0.1% CHS (cholesteryl hydrogen succinate), 1% DDM (n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside), 30% glycerol, and
protease inhibitors (Roche)). Cells were cleared by centrifugation
at 10 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The purification
relies on the Ca2+-dependent high-affinity interaction
between EF-hand 1 (EF1) and EF-hand 2 (EF2) of calbindin D9k. EF2-agarose resin specific to EF1 and control beads were incubated
with 1.5 mg of EF1-N-GSK3α lysate. Following incubation, samples
were collected by centrifugation at 5000g for 1 min
at 4 °C. EF1-N-GSK3α was eluted from the EF2-agarose beads
in elution buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA). GSK3β
was expressed from a pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3β vector and purified
in the same manner as GSK3α. A second sample of GSK3α
was purchased from Origene (TP308698, Rockville) and used in the thermophoresis
and kinase assay. A second sample of GSK3β was purchased from
Sino Biological (10044-H07B, Beijing) and used in the thermophoresis
assay.

Expression and Purification of GSK3α and GSK3β

Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293 T) were transiently transfected
with pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3α. Cells were lysed 24 h post-transfection
in a high detergent lysis buffer (2 mM CaCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl,
100 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate
hydrate), 0.1% CHS (cholesteryl hydrogen succinate), 1% DDM (n-dodecyl β-d-maltoside), 30% glycerol, and
protease inhibitors (Roche)). Cells were cleared by centrifugation
at 10 000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The purification
relies on the Ca2+-dependent high-affinity interaction
between EF-hand 1 (EF1) and EF-hand 2 (EF2) of calbindin D9k. EF2-agarose resin specific to EF1 and control beads were incubated
with 1.5 mg of EF1-N-GSK3α lysate. Following incubation, samples
were collected by centrifugation at 5000g for 1 min
at 4 °C. EF1-N-GSK3α was eluted from the EF2-agarose beads
in elution buffer (10 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA). GSK3β
was expressed from a pEF1-N-CMV-Tev-GSK3β vector and purified
in the same manner as GSK3α. A second sample of GSK3α
was purchased from Origene (TP308698, Rockville) and used in the thermophoresis
and kinase assay. A second sample of GSK3β was purchased from
Sino Biological (10044-H07B, Beijing) and used in the thermophoresis
assay.

Expression and Purification of Control ProteinsCalbindin
D9k (bovine minor A with the P43 M mutation) was expressed
in E. coli and purified as described.40 EF-hand1 of this protein was prepared by CNBr
cleavage followed by ion exchange purification as described.41

Expression and Purification of Control Proteins

Calbindin
D9k (bovine minor A with the P43 M mutation) was expressed
in E. coli and purified as described.40 EF-hand1 of this protein was prepared by CNBr
cleavage followed by ion exchange purification as described.41

SPRThe SPR studies were performed
using a Biacore 3000 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) instrument,
and 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.005% Tween20, pH 7.4
as running buffer at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Before immobilization,
CM5 carboxymethylated dextran sensor chips (GE Healthcare, Uppsala,
Sweden) were activated by injecting a mixture of 0.2 M 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-carbodiimide
and 0.02 M N-hydroxysuccinimide in water in all four
flow channels. To couple Aβ42, 100 μL of a freshly prepared
solution of 10 μM monomers in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer pH
3 was injected in channels 2–4. All flow channel were blocked
by injecting 70 μL of 1 M ethanolamine; thus, channel 1 was
prepared to serve as negative control. To study the association of
GSK3α or GSK3β, the kinase was injected at concentration
ranging from 1 to 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer flow for up
to 24 h. To remove background signal the recorded response of the
control channel was subtracted from the values obtained from channels
with immobilized Aβ42. The presented data are then averaged
over channels 2–4. In a control experiment, EF-hand 1 of bovine
calbindin D9k (43 residues, net charge −2) was immobilized
on a CM5 sensorchip using the same procedure as above. GSK3α
was injected over this chip at 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer
flow.The dissociation phase data minus baseline were fitted
to a single exponential decay:where A is the amplitude and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.The association phase data minus baseline were
fitted to a single exponential decay:where A
is the amplitude, C is the GSK3α concentration
in the flow, kon is the association rate
constant, and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.

The SPR studies were performed
using a Biacore 3000 (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) instrument,
and 10 mM Hepes/NaOH, 0.15 M NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 0.005% Tween20, pH 7.4
as running buffer at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Before immobilization,
CM5 carboxymethylated dextran sensor chips (GE Healthcare, Uppsala,
Sweden) were activated by injecting a mixture of 0.2 M 1-ethyl-3-(3-(dimethylamino)propyl)-carbodiimide
and 0.02 M N-hydroxysuccinimide in water in all four
flow channels. To couple Aβ42, 100 μL of a freshly prepared
solution of 10 μM monomers in 10 mM sodium acetate buffer pH
3 was injected in channels 2–4. All flow channel were blocked
by injecting 70 μL of 1 M ethanolamine; thus, channel 1 was
prepared to serve as negative control. To study the association of
GSK3α or GSK3β, the kinase was injected at concentration
ranging from 1 to 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer flow for up
to 24 h. To remove background signal the recorded response of the
control channel was subtracted from the values obtained from channels
with immobilized Aβ42. The presented data are then averaged
over channels 2–4. In a control experiment, EF-hand 1 of bovine
calbindin D9k (43 residues, net charge −2) was immobilized
on a CM5 sensorchip using the same procedure as above. GSK3α
was injected over this chip at 20 nM for 20 min, followed by buffer
flow.

The dissociation phase data minus baseline were fitted
to a single exponential decay:where A is the amplitude and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.

The association phase data minus baseline were
fitted to a single exponential decay:where A
is the amplitude, C is the GSK3α concentration
in the flow, kon is the association rate
constant, and koff is the dissociation
rate constant.

ThermophoresisJust prior to the
experiment, purified aliquots of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42)
were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The monomer fraction
was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen), supplemented with NaCl
and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). Two samples were prepared with
60 nM Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) monomer, one without GSK3α
and one with 188 nM GSK3α in PBS. These two samples were used
to prepare 15 samples with logarithmic spacing of the GKS3α
concentration between 3.4 and 188 nM. These samples, plus the sample
with no GKS3α, were placed in low-binding capillaries (MST Premium
Coated from Nanotemper Technologies, München) and mounted in
a Monolith NT.115 Instrument (Nanotemper Technologies, München)
operated at 37 °C. Thermophoresis measurements were repeated
70 times over a time period of 800 min using LED power 50%, themorophoresis
80%. The data presented in Figure 3A of the main text are from one time point in this
series. The therophoresis signal, as a function of total GSK3α
concentration, C, in nM, were fitted using a 1:1
binding equation:where Y is the calculated signal, Yfree is its
contribution from free Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42), and Ybound is its contribution from bound Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42). X is the free GSK3α concentration, C is the total GSK3α concentration in nM, and 60 is the total
Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) concentration in nM. The potential
interactions of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with GSK3β
and Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with calbindin D9k were studied
in the exact same manner.

Thermophoresis

Just prior to the
experiment, purified aliquots of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42)
were dissolved in 6 M GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0. The monomer fraction
was collected in low-binding tubes (Axygen), supplemented with NaCl
and KCl from concentrated stocks to achieve 20 mM sodium phosphate,
137 mM NaCl, 27 mM KCl, pH 8.0 (PBS). Two samples were prepared with
60 nM Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) monomer, one without GSK3α
and one with 188 nM GSK3α in PBS. These two samples were used
to prepare 15 samples with logarithmic spacing of the GKS3α
concentration between 3.4 and 188 nM. These samples, plus the sample
with no GKS3α, were placed in low-binding capillaries (MST Premium
Coated from Nanotemper Technologies, München) and mounted in
a Monolith NT.115 Instrument (Nanotemper Technologies, München)
operated at 37 °C. Thermophoresis measurements were repeated
70 times over a time period of 800 min using LED power 50%, themorophoresis
80%. The data presented in Figure 3A of the main text are from one time point in this
series. The therophoresis signal, as a function of total GSK3α
concentration, C, in nM, were fitted using a 1:1
binding equation:where Y is the calculated signal, Yfree is its
contribution from free Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42), and Ybound is its contribution from bound Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42). X is the free GSK3α concentration, C is the total GSK3α concentration in nM, and 60 is the total
Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) concentration in nM. The potential
interactions of Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with GSK3β
and Alexa488-Aβ(MC1–42) with calbindin D9k were studied
in the exact same manner.

Primary NeuronsThe primary mouse
neuronal cultures were prepared from cortices and hippocampi of embryonic
day 15 mouse embryos as previously described (Takahashi et al. 2004).
In brief E15 brain tissue was dissociated by trypsinization and trituration
in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco). Dissociated neurons were
cultured on poly-d-lysine (Sigma) coated glass coverslips
and were maintained in neurobasal medium (Gibco), B27 supplement (Gibco),
glutamine (Invitrogen) and antibiotics (ThermoScientific). All animal
experiments were approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of Lund
University.

Primary Neurons

The primary mouse
neuronal cultures were prepared from cortices and hippocampi of embryonic
day 15 mouse embryos as previously described (Takahashi et al. 2004).
In brief E15 brain tissue was dissociated by trypsinization and trituration
in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco). Dissociated neurons were
cultured on poly-d-lysine (Sigma) coated glass coverslips
and were maintained in neurobasal medium (Gibco), B27 supplement (Gibco),
glutamine (Invitrogen) and antibiotics (ThermoScientific). All animal
experiments were approved by the Animal Ethical Committee of Lund
University.

Confocal MicroscopyThe cultured
primary mouse neurons were fixed at 19 days in vitro
(DIV) in 4% formaldehyde in PBS with 0.12 M sucrose for 20 min, permeabilized
and blocked in PBS containing 2% normal goat serum (NGS), 1% bovine
serum albumin (BSA), and 0.1% saponin (room temperature, 1 h), and
then immunolabeled in 2% NGS in PBS overnight at 4 °C with monoclonal
anti-Aβ42 antibody 12F4 (Biolegend) and anti-GSKα (Cell
Signaling) or anti-GSKβ (Cell Signaling). After labeling with
secondary antibodies and appropriate washing, coverslips were mounted
with SlowfadeGold (Invitrogen). Images were taken with confocal laser
scanning microscopy (Leica TCS SP8) and analyzed with ImageJ and ImarisColoc
7.6. Channels were imaged sequentially to avoid bleed-through.

Confocal Microscopy

The cultured
primary mouse neurons were fixed at 19 days in vitro
(DIV) in 4% formaldehyde in PBS with 0.12 M sucrose for 20 min, permeabilized
and blocked in PBS containing 2% normal goat serum (NGS), 1% bovine
serum albumin (BSA), and 0.1% saponin (room temperature, 1 h), and
then immunolabeled in 2% NGS in PBS overnight at 4 °C with monoclonal
anti-Aβ42 antibody 12F4 (Biolegend) and anti-GSKα (Cell
Signaling) or anti-GSKβ (Cell Signaling). After labeling with
secondary antibodies and appropriate washing, coverslips were mounted
with SlowfadeGold (Invitrogen). Images were taken with confocal laser
scanning microscopy (Leica TCS SP8) and analyzed with ImageJ and ImarisColoc
7.6. Channels were imaged sequentially to avoid bleed-through.

Cell
Culture and Cell Lines for ImmunoprecipitationAll cells
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 units/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a humidified
incubator set at 5% CO2, and 37 °C.

Cell
Culture and Cell Lines for Immunoprecipitation

All cells
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 units/mL penicillin,
and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a humidified
incubator set at 5% CO2, and 37 °C.

ImmunoprecipitationCells were lysed in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS before centrifugation,
and lysates were then clarified by spinning at 20 000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cleared lysates were then incubated
overnight with relevant antibodies (GSK3α, GSK3β (Cell
Signaling Technologies) or Aβ (4G8) (Covance)) overnight at
4 °C. Protein A magnetic beads (Cell Signaling Technologies)
or Dynabeads M-280 with Sheep anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen) were washed
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and then blocked for 30 min in 5% skim
milk powder before incubation with lysate solution for 1 h at 4 °C.
Beads were subsequently isolated on a magnetic rack and washed 6×
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and 3× in PBS. For IR800-Aβ42
experiments, IR800-Aβ42 was mixed 1:10 with unlabeled Aβ42
and added to washed beads in PBS to a final concentration of 1 μM,
and incubated with the beads for 1 h at 4 °C before washing as
described above.

Immunoprecipitation

Cells were lysed in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS before centrifugation,
and lysates were then clarified by spinning at 20 000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Cleared lysates were then incubated
overnight with relevant antibodies (GSK3α, GSK3β (Cell
Signaling Technologies) or Aβ (4G8) (Covance)) overnight at
4 °C. Protein A magnetic beads (Cell Signaling Technologies)
or Dynabeads M-280 with Sheep anti-rabbit IgG (Invitrogen) were washed
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and then blocked for 30 min in 5% skim
milk powder before incubation with lysate solution for 1 h at 4 °C.
Beads were subsequently isolated on a magnetic rack and washed 6×
in 1% (w/v) Triton X-100/PBS and 3× in PBS. For IR800-Aβ42
experiments, IR800-Aβ42 was mixed 1:10 with unlabeled Aβ42
and added to washed beads in PBS to a final concentration of 1 μM,
and incubated with the beads for 1 h at 4 °C before washing as
described above.

Western BlotSamples
were boiled in Laemmli buffer for 5 min before being applied to 10–20%
polyacrylamide gels (BioRad) and subsequent transfer to PVDF membrane
using TransBlot Turbo transfer packs (BioRad). Membranes were blocked
in 5% skim milk powder. The membranes were incubated in primary antibody
(GSK3α, Aβ, Tau (Tau46) (Cell Signaling Technologies),
Tau Phospho Ser396 (BD-Bioscience), and Amyloidβ (6E10) (Covance))
solutions overnight. HRP conjugated secondary antibodies were from
Cell Signaling Technologies. Protein bands were detected using Signal
Fire ECL reagent (Cell Signaling Technologies) and imaged on BioRad
ChemiDoc XRS+. Quantification was performed using Image Lab Software
(BioRad). Blots with IR labeled proteins were processed using Odyssey
CLx Imager (LI-COR Biosciences).

Western Blot

Samples
were boiled in Laemmli buffer for 5 min before being applied to 10–20%
polyacrylamide gels (BioRad) and subsequent transfer to PVDF membrane
using TransBlot Turbo transfer packs (BioRad). Membranes were blocked
in 5% skim milk powder. The membranes were incubated in primary antibody
(GSK3α, Aβ, Tau (Tau46) (Cell Signaling Technologies),
Tau Phospho Ser396 (BD-Bioscience), and Amyloidβ (6E10) (Covance))
solutions overnight. HRP conjugated secondary antibodies were from
Cell Signaling Technologies. Protein bands were detected using Signal
Fire ECL reagent (Cell Signaling Technologies) and imaged on BioRad
ChemiDoc XRS+. Quantification was performed using Image Lab Software
(BioRad). Blots with IR labeled proteins were processed using Odyssey
CLx Imager (LI-COR Biosciences).

Phosphorylation AssayTau phosphorylation assays were performed at 37 °C in 20 mM
Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTT, pH
7.5 with 10 μM ATP, and 150 nM tau (T08-54H from SignalChem,
Richmond, Canada). For these assays, we used GSK3α from Origene,
at a final concentration of 0.2 nM. Just prior to each experiment,
a purified aliquot of Aβ(M1–42) was dissolved in 6 M
GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected
in low-binding tubes (Axygen) and kept on ice during adjustment of
pH to 7.5, dilution to 5 μM in the reaction buffer. The monomer
was incubated at 37 °C for 8 min before adding to the phosphorylation
reactions at final concentration of 5, 50, and 500 nM. A control reaction
with no Aβ42 was performed in parallel. Another control reaction
contained 500 nM Aβ42 but no GSK3α. All solutions were
incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. The reactions were stopped by
mixing with 2× SDS gel loading buffer and separated on SDS PAGE,
followed by Western blots using antibodies against total tau or tau
with phospho-Ser396.

Phosphorylation Assay

Tau phosphorylation assays were performed at 37 °C in 20 mM
Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 μM DTT, pH
7.5 with 10 μM ATP, and 150 nM tau (T08-54H from SignalChem,
Richmond, Canada). For these assays, we used GSK3α from Origene,
at a final concentration of 0.2 nM. Just prior to each experiment,
a purified aliquot of Aβ(M1–42) was dissolved in 6 M
GuHCl and subjected to gel filtration and buffer exchange on a Superdex
75 column in 20 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.0. The monomer fraction was collected
in low-binding tubes (Axygen) and kept on ice during adjustment of
pH to 7.5, dilution to 5 μM in the reaction buffer. The monomer
was incubated at 37 °C for 8 min before adding to the phosphorylation
reactions at final concentration of 5, 50, and 500 nM. A control reaction
with no Aβ42 was performed in parallel. Another control reaction
contained 500 nM Aβ42 but no GSK3α. All solutions were
incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. The reactions were stopped by
mixing with 2× SDS gel loading buffer and separated on SDS PAGE,
followed by Western blots using antibodies against total tau or tau
with phospho-Ser396.
