---
pmid: '12100563'
title: Diethylmaleate activates the transcription factor Pap1 by covalent modification
  of critical cysteine residues.
authors:
- Castillo EA
- Ayté J
- Chiva C
- Moldón A
- Carrascal M
- Abián J
- Jones N
- Hidalgo E
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03020.x
---

# Diethylmaleate activates the transcription factor Pap1 by covalent modification of critical cysteine residues.
**Authors:** Castillo EA, Ayté J, Chiva C, Moldón A, Carrascal M, Abián J, Jones N, Hidalgo E
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03020.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03020.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2002 Jul;45(1):243-54. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03020.x.

Diethylmaleate activates the transcription factor Pap1 by covalent modification 
of critical cysteine residues.

Castillo EA(1), Ayté J, Chiva C, Moldón A, Carrascal M, Abián J, Jones N, 
Hidalgo E.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signalling Unit, Department de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

During the last decade, much has been learnt about the mechanisms by which 
oxidative stress is perceived by aerobic organisms. The Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe Pap1 protein is a transcription factor localized at the cytoplasm, which 
accumulates in the nucleus in response to different inducers, such as the 
pro-oxidant hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) or the glutathione-depleting agent 
diethylmaleate (DEM). As described for other H2O2 sensors, our genetic data 
indicates that H2O2 reversibly oxidizes two cysteine residues in Pap1 (Cys278 
and Cys501). Surprisingly, our studies demonstrate that DEM generates a 
non-reversible modification of at least two cysteine residues located in or 
close to the nuclear export signal of Pap1 (Cys523 and Cys532). This 
modification impedes the interaction of the nuclear exporter Crm1 with the 
nuclear export signal located at the carboxy-terminal domain of Pap1. Mass 
spectrometry data suggest that DEM binds to the thiol groups of the target 
cysteine residues through the formation of a thioether. Here we show that DEM 
triggers Pap1 nuclear accumulation by a novel molecular mechanism.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03020.x
PMID: 12100563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
