---
pmid: '17285345'
title: 'N-terminal iron-mediated self-cleavage of human frataxin: regulation of iron
  binding and complex formation with target proteins.'
authors:
- Yoon T
- Dizin E
- Cowan JA
journal: J Biol Inorg Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00775-007-0205-2
---

# N-terminal iron-mediated self-cleavage of human frataxin: regulation of iron binding and complex formation with target proteins.
**Authors:** Yoon T, Dizin E, Cowan JA
**Journal:** J Biol Inorg Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00775-007-0205-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00775-007-0205-2)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Inorg Chem. 2007 May;12(4):535-42. doi: 10.1007/s00775-007-0205-2. Epub
 2007 Feb 7.

N-terminal iron-mediated self-cleavage of human frataxin: regulation of iron 
binding and complex formation with target proteins.

Yoon T(1), Dizin E, Cowan JA.

Author information:
(1)Evans Laboratory of Chemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

Frataxin is an iron-binding mitochondrial matrix protein that has been shown to 
mediate iron delivery during iron-sulfur cluster and heme biosynthesis. 
Mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP) yields a form of human frataxin 
corresponding to residues 56-210. However, structural and functional studies 
have focused on a core structure that results from an ill-defined cleavage event 
at the N-terminus. Herein we show that the N-terminus of MPP-processed frataxin 
shows a unique high-affinity iron site and that this iron center appears to 
mediate a self-cleavage reaction. Moreover, the N-terminus appears to block 
previously defined iron-binding sites located on the carboxylate-rich surface 
defined by the helix (alpha1) and the beta-sheet (beta1), most likely through 
electrostatic contact with the carboxylate-rich surface on the core protein, as 
well as inhibiting iron-promoted binding of the iron-sulfur cluster assembly 
scaffold partner protein, ISU. The physiological significance of iron-mediated 
release of the N-terminal residues from this anionic surface is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00775-007-0205-2
PMID: 17285345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
