---
pmid: '20974968'
title: Rubicon controls endosome maturation as a Rab7 effector.
authors:
- Sun Q
- Westphal W
- Wong KN
- Tan I
- Zhong Q
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2984168
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1010554107
---

# Rubicon controls endosome maturation as a Rab7 effector.
**Authors:** Sun Q, Westphal W, Wong KN, Tan I, Zhong Q
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1010554107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1010554107)
**PMC:** [PMC2984168](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2984168/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19338-43. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1010554107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Rubicon controls endosome maturation as a Rab7 effector.

Sun Q(1), Westphal W, Wong KN, Tan I, Zhong Q.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The activation and recruitment of the small GTPase Rab7 to early endosome is a 
critical step for early to late endosome maturation, a process that requires the 
class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3KC3) and GTPase regulators. However, 
the molecular mechanism underlying Rab7 activation and endosome maturation is 
still poorly defined. Here we report that Rubicon, a component of the PI3KC3 
complex, prevents endosome maturation through differential interactions with 
Rab7 and UVRAG. UVRAG activates PI3KC3 and C-VPS/HOPS, a guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP on Rab7. We 
demonstrate that Rubicon sequesters UVRAG from C-VPS/HOPS. Active GTP-bound Rab7 
competes for Rubicon binding and releases UVRAG to associate with C-VPS/HOPS, 
which in turn promotes further loading of Rab7 with GTP. This feed-forward loop 
ensures rapid amplification of GTP-bound Rab7 and consequent stimulation of 
endosome maturation. Hence, Rubicon serves as a previously unknown Rab7 effector 
to ensure the proper progression of the endocytic pathway.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1010554107
PMCID: PMC2984168
PMID: 20974968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
