---
pmid: '11259577'
title: Association of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) y895 with Grb-2 mediates
  the insulin signaling involved in IRS-1-deficient brown adipocyte mitogenesis.
authors:
- Valverde AM
- Mur C
- Pons S
- Alvarez AM
- White MF
- Kahn CR
- Benito M
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC86861
doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.7.2269-2280.2001
---

# Association of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) y895 with Grb-2 mediates the insulin signaling involved in IRS-1-deficient brown adipocyte mitogenesis.
**Authors:** Valverde AM, Mur C, Pons S, Alvarez AM, White MF, Kahn CR, Benito M
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.21.7.2269-2280.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.21.7.2269-2280.2001)
**PMC:** [PMC86861](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC86861/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;21(7):2269-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.7.2269-2280.2001.

Association of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) y895 with Grb-2 mediates the 
insulin signaling involved in IRS-1-deficient brown adipocyte mitogenesis.

Valverde AM(1), Mur C, Pons S, Alvarez AM, White MF, Kahn CR, Benito M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Centro Mixto CSIC/UCM, 
Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We have recently generated immortalized fetal brown adipocyte cell lines from 
insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) knockout mice and demonstrated an 
impairment in insulin-induced lipid synthesis as compared to wild-type cell 
lines. In this study, we investigated the consequences of IRS-1 deficiency on 
mitogenesis in response to insulin. The lack of IRS-1 resulted in the inability 
of insulin-stimulated IRS-1-deficient brown adipocytes to increase DNA synthesis 
and enter into S/G2/M phases of the cell cycle. These cells showed a severe 
impairment in activating mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK1/2) and 
p42-p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) upon insulin stimulation. 
IRS-1-deficient cells also lacked tyrosine phosphorylation of SHC and showed no 
SHC-Grb-2 association in response to insulin. The mitogenic response to insulin 
could be partially restored by enhancing IRS-2 tyrosine phosphorylation and its 
association with Grb-2 by inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity 
through a feedback mechanism. Reconstitution of IRS-1-deficient brown adipocytes 
with wild-type IRS-1 restored insulin-induced IRS-1 and SHC tyrosine 
phosphorylation and IRS-1-Grb-2, IRS-1-SHC, and SHC-Grb-2 associations, leading 
to the activation of MAPK and enhancement of DNA synthesis. Reconstitution of 
IRS-1-deficient brown adipocytes with the IRS-1 mutant Tyr895Phe, which lacks 
IRS-1-Grb-2 binding, restored SHC-IRS-1 association and SHC-Grb-2 association. 
However, the lack of IRS-1-Grb-2 association impaired MAPK activation and DNA 
synthesis in insulin-stimulated mutant cells. These data provide strong evidence 
for an essential role of IRS-1 and its direct association with Grb-2 in the 
insulin signaling pathway leading to MAPK activation and mitogenesis in brown 
adipocytes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.7.2269-2280.2001
PMCID: PMC86861
PMID: 11259577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
