---
pmid: '19345331'
title: ZNF423 is critically required for retinoic acid-induced differentiation and
  is a marker of neuroblastoma outcome.
authors:
- Huang S
- Laoukili J
- Epping MT
- Koster J
- Hölzel M
- Westerman BA
- Nijkamp W
- Hata A
- Asgharzadeh S
- Seeger RC
- Versteeg R
- Beijersbergen RL
- Bernards R
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2693316
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.02.023
---

# ZNF423 is critically required for retinoic acid-induced differentiation and is a marker of neuroblastoma outcome.
**Authors:** Huang S, Laoukili J, Epping MT, Koster J, Hölzel M, Westerman BA, Nijkamp W, Hata A, Asgharzadeh S, Seeger RC, Versteeg R, Beijersbergen RL, Bernards R
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2009.02.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2009.02.023)
**PMC:** [PMC2693316](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2693316/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2009 Apr 7;15(4):328-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.02.023.

ZNF423 is critically required for retinoic acid-induced differentiation and is a 
marker of neuroblastoma outcome.

Huang S(1), Laoukili J, Epping MT, Koster J, Hölzel M, Westerman BA, Nijkamp W, 
Hata A, Asgharzadeh S, Seeger RC, Versteeg R, Beijersbergen RL, Bernards R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Center for Biomedical Genetics and 
Cancer Genomics Center, The Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI), Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2009 Apr 7;15(4):249-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.012.

Retinoids play key roles in differentiation, growth arrest, and apoptosis and 
are increasingly being used in the clinic for the treatment of a variety of 
cancers, including neuroblastoma. Here, using a large-scale RNA 
interference-based genetic screen, we identify ZNF423 (also known as Ebfaz, OAZ, 
or Zfp423) as a component critically required for retinoic acid (RA)-induced 
differentiation. ZNF423 associates with the RARalpha/RXRalpha nuclear receptor 
complex and is essential for transactivation in response to retinoids. 
Downregulation of ZNF423 expression by RNA interference in neuroblastoma cells 
results in a growth advantage and resistance to RA-induced differentiation, 
whereas overexpression of ZNF423 leads to growth inhibition and enhanced 
differentiation. Finally, we show that low ZNF423 expression is associated with 
poor disease outcome in neuroblastoma patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.02.023
PMCID: PMC2693316
PMID: 19345331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
