---
pmid: '7638186'
title: Interleukin 12 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT4 in
  human lymphocytes.
authors:
- Bacon CM
- Petricoin EF 3rd
- Ortaldo JR
- Rees RC
- Larner AC
- Johnston JA
- O'Shea JJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC41328
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.16.7307
---

# Interleukin 12 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT4 in human lymphocytes.
**Authors:** Bacon CM, Petricoin EF 3rd, Ortaldo JR, Rees RC, Larner AC, Johnston JA, O'Shea JJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.92.16.7307](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.16.7307)
**PMC:** [PMC41328](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC41328/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 1;92(16):7307-11. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.16.7307.

Interleukin 12 induces tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of STAT4 in human 
lymphocytes.

Bacon CM(1), Petricoin EF 3rd, Ortaldo JR, Rees RC, Larner AC, Johnston JA, 
O'Shea JJ.

Author information:
(1)Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Arthritis and 
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

Interleukin 12 (IL-12) is an important immunoregulatory cytokine whose receptor 
is a member of the hematopoietin receptor superfamily. We have recently 
demonstrated that stimulation of human T and natural killer cells with IL-12 
induces tyrosine phosphorylation of the Janus family tyrosine kinase JAK2 and 
Tyk2, implicating these kinases in the immediate biochemical response to IL-12. 
Recently, transcription factors known as STATs (signal transducers and 
activators of transcription) have been shown to be tyrosine phosphorylated and 
activated in response to a number of cytokines that bind hematopoietin receptors 
and activate JAK kinases. In this report we demonstrate that IL-12 induces 
tyrosine phosphorylation of a recently identified STAT family member, STAT4, and 
show that STAT4 expression is regulated by T-cell activation. Furthermore, we 
show that IL-12 stimulates formation of a DNA-binding complex that recognizes a 
DNA sequence previously shown to bind STAT proteins and that this complex 
contains STAT4. These data, and the recent demonstration of JAK phosphorylation 
by IL-12, identify a rapid signal-transduction pathway likely to mediate 
IL-12-induced gene expression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.16.7307
PMCID: PMC41328
PMID: 7638186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
