---
pmid: '11779463'
title: ATP-bound states of GroEL captured by cryo-electron microscopy.
authors:
- Ranson NA
- Farr GW
- Roseman AM
- Gowen B
- Fenton WA
- Horwich AL
- Saibil HR
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00617-1
---

# ATP-bound states of GroEL captured by cryo-electron microscopy.
**Authors:** Ranson NA, Farr GW, Roseman AM, Gowen B, Fenton WA, Horwich AL, Saibil HR
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00617-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00617-1)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2001 Dec 28;107(7):869-79. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00617-1.

ATP-bound states of GroEL captured by cryo-electron microscopy.

Ranson NA(1), Farr GW, Roseman AM, Gowen B, Fenton WA, Horwich AL, Saibil HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Crystallography, Birkbeck College London, Malet Street, London 
WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom. n.ranson@bbk.ac.uk

The chaperonin GroEL drives its protein-folding cycle by cooperatively binding 
ATP to one of its two rings, priming that ring to become folding-active upon 
GroES binding, while simultaneously discharging the previous folding chamber 
from the opposite ring. The GroEL-ATP structure, determined by cryo-EM and 
atomic structure fitting, shows that the intermediate domains rotate downward, 
switching their intersubunit salt bridge contacts from substrate binding to ATP 
binding domains. These observations, together with the effects of ATP binding to 
a GroEL-GroES-ADP complex, suggest structural models for the ATP-induced 
reduction in affinity for polypeptide and for cooperativity. The model for 
cooperativity, based on switching of intersubunit salt bridge interactions 
around the GroEL ring, may provide general insight into cooperativity in other 
ring complexes and molecular machines.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00617-1
PMID: 11779463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
