---
pmid: '9383998'
title: Human blue-light photoreceptor hCRY2 specifically interacts with protein serine/threonine
  phosphatase 5 and modulates its activity.
authors:
- Zhao S
- Sancar A
journal: Photochem Photobiol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03214.x
---

# Human blue-light photoreceptor hCRY2 specifically interacts with protein serine/threonine phosphatase 5 and modulates its activity.
**Authors:** Zhao S, Sancar A
**Journal:** Photochem Photobiol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03214.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03214.x)

## Abstract

1. Photochem Photobiol. 1997 Nov;66(5):727-31. doi: 
10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03214.x.

Human blue-light photoreceptor hCRY2 specifically interacts with protein 
serine/threonine phosphatase 5 and modulates its activity.

Zhao S(1), Sancar A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599-7260, USA.

Photolyase/blue-light photoreceptor family of proteins includes cyclobutane 
pyrimidine dimer photolyase, (6-4) photolyase and blue-light photoreceptors that 
were recently discovered in Arabidopsis thaliana, Sinapis alba and Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii. Recently, we identified two human genes, hCRY1 and hCRY2, belonging 
to this family. The proteins encoded by these genes have no DNA repair activity 
and therefore were hypothesized to function in human blue-light response 
reactions. To identify downstream targets for these putative blue-light 
photoreceptors we searched for interacting proteins by the yeast two-hybrid 
method. We found that the tetratricopeptide repeat protein 1, Tpr1, and the 
protein serine/threonine phosphatase 5 (PP5) that contains the TPR motif 
specifically interacted with hCRY2. The effect of the hCRY2-PP5 interaction on 
the protein phosphatase activity was investigated. We found that hCRY2, but not 
the highly homologous (6-4) photolyase, inhibits the phosphatase activity of 
PP5. This inhibition may be on the pathway of blue-light signal transduction 
reaction in humans.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-1097.1997.tb03214.x
PMID: 9383998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
