---
pmid: '15661744'
title: Brain contains a functional glucose-6-phosphatase complex capable of endogenous
  glucose production.
authors:
- Ghosh A
- Cheung YY
- Mansfield BC
- Chou JY
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410894200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Brain contains a functional glucose-6-phosphatase complex capable of endogenous glucose production.
**Authors:** Ghosh A, Cheung YY, Mansfield BC, Chou JY
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M410894200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M410894200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11114-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410894200. Epub
2005  Jan 20.

Brain contains a functional glucose-6-phosphatase complex capable of endogenous 
glucose production.

Ghosh A(1), Cheung YY, Mansfield BC, Chou JY.

Author information:
(1)Section on Cellular Differentiation, Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1830, USA.

Glucose is absolutely essential for the survival and function of the brain. In 
our current understanding, there is no endogenous glucose production in the 
brain, and it is totally dependent upon blood glucose. This glucose is generated 
between meals by the hydrolysis of glucose-6-phosphate (Glc-6-P) in the liver 
and the kidney. Recently, we reported a ubiquitously expressed Glc-6-P 
hydrolase, glucose-6-phosphatase-beta (Glc-6-Pase-beta), that can couple with 
the Glc-6-P transporter to hydrolyze Glc-6-P to glucose in the terminal stages 
of glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Here we show that astrocytes, the main 
reservoir of brain glycogen, express both the Glc-6-Pase-beta and Glc-6-P 
transporter activities and that these activities can couple to form an active 
Glc-6-Pase complex, suggesting that astrocytes may provide an endogenous source 
of brain glucose.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410894200
PMID: 15661744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
