---
pmid: '29778605'
title: Proteomic and Biochemical Comparison of the Cellular Interaction Partners of
  Human VPS33A and VPS33B.
authors:
- Hunter MR
- Hesketh GG
- Benedyk TH
- Gingras AC
- Graham SC
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6005816
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.019
---

# Proteomic and Biochemical Comparison of the Cellular Interaction Partners of Human VPS33A and VPS33B.
**Authors:** Hunter MR, Hesketh GG, Benedyk TH, Gingras AC, Graham SC
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.019)
**PMC:** [PMC6005816](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6005816/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2018 Jul 6;430(14):2153-2163. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.019. Epub
 2018 May 17.

Proteomic and Biochemical Comparison of the Cellular Interaction Partners of 
Human VPS33A and VPS33B.

Hunter MR(1), Hesketh GG(2), Benedyk TH(1), Gingras AC(3), Graham SC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK.
(2)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto M5G 
1X5, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto M5G 
1X5, Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK. Electronic address: scg34@cam.ac.uk.

Multi-subunit tethering complexes control membrane fusion events in eukaryotic 
cells. Class C core vacuole/endosome tethering (CORVET) and homotypic fusion and 
vacuole protein sorting (HOPS) are two such complexes, both containing the 
Sec1/Munc18 protein subunit VPS33A. Metazoans additionally possess VPS33B, which 
has considerable sequence similarity to VPS33A but does not integrate into 
CORVET or HOPS complexes and instead stably interacts with VIPAR. It has been 
recently suggested that VPS33B and VIPAR comprise two subunits of a novel 
multi-subunit tethering complex (named "CHEVI"), perhaps analogous in 
configuration to CORVET and HOPS. We utilized the BioID proximity biotinylation 
assay to compare and contrast the interactomes of VPS33A and VPS33B. Overall, 
few proteins were identified as associating with both VPS33A and VPS33B, 
suggesting that these proteins have distinct sub-cellular localizations. 
Consistent with previous reports, we observed that VPS33A was co-localized with 
many components of class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3KC3) complexes: 
PIK3C3, PIK3R4, NRBF2, UVRAG and RUBICON. Although VPS33A clearly co-localized 
with several subunits of CORVET and HOPS in this assay, no proteins with the 
canonical CORVET/HOPS domain architecture were found to co-localize with VPS33B. 
Instead, we identified that VPS33B interacts directly with CCDC22, a member of 
the CCC complex. CCDC22 does not co-fractionate with VPS33B and VIPAR in gel 
filtration of human cell lysates, suggesting that CCDC22 interacts transiently 
with VPS33B/VIPAR rather than forming a stable complex with these proteins in 
cells. We also observed that the protein complex containing VPS33B and VIPAR is 
considerably smaller than CORVET/HOPS, suggesting that the CHEVI complex 
comprises just VPS33B and VIPAR.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.019
PMCID: PMC6005816
PMID: 29778605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
