---
pmid: '18687691'
title: Regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3beta/AR signaling network by isoflavone in prostate
  cancer cells.
authors:
- Li Y
- Wang Z
- Kong D
- Li R
- Sarkar SH
- Sarkar FH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2562074
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802759200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3beta/AR signaling network by isoflavone in prostate cancer cells.
**Authors:** Li Y, Wang Z, Kong D, Li R, Sarkar SH, Sarkar FH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M802759200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M802759200)
**PMC:** [PMC2562074](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2562074/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Oct 10;283(41):27707-27716. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802759200.
Epub  2008 Aug 7.

Regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3beta/AR signaling network by isoflavone in 
prostate cancer cells.

Li Y(1), Wang Z(1), Kong D(1), Li R(1), Sarkar SH(1), Sarkar FH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201.
(2)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201. Electronic address: 
fsarkar@med.wayne.edu.

We have previously shown that genistein could inhibit Akt activation and 
down-regulate AR (androgen receptor) and PSA (prostate-specific antigen) 
expression in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. However, pure genistein showed 
increased lymph node metastasis in an animal model, but such an adverse effect 
was not seen with isoflavone, suggesting that further mechanistic studies are 
needed for elucidating the role of isoflavone in PCa. It is known that FOXO3a 
and GSK-3beta, targets of Akt, regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. 
Moreover, FOXO3a, GSK-3beta, and Src are AR regulators and regulate 
transactivation of AR, mediating the development and progression of PCa. 
Therefore, we investigated the molecular effects of isoflavone on the 
Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3beta/AR signaling network in hormone-sensitive LNCaP and 
hormone-insensitive C4-2B PCa cells. We found that isoflavone inhibited the 
phosphorylation of Akt and FOXO3a, regulated the phosphorylation of Src, and 
increased the expression of GSK-3beta, leading to the down-regulation of AR and 
its target gene PSA. We also found that isoflavone inhibited AR nuclear 
translocation and promoted FOXO3a translocation to the nucleus. By 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we 
found that isoflavone inhibited FOXO3a binding to the promoter of AR and 
increased FOXO3a binding to the p27(KIP1) promoter, resulting in the alteration 
of AR and p27(KIP1) expression, the inhibition of cell proliferation, and the 
induction of apoptosis in both androgen-sensitive and -insensitive PCa cells. 
These results suggest that isoflavone-induced inhibition of cell proliferation 
and induction of apoptosis are partly mediated through the regulation of the 
Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3beta/AR signaling network. In conclusion, our data suggest that 
isoflavone could be useful for the prevention and/or treatment of PCa.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M802759200
PMCID: PMC2562074
PMID: 18687691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have previously shown that genistein could inhibit Akt activation and
 down-regulate AR (androgen receptor) and PSA (prostate-specific antigen)
 expression in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. However, pure genistein showed
 increased lymph node metastasis in an animal model, but such an adverse effect
 was not seen with isoflavone, suggesting that further mechanistic studies are
 needed for elucidating the role of isoflavone in PCa. It is known that FOXO3a
 and GSK-3β, targets of Akt, regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis.
 Moreover, FOXO3a, GSK-3β, and Src are AR regulators and regulate
 transactivation of AR, mediating the development and progression of PCa.
 Therefore, we investigated the molecular effects of isoflavone on the
 Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR signaling network in hormone-sensitive LNCaP and
 hormone-insensitive C4-2B PCa cells. We found that isoflavone inhibited the
 phosphorylation of Akt and FOXO3a, regulated the phosphorylation of Src, and
 increased the expression of GSK-3β, leading to the down-regulation of AR
 and its target gene PSA . We also found that isoflavone inhibited AR
 nuclear translocation and promoted FOXO3a translocation to the nucleus. By
 electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay,
 we found that isoflavone inhibited FOXO3a binding to the promoter of AR and
 increased FOXO3a binding to the p27 KIP1 promoter, resulting in the
 alteration of AR and p27 KIP1 expression, the inhibition of cell
 proliferation, and the induction of apoptosis in both androgen-sensitive and
 -insensitive PCa cells. These results suggest that isoflavone-induced
 inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis are partly
 mediated through the regulation of the Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR signaling
 network. In conclusion, our data suggest that isoflavone could be useful for
 the prevention and/or treatment of PCa.

RESULTS

Inhibition of FOXO3a Phosphorylation, Up-regulation of GSK-3 β Expression, and Down-regulation of AR Expression and Phosphorylation by
 Isoflavone —We have previously reported that genistein inhibits the
 phosphorylation of Akt in PC-3 PCa cells and the expression of PSA in LNCaP
 PCa cells ( 20 , 21 ). To further investigate
 whether isoflavone could suppress the expression of PSA through the inhibition
 of Akt phosphorylation and the inactivation of AR, we tested the effects of
 isoflavone on Akt, FOXO3a, and AR in IGF-1-stimulated and -unstimulated
 conditions. We observed that phosphorylation of Akt, FOXO3a, and AR was
 up-regulated by IGF-1 in PCa cells, as expected
 ( Fig. 1 A ). However,
 isoflavone inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt, FOXO3a, and AR in the
 cytoplasm and nucleus of C4-2B and LNCaP PCa cells
 ( Fig. 1, B and C ). Moreover, isoflavone abrogated the up-regulation of
 Akt, FOXO3a, and AR phosphorylation induced by IGF-1
 ( Fig. 1 A ).
 Phosphorylation of Akt at both Ser 473 and Thr 308 sites
 was inhibited by isoflavone ( Fig. 1, B and C ). Furthermore, we found that isoflavone
 inhibited the phosphorylation of FOXO3a at both Thr 32 and
 Ser 253 sites and FOXO1 at Thr 24 in LNCaP and C4-2B PCa
 cells ( Fig. 1 D ). We
 have also observed that the level of FOXO3a was increased in nuclear lysate
 after isoflavone treatment ( Fig.
 1 E ), suggesting that the increased ratio of FOXO3a over
 phospho-FOXO3a in both the cytoplasm and nucleus of PCa cells could retain a
 greater amount of active FOXO3a in the nuclear compartment to inhibit cancer
 cell growth. To further confirm the effects of isoflavone on FOXO3a and AR, we
 conducted studies using Akt siRNA. We found that Akt siRNA transfection
 decreased the levels of Akt, phospho-Akt, phospho-FOXO3a, phospho-AR, and PSA
 ( Fig. 1 F ), similar to
 the effects of isoflavone, suggesting that the effect of isoflavone on FOXO3a
 and AR is mediated through the Akt signaling. We also exposed the PCa cells to
 a lower concentration of isoflavone for a short time (1–8 h) and
 observed similar results ( Fig.
 1 E ), suggesting that the down-regulation of
 phospho-FOXO3a by isoflavone observed in our studies was not the consequence
 of cell death. In addition, we also found that testosterone stimulated AR
 expression and phosphorylation, whereas isoflavone decreased AR expression and
 phosphorylation under both testosterone-stimulated and -unstimulated
 conditions ( Fig. 1, A and B ).

Next, we tested the effects of isoflavone on FOXO3a and AR after Akt
 transfection. After transfection with wild-type Akt and constitutively
 activated Akt cDNA, we observed up-regulation of phospho-Akt and
 phospho-FOXO3a proteins in the cytoplasm and nucleus of C4-2B PCa cells
 ( Fig. 2, A and B ). We also observed up-regulated AR phosphorylation in
 nucleus and increased level of PSA in the cytosol after Akt transfection
 ( Fig. 2, A and B ). Importantly, we found that isoflavone could abrogate
 the up-regulation of phospho-Akt, phospho-FOXO3a, phospho-AR, and PSA induced
 by wild-type Akt or constitutively activated Akt cDNA transfection and
 increased the levels of FOXO3a in the nuclear compartment
 ( Fig. 2, A and B ).

By immunoprecipitation, we found that isoflavone inhibited the formation of
 Akt and FOXO3a complex in the cytoplasm and nucleus of PCa cells
 ( Fig. 2, C and D ), consistent with Akt inactivation and subsequent
 decrease in FOXO3a phosphorylation by isoflavone treatment. We also found that
 isoflavone decreased the formation of FOXO3a and AR complex, which could
 inhibit FOXO3a activity, in both the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments
 ( Fig. 2, C and D ), suggesting that higher levels of active FOXO3a
 proteins in the nuclear compartment in isoflavone-treated cells could be
 mechanistically linked with the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of
 isoflavone.

Moreover, we found that isoflavone enhanced the expression of GSK-3β
 beginning from 4–8 h and up to 72 h
 ( Fig. 1, E and G ), consistent with the down-regulation of AR by
 isoflavone. By immunoprecipitation, we discovered that GSK-3β binding to
 β-catenin was increased upon isoflavone treatment
 ( Fig. 2, C and D ). Isoflavone also inhibited the phosphorylation of
 GSK-3β and increased the phosphorylation of β-catenin
 ( Fig. 1, G and H ), suggesting that isoflavone could inactivate Wnt
 signaling to inhibit PCa cell growth. Because AR could also be transactivated
 by activated Src, we next investigated the effects of isoflavone on Src
 signaling to gain further insight as to the molecular mechanism of action of
 isoflavone.

Down-regulation of Src Signaling by Isoflavone —By Western
 blot analysis, we found that isoflavone down-regulated the expression of Src
 ( Fig. 1 I ). Moreover,
 the level of phospho-Src (Tyr 416 ), which is activated form of Src,
 was decreased by isoflavone ( Fig.
 1 I ). However, the level of phospho-Src
 (Tyr 527 ), which triggers Src inactivation, was increased
 ( Fig. 1 I ). These
 findings are consistent with the down-regulation of Akt and AR signaling by
 isoflavone ( Fig. 1 A ).
 Because both AR and FOXO3a are transcription factors that regulate the
 transcription of their target genes in the nuclear compartment, we further
 investigated the nuclear localization of AR and FOXO3a altered by isoflavone
 treatment.

Inhibition of AR Nuclear Translocation and Enhancement of FOXO3a
 Nuclear Localization by Isoflavone —By immunofluorescent staining,
 we found that isoflavone decreased the levels of nuclear AR
 ( Fig. 3 A ); however,
 the nuclear FOXO3a was increased upon isoflavone treatment
 ( Fig. 3 B ). To confirm
 these results, we exposed PCa cells to 25 μ m isoflavone for
 1–8 h. We observed that cytoplasmic AR was increased, whereas nuclear AR
 was gradually decreased ( Fig.
 3 C ), suggesting the inhibition of AR nuclear
 translocation by isoflavone. Moreover, isoflavone treatment for 24–72 h
 significantly reduced the levels of both cytoplasmic and nuclear AR proteins
 ( Fig. 1 B ), consistent
 with the results from immunofluorescent staining. We also tested the
 expression of karyopherin, one of the nuclear importins, and the interaction
 of karyopherin with AR or FOXO3a in isoflavone-treated and -untreated PCa
 cells. We found that isoflavone decreased the level of karyopherin protein in
 LNCaP ( Fig. 3 D ) and
 C4-2B PCa cells ( Fig.
 3 E ). More importantly, we found that isoflavone inhibited
 karyopherin binding to AR ( Fig.
 2 C ), consistent with the data from immunofluorescent
 staining ( Fig. 3 A ) and
 Western blot analysis ( Fig. 3, D and E ), demonstrating the inhibitory effects of
 isoflavone on the nuclear localization of AR. However, we observed increased
 binding of karyopherin to FOXO3a ( Fig. 2, C and D ) and increased level of FOXO3a in
 nuclear lysate ( Fig.
 1 E ) after isoflavone treatment, consistent with the data
 from immunofluorescent staining ( Fig.
 3 B ). Since FOXO3a functions as a transcription factor,
 which is known to regulate the transcription of its target genes, including AR
 and p27 KIP1 , we tested the effects of isoflavone on the
 transcriptional activity of AR and p27 KIP1 regulated by FOXO3a.

Stimulation of FOXO3a-mediated p27 KIP1 Expression by
 Isoflavone —By EMSA, we found that isoflavone increased the activity
 of FOXO3a protein binding to p27 KIP1 promoter DNA in C4-2B
 PCa cells ( Fig. 4 A ). A
 ChIP assay confirmed the EMSA data, showing that isoflavone significantly
 enhanced FOXO3a protein binding to the p27 KIP1 promoter in vivo in PCa cells ( Fig. 4, B and C ). Moreover, we found an increased level
 of p27 KIP1 protein after 24 h of isoflavone treatment in LNCaP and
 C4-2B PCa cells ( Fig.
 4 D ), consistent with the data from EMSA and ChIP assays.
 Furthermore, we found that exposure of PCa cells to isoflavone for a short
 (1–8 h) period enhanced the nuclear translocation of p27 KIP1 ( Fig. 4 E ), suggesting
 that isoflavone inhibits cell proliferation partly through the nuclear
 accumulation of p27 KIP1 .

Inhibition of FOXO3a-mediated AR Transcription by
 Isoflavone —In contrast to the data on p27 KIP1 , using
 EMSA, we found that isoflavone inhibited the activity of FOXO3a protein
 binding to AR promoter DNA in C4-2B PCa cells
 ( Fig. 5 A ), suggesting
 the inhibitory effect of isoflavone on the FOXO3a-induced transcription of AR . The data from the ChIP assay clearly showed that isoflavone
 treatment decreased FOXO3a protein binding to the AR promoter in
 vivo in C4-2B PCa cells ( Fig. 5, B and C ). By Western blot analysis, we found the
 down-regulation of AR expression by isoflavone treatment
 ( Fig. 1, A and B ), consistent with the results from EMSA and ChIP
 assays. Since FOXO3a, GSK-3β, p27 KIP1 , Src, and AR all are
 important factors in Akt and AR signaling that regulate cell survival, we
 tested the effects of isoflavone on cell proliferation and apoptosis.

Inhibition of Cell Proliferation and Induction of Apoptosis by
 Isoflavone through Regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR
 Signaling —Using two different methods of proliferation assays, we
 found that IGF-1, which activates Akt, promoted cell proliferation in LNCaP
 and C4-2B PCa cells ( Fig. 6, A and B ). Importantly, isoflavone inhibited cell proliferation
 and abrogated IGF-1-induced cell proliferation
 ( Fig. 6, A and B ). By Hoechst staining for testing apoptotic cells, we
 observed more bright condensed and granular stained nuclei in
 isoflavone-treated C4-2B and LNCaP PCa cells compared with control
 ( Fig. 7 A ), suggesting
 that isoflavone could induce apoptosis. To quantitatively measure apoptotic
 cell death after different treatment, we conducted a histone/DNA enzyme-linked
 immunosorbent apoptosis assay. We found that IGF-1 protected cancer cells from
 apoptosis ( Fig. 7 B ),
 whereas isoflavone induced apoptosis and abrogated IGF-1-mediated protection
 of LNCaP and C4-2B PCa cells from apoptosis
 ( Fig. 7 B ). To further
 confirm the induction of apoptosis by isoflavone, we conducted caspase-3
 activity and cleavage assays. We found increased activity of caspase-3
 ( Fig. 7 C ) and the
 cleaved and active caspase-3 fragment ( Fig.
 7 D ) in isoflavone-treated cells. Moreover, AR siRNA also
 inhibited the proliferation of prostate cancer cells, whereas
 p27 KIP1 siRNA promoted cell growth
 ( Fig. 6 C ). These
 results are consistent with our observation on the alterations of Akt, FOXO3a,
 and AR caused by IGF-1 or isoflavone treatment
 ( Fig. 1 A ), suggesting
 that the inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis by
 isoflavone is partly mediated by the regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR
 signaling pathways.

DISCUSSION

Akt/FOXO3a signal transduction is an important regulatory event in the Akt
 signaling pathway ( 30 ). The
 key step to control FOXO3a is phosphorylation of FOXO3a by Akt. The ratio of
 FOXO3a over phospho-FOXO3a is one of the factors that determine whether cancer
 cells will survive or undergo apoptotic cell death. From our series of
 studies, we found that isoflavone inhibited the phosphorylation and activation
 of Akt, leading to the lower levels of phospho-FOXO3a
 ( Fig. 8 ). Moreover, isoflavone
 also increased nuclear translocation of FOXO3a, leading to the higher ratio of
 FOXO3a over phospho-FOXO3a in the nuclear compartment of isoflavone-treated
 cells. These results suggest that isoflavone regulates the activity of FOXO3a
 through the regulation of FOXO3a phosphorylation and nuclear importing. It has
 been shown that FOXO3a regulates the transcription of p27 KIP1 and
 AR by binding to their promoters
 ( 13 , 31 ). Interestingly, using EMSA
 and ChIP assay, we found that isoflavone was able to induce FOXO3a binding to p27 KIP1 promoter and suppress FOXO3a binding to the AR promoter, resulting in the increased p27 KIP1 protein
 expression and decreased AR protein level. Up-regulation of p27 KIP1 promoter activity and protein expression by isoflavone-mediated FOXO3a
 regulation could lead to the growth inhibition and apoptotic cell death that
 we have observed in PCa cells, as reported in this paper. It has been reported
 that FOXO3a activates AR expression
 ( 13 ), whereas AR inactivates
 FOXO ( 32 ), forming a
 regulatory loop to maintain a balance between AR and FOXO. The decreased
 levels of AR protein and AR-FOXO3a complex after isoflavone treatment clearly
 suggest that isoflavone could interrupt the above mentioned regulatory loop,
 resulting in the inhibition of AR transactivation
 ( Fig. 8 ). It is important to
 note that the initiation of transcription for a specific gene requires
 chromatin remodeling, promoter recognition, and DNA binding under the
 regulation of co-regulators, including activators and suppressors
 ( 33 ). Isoflavone-altered
 FOXO3a DNA binding could also be caused by the alterations in chromatin
 remodeling and co-regulators, such as GSK-3β, leading to increased FOXO3a
 binding to the p27 KIP1 promoter and decreased binding to
 the AR promoter. In addition, the alteration of p27 KIP1 protein level by isoflavone treatment could also be due to the altered
 activity of proteasome, as reported previously
 ( 34 ). Therefore, further
 investigations are required for establishing the cause and effect relationship
 between these molecules during isoflavone-induced cell death.

GSK-3β is another molecule that controls cell cycle and apoptosis in
 the Akt signaling pathway. GSK-3β also interacts with β-catenin to
 regulate cell proliferation through Wnt signaling. It has been shown that
 activated Akt phosphorylates and inactivates GSK-3β
 ( 35 ). If Akt is inactivated,
 GSK-3β can phosphorylate and inactivate β-catenin, leading to the
 inhibition of cell survival stimulated by Wnt signaling
 ( 15 , 36 ). In this study, we found
 that isoflavone treatment decreased GSK-3β phosphorylation and increased
 GSK-3β expression and β-catenin phosphorylation, suggesting that
 isoflavone could down-regulate Wnt signaling. However, the regulation of Wnt
 signaling is a complex process and thus requires in-depth mechanistic studies
 that are currently being conducted in our laboratory. Importantly, it has been
 reported that GSK-3β can suppress the activity of AR
 ( 16 ), whereas Src can activate
 AR ( 2 ). β-Catenin also can
 form a complex with AR binding to the PSA promoter to initiate PSA
 transcription ( 37 ). In this
 study, we did observe increased expression of GSK-3β and decreased active
 Src, AR, and PSA in isoflavone-treated PCa cells. More importantly, we found
 that isoflavone inhibited Akt-mediated AR phosphorylation and activation.
 These results all suggest that isoflavone could inhibit cell survival through
 the regulation of Akt/GSK-3β/AR signaling
 ( Fig. 8 ). Recent study by other
 investigators also showed that genistein in diet could inhibit Akt activation
 and increase GSK-3β activity in TRAMP PCa model, providing relevant
 evidence of isoflavone effect in vivo ( 38 ), and thus these results
 are consistent with our findings.

Akt, FOXO3a, p27 KIP1 , GSK-3β, and Src all are critical
 molecules in signal transduction, and they interact with each other to
 regulate cell survival and apoptosis
 ( 39 – 41 ).
 Moreover, all of them act as AR co-regulators that influence AR
 transactivation ( 13 , 16 , 42 ). It is obvious that there
 is significant cross-talk between Akt, FOXO3a, p27 KIP1 ,
 GSK-3β, Src, and AR. Therefore, the Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR signaling
 network appears to play critical roles in the control of PCa cell growth and
 apoptosis. In the present study, we found that isoflavone exerts its effects
 on each of these molecules at every step of this signaling pathway. The effect
 of isoflavone could begin from the inhibition of Akt activation and cause
 subsequent series of alterations of signal transduction in this signaling
 network, finally leading to the inhibition of AR transactivation and PSA
 expression in both androgen-sensitive and -insensitive PCa cells
 ( Fig. 8 ). More importantly, it
 has been found that Akt, FOXO3a, and GSK-3β function as critical
 regulators in the development of androgen-independent PCa by regulation of the
 oncogenic function of AR and other genes
 ( 15 , 43 , 44 ). We found that the
 isoflavone mixture in the present formula that we have used could regulate
 these molecules and subsequently cause down-regulation of AR transactivation
 and decreased level of PSA, suggesting that this isoflavone mixture could be
 used for the prevention and/or treatment of PCa, especially HRPC. The
 comparisons of pure genistein, diadzin, or glycitein alone with the isoflavone
 mixture for the regulation of Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR signaling pathways are
 needed to investigate the role of a component in the isoflavone that is
 responsible for negating the adverse effect of pure genistein in PCa, and
 thus, studies are ongoing in our laboratory, which could be important for
 gaining further insight as to the molecular mechanism of action of isoflavone
 for the prevention and/or treatment of PCa in the future.

It is known that growth factor IGF-1 activates Akt and testosterone
 activates AR ( 45 , 46 ), suggesting that IGF-1 and
 testosterone could induce cell growth and inhibit apoptosis. Interestingly, we
 found that isoflavone abrogated the IGF-1- and testosterone-induced Akt and AR
 activation and cell proliferation and caused more apoptotic cell death.
 Isoflavone also affected Akt downstream genes, including FOXO3a, GSK-3β,
 and p27 KIP1 , due to the inactivation of Akt, resulting in the
 down-regulation of AR. These results suggest that isoflavone-induced
 inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptotic cell death are in
 part due to the regulation of the Akt/FOXO3a/GSK-3β/AR signaling network.
 Our molecular mechanistic data also suggest that isoflavone could be a potent
 nontoxic agent for the prevention and/or treatment of hormone-dependent PCa
 but most importantly for HRPC.
