---
pmid: '29053958'
title: Structure of the Dnmt1 Reader Module Complexed with a Unique Two-Mono-Ubiquitin
  Mark on Histone H3 Reveals the Basis for DNA Methylation Maintenance.
authors:
- Ishiyama S
- Nishiyama A
- Saeki Y
- Moritsugu K
- Morimoto D
- Yamaguchi L
- Arai N
- Matsumura R
- Kawakami T
- Mishima Y
- Hojo H
- Shimamura S
- Ishikawa F
- Tajima S
- Tanaka K
- Ariyoshi M
- Shirakawa M
- Ikeguchi M
- Kidera A
- Suetake I
- Arita K
- Nakanishi M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037
---

# Structure of the Dnmt1 Reader Module Complexed with a Unique Two-Mono-Ubiquitin Mark on Histone H3 Reveals the Basis for DNA Methylation Maintenance.
**Authors:** Ishiyama S, Nishiyama A, Saeki Y, Moritsugu K, Morimoto D, Yamaguchi L, Arai N, Matsumura R, Kawakami T, Mishima Y, Hojo H, Shimamura S, Ishikawa F, Tajima S, Tanaka K, Ariyoshi M, Shirakawa M, Ikeguchi M, Kidera A, Suetake I, Arita K, Nakanishi M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2017 Oct 19;68(2):350-360.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037.

Structure of the Dnmt1 Reader Module Complexed with a Unique Two-Mono-Ubiquitin 
Mark on Histone H3 Reveals the Basis for DNA Methylation Maintenance.

Ishiyama S(1), Nishiyama A(2), Saeki Y(3), Moritsugu K(4), Morimoto D(5), 
Yamaguchi L(6), Arai N(3), Matsumura R(1), Kawakami T(7), Mishima Y(8), Hojo 
H(7), Shimamura S(9), Ishikawa F(10), Tajima S(8), Tanaka K(3), Ariyoshi M(5), 
Shirakawa M(5), Ikeguchi M(4), Kidera A(4), Suetake I(11), Arita K(12), 
Nakanishi M(13).

Author information:
(1)Structure Biology Laboratory, Graduate School of Medical Life Science, 
Yokohama City University, 1-7-29, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 
230-0045, Japan.
(2)Division of Cancer Cell Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; 
Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City 
University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Protein Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.
(4)Computational Life Science Laboratory, Graduate School of Medical Life 
Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto-Daigaku Katsura, Nishikyo-Ku, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City 
University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Protein Organic Chemistry, Institute for Protein Research, 
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, 
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(9)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki 
852-8501, Japan.
(10)Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(11)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, 
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; CREST, JST, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 
332-0012, Japan. Electronic address: suetake@protein.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(12)Structure Biology Laboratory, Graduate School of Medical Life Science, 
Yokohama City University, 1-7-29, Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 
230-0045, Japan; PRESTO, JST, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. 
Electronic address: aritak@tsurumi.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(13)Division of Cancer Cell Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; 
Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City 
University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan. 
Electronic address: mkt-naka@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2017 Oct 19;68(2):261-262. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.10.007.

The proper location and timing of Dnmt1 activation are essential for DNA 
methylation maintenance. We demonstrate here that Dnmt1 utilizes 
two-mono-ubiquitylated histone H3 as a unique ubiquitin mark for its recruitment 
to and activation at DNA methylation sites. The crystal structure of the 
replication foci targeting sequence (RFTS) of Dnmt1 in complex with 
H3-K18Ub/23Ub reveals striking differences to the known ubiquitin-recognition 
structures. The two ubiquitins are simultaneously bound to the RFTS with a 
combination of canonical hydrophobic and atypical hydrophilic interactions. The 
C-lobe of RFTS, together with the K23Ub surface, also recognizes the N-terminal 
tail of H3. The binding of H3-K18Ub/23Ub results in spatial rearrangement of two 
lobes in the RFTS, suggesting the opening of its active site. Actually, 
incubation of Dnmt1 with H3-K18Ub/23Ub increases its catalytic activity 
in vitro. Our results therefore shed light on the essential role of a unique 
ubiquitin-binding module in DNA methylation maintenance.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037
PMID: 29053958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
