---
pmid: '21249130'
title: Gadd45a is an RNA binding protein and is localized in nuclear speckles.
authors:
- Sytnikova YA
- Kubarenko AV
- Schäfer A
- Weber AN
- Niehrs C
journal: PLoS One
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3017548
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014500
---

# Gadd45a is an RNA binding protein and is localized in nuclear speckles.
**Authors:** Sytnikova YA, Kubarenko AV, Schäfer A, Weber AN, Niehrs C
**Journal:** PLoS One (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0014500](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0014500)
**PMC:** [PMC3017548](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3017548/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 7;6(1):e14500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014500.

Gadd45a is an RNA binding protein and is localized in nuclear speckles.

Sytnikova YA(1), Kubarenko AV, Schäfer A, Weber AN, Niehrs C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Embryology, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Krebsforschungszentrum, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The Gadd45 proteins play important roles in growth control, 
maintenance of genomic stability, DNA repair, and apoptosis. Recently, Gadd45 
proteins have also been implicated in epigenetic gene regulation by promoting 
active DNA demethylation. Gadd45 proteins have sequence homology with the 
L7Ae/L30e/S12e RNA binding superfamily of ribosomal proteins, which raises the 
question if they may interact directly with nucleic acids.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that Gadd45a binds RNA but not single- or 
double stranded DNA or methylated DNA in vitro. Sucrose density gradient 
centrifugation experiments demonstrate that Gadd45a is present in high molecular 
weight particles, which are RNase sensitive. Gadd45a displays RNase-sensitive 
colocalization in nuclear speckles with the RNA helicase p68 and the RNA binding 
protein SC35. A K45A point mutation defective in RNA binding was still active in 
DNA demethylation. This suggests that RNA binding is not absolutely essential 
for demethylation of an artificial substrate. A point mutation at G39 impared 
RNA binding, nuclear speckle localization and DNA demethylation, emphasizing its 
relevance for Gadd45a function.
SIGNIFICANCE: The results implicate RNA in Gadd45a function and suggest that 
Gadd45a is associated with a ribonucleoprotein particle.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014500
PMCID: PMC3017548
PMID: 21249130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
