---
pmid: '10898110'
title: Biochemical and pharmacogenetic dissection of human steroid 5 alpha-reductase
  type II.
authors:
- Makridakis NM
- di Salle E
- Reichardt JK
journal: Pharmacogenetics
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1097/00008571-200007000-00004
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical and pharmacogenetic dissection of human steroid 5 alpha-reductase type II.
**Authors:** Makridakis NM, di Salle E, Reichardt JK
**Journal:** Pharmacogenetics (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00008571-200007000-00004](https://doi.org/10.1097/00008571-200007000-00004)

## Abstract

1. Pharmacogenetics. 2000 Jul;10(5):407-13. doi:
10.1097/00008571-200007000-00004.

Biochemical and pharmacogenetic dissection of human steroid 5 alpha-reductase 
type II.

Makridakis NM(1), di Salle E, Reichardt JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute for Genetic 
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles 90089-9075, USA.

Human prostatic steroid 5alpha-reductase, encoded by the SRD5A2 gene on 
chromosome band 2p23, catalyses the irreversible conversion of testosterone to 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the most active androgen in the prostate, with NADPH 
as its cofactor. This enzyme has never been purified but a number of competitive 
inhibitors have been developed for this enzyme since increased steroid 
5alpha-reductase activity may cause benign prostatic hypertrophy and prostate 
cancer. We report here the detailed biochemical and pharmacogenetic dissection 
of the human enzyme by analysing 10 missense substitutions and three double 
mutants which are all naturally found in humans. Nine of these 13 mutants reduce 
activity (measured as Vmax) by 20% or more, three increase steroid 
5alpha-reductase by more than 15% and one results in essentially unaltered 
kinetic properties suggesting that it is a truly neutral ('polymorphic') amino 
acid substitution. Substantial pharmacogenetic variation among the mutants was 
also observed when three competitive inhibitors, finasteride, GG745 
(dutasteride) and PNU157706, were investigated. Our studies not only define the 
substrate and cofactor binding sites of human steroid 5alpha-reductase, but also 
have significant consequences for the pharmacological usage of steroid 
5alpha-reductase inhibitors in human patients treated for prostatic conditions.

DOI: 10.1097/00008571-200007000-00004
PMID: 10898110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
