---
pmid: '25009184'
title: Tumor suppressor p53 cooperates with SIRT6 to regulate gluconeogenesis by promoting
  FoxO1 nuclear exclusion.
authors:
- Zhang P
- Tu B
- Wang H
- Cao Z
- Tang M
- Zhang C
- Gu B
- Li Z
- Wang L
- Yang Y
- Zhao Y
- Wang H
- Luo J
- Deng CX
- Gao B
- Roeder RG
- Zhu WG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4115576
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1411026111
---

# Tumor suppressor p53 cooperates with SIRT6 to regulate gluconeogenesis by promoting FoxO1 nuclear exclusion.
**Authors:** Zhang P, Tu B, Wang H, Cao Z, Tang M, Zhang C, Gu B, Li Z, Wang L, Yang Y, Zhao Y, Wang H, Luo J, Deng CX, Gao B, Roeder RG, Zhu WG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1411026111](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1411026111)
**PMC:** [PMC4115576](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4115576/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 22;111(29):10684-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1411026111. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Tumor suppressor p53 cooperates with SIRT6 to regulate gluconeogenesis by 
promoting FoxO1 nuclear exclusion.

Zhang P(1), Tu B(1), Wang H(2), Cao Z(1), Tang M(1), Zhang C(1), Gu B(1), Li 
Z(1), Wang L(1), Yang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang H(1), Luo J(1), Deng CX(3), Gao 
B(2), Roeder RG(4), Zhu WG(5).

Author information:
(1)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China;
(2)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892;
(3)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892;
(4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065; and zhuweiguo@bjmu.edu.cn roeder@rockefeller.edu.
(5)Key laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of 
Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University 
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China;Center for Life Sciences, 
Peking-Tsinghua University, Beijing 100871, China zhuweiguo@bjmu.edu.cn 
roeder@rockefeller.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 21;111(42):E4395. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1416664111.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 21;111(42):E4394. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1415680111.

In mammalian cells, tumor suppressor p53 plays critical roles in the regulation 
of glucose metabolism, including glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, but 
whether and how p53 also regulates gluconeogenesis is less clear. Here, we 
report that p53 efficiently down-regulates the expression of phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase (PCK1) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC), which encode 
rate-limiting enzymes in gluconeogenesis. Cell-based assays demonstrate the 
p53-dependent nuclear exclusion of forkhead box protein O1 (FoxO1), a key 
transcription factor that mediates activation of PCK1 and G6PC, with consequent 
alleviation of FoxO1-dependent gluconeogenesis. Further mechanistic studies show 
that p53 directly activates expression of the NAD(+)-dependent histone 
deacetylase sirtuin 6 (SIRT6), whose interaction with FoxO1 leads to FoxO1 
deacetylation and export to the cytoplasm. In support of these observations, 
p53-mediated FoxO1 nuclear exclusion, down-regulation of PCK1 and G6PC 
expression, and regulation of glucose levels were confirmed in C57BL/J6 mice and 
in liver-specific Sirt6 conditional knockout mice. Our results provide insights 
into mechanisms of metabolism-related p53 functions that may be relevant to 
tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1411026111
PMCID: PMC4115576
PMID: 25009184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
