---
pmid: '10684600'
title: Mutagenesis of E477 or K505 in the B' domain of human topoisomerase II beta
  increases the requirement for magnesium ions during strand passage.
authors:
- West KL
- Meczes EL
- Thorn R
- Turnbull RM
- Marshall R
- Austin CA
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi991328b
---

# Mutagenesis of E477 or K505 in the B' domain of human topoisomerase II beta increases the requirement for magnesium ions during strand passage.
**Authors:** West KL, Meczes EL, Thorn R, Turnbull RM, Marshall R, Austin CA
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi991328b](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi991328b)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2000 Feb 15;39(6):1223-33. doi: 10.1021/bi991328b.

Mutagenesis of E477 or K505 in the B' domain of human topoisomerase II beta 
increases the requirement for magnesium ions during strand passage.

West KL(1), Meczes EL, Thorn R, Turnbull RM, Marshall R, Austin CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, The Medical School, The University 
of Newcastle Upon Tyne, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

A type II topoisomerase is essential for decatenating DNA replication products, 
and it accomplishes this task by passing one DNA duplex through a transient 
break in a second duplex. The B' domain of topoisomerase II contains three 
highly conserved motifs, EGDSA, PL(R/K)GK(I/L/M)LNVR, and IMTD(Q/A)DXD. We have 
investigated these motifs in topoisomerase II beta by mutagenesis, and report 
that they play a critical role in establishing the DNA cleavage-religation 
equilibrium. In addition, the mutations E477Q (EGDSA) and K505E (PLRGKILNVR) 
increase the optimal magnesium ion concentration for strand passage, without 
affecting the Mg(2+) dependence of ATP hydrolysis. It is likely that the binding 
affinity of the magnesium ion(s) specifically required for DNA cleavage has been 
reduced by these mutations. The crystal structure of yeast topo II indicates 
that residues E477 and K505 may help to position the three aspartate residues of 
the IMTD(Q/A)DXD motif for magnesium ion coordination, and we propose two 
possible locations for the magnesium ion binding site(s). These observations are 
consistent with a previous model in which the B' domain is positioned such that 
these acidic residues lie next to the active site tyrosine residue. A magnesium 
ion bound by these aspartate residues could therefore mediate the DNA 
cleavage-religation reaction.

DOI: 10.1021/bi991328b
PMID: 10684600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
