---
pmid: '26948053'
title: NECAB3 Promotes Activation of Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 during Normoxia and
  Enhances Tumourigenicity of Cancer Cells.
authors:
- Nakaoka HJ
- Hara T
- Yoshino S
- Kanamori A
- Matsui Y
- Shimamura T
- Sato H
- Murakami Y
- Seiki M
- Sakamoto T
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4780031
doi: 10.1038/srep22784
---

# NECAB3 Promotes Activation of Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 during Normoxia and Enhances Tumourigenicity of Cancer Cells.
**Authors:** Nakaoka HJ, Hara T, Yoshino S, Kanamori A, Matsui Y, Shimamura T, Sato H, Murakami Y, Seiki M, Sakamoto T
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep22784](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep22784)
**PMC:** [PMC4780031](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4780031/)

## Abstract

1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 7;6:22784. doi: 10.1038/srep22784.

NECAB3 Promotes Activation of Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 during Normoxia and 
Enhances Tumourigenicity of Cancer Cells.

Nakaoka HJ(1)(2), Hara T(1), Yoshino S(1)(2), Kanamori A(2), Matsui Y(3), 
Shimamura T(3), Sato H(4), Murakami Y(2), Seiki M(1)(5), Sakamoto T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cancer Cell Research, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University, Tsurumai-chou, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Division of Molecular Virology and Oncology, Cancer Research Institute, 
Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Medical, Pharmaceutical and Health 
Sciences, Kanazawa University, Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.

Unlike most cells, cancer cells activate hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) to 
use glycolysis even at normal oxygen levels, or normoxia. Therefore, HIF-1 is an 
attractive target in cancer therapy. However, the regulation of HIF-1 during 
normoxia is not well characterised, although Mint3 was recently found to 
activate HIF-1 in cancer cells and macrophages by suppressing the HIF-1 
inhibitor, factor inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH-1). In this study, we analysed 
Mint3-binding proteins to investigate the mechanism by which Mint3 regulates 
HIF-1. Yeast two-hybrid screening using Mint3 as bait identified N-terminal 
EF-hand calcium binding protein 3 (NECAB3) as a novel factor regulating HIF-1 
activity via Mint3. NECAB3 bound to the phosphotyrosine-binding domain of Mint3, 
formed a ternary complex with Mint3 and FIH-1, and co-localised with Mint3 at 
the Golgi apparatus. Depletion of NECAB3 decreased the expression of HIF-1 
target genes and reduced glycolysis in normoxic cancer cells. NECAB3 mutants 
that binds Mint3 but lacks an intact monooxygenase domain also inhibited HIF-1 
activation. Inhibition of NECAB3 in cancer cells by either expressing shRNAs or 
generating a dominant negative mutant reduced tumourigenicity. Taken together, 
the data indicate that NECAB3 is a promising new target for cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/srep22784
PMCID: PMC4780031
PMID: 26948053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
