---
pmid: '20395957'
title: New Cdc2 Tyr 4 phosphorylation by dsRNA-activated protein kinase triggers Cdc2
  polyubiquitination and G2 arrest under genotoxic stresses.
authors:
- Yoon CH
- Miah MA
- Kim KP
- Bae YS
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2868534
doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.45
---

# New Cdc2 Tyr 4 phosphorylation by dsRNA-activated protein kinase triggers Cdc2 polyubiquitination and G2 arrest under genotoxic stresses.
**Authors:** Yoon CH, Miah MA, Kim KP, Bae YS
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2010.45](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2010.45)
**PMC:** [PMC2868534](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2868534/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2010 May;11(5):393-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.45. Epub 2010 Apr 16.

New Cdc2 Tyr 4 phosphorylation by dsRNA-activated protein kinase triggers Cdc2 
polyubiquitination and G2 arrest under genotoxic stresses.

Yoon CH(1), Miah MA, Kim KP, Bae YS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, 
Gyeonggi-Do, South Korea.

Cell division cycle 2 (Cdc2) protein is an essential subunit of M-phase kinase 
(MPK), which has a key role in G2/M transition. Even though the control of MPK 
activity has been well established with regard to the phosphorylation of Cdc2 at 
Thr 14 and/or Tyr 15 and Thr 161, little is known about the proteolytic control 
of Cdc2. In this study, we observed that Cdc2 was downregulated under genotoxic 
stresses and that double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR) was 
involved in the process. The PKR-mediated Tyr4 phosphorylation triggered Cdc2 
ubiquitination. Phospho-mimic mutations at the Tyr 4 residue (Y4D or Y4E) caused 
significant ubiquitination of Cdc2 even in the absence of PKR. Our findings 
demonstrate that (i) PKR, Ser/Thr kinase, phosphorylates its new substrate Cdc2 
at the Tyr 4 residue, (ii) PKR-mediated Tyr 4-phosphorylation facilitates Cdc2 
ubiquitination and proteosomal degradation, (iii) unphosphorylated Tyr 4 
prevents Cdc2 ubiquitination, and (iv) downstream from p53, PKR has a crucial 
role in G2 arrest and triggers Cdc2 downregulation under genotoxic conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2010.45
PMCID: PMC2868534
PMID: 20395957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
