---
pmid: '11598133'
title: Nedd4 regulates ubiquitination and stability of the guanine-nucleotide exchange
  factor CNrasGEF.
authors:
- Pham N
- Rotin D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108373200
---

# Nedd4 regulates ubiquitination and stability of the guanine-nucleotide exchange factor CNrasGEF.
**Authors:** Pham N, Rotin D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M108373200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M108373200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 14;276(50):46995-7003. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M108373200. Epub
 2001 Oct 11.

Nedd4 regulates ubiquitination and stability of the guanine-nucleotide exchange 
factor CNrasGEF.

Pham N(1), Rotin D.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Cyclic nucleotide ras GEF (CNrasGEF) is a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor 
previously isolated in a screen for Nedd4-WW domain interacting proteins (Pham, 
N., Cheglakov, I., Koch, C. A., de Hoog, C. L., Moran, M. F., and Rotin, D. 
(2000) Curr. Biol. 10, 555-558). It activates Ras in a cAMP-dependent manner and 
Rap-1 independent of cAMP. Here we show that CNrasGEF is a likely substrate of 
the ubiquitin protein ligase Nedd4. CNrasGEF possesses two PY motifs at its C 
terminus that are responsible for binding to Nedd4 in vitro. Moreover, Nedd4 and 
CNrasGEF co-immunoprecipitate from 293T cells expressing ectopic CNrasGEF and 
endogenous Nedd4, and this co-immunoprecipitation is abrogated in PY 
motif-mutated CNrasGEF (CNrasGEFDelta2PY). CNrasGEF is ubiquitinated in cells, 
and this ubiquitination is augmented upon overexpression of wt-Nedd4 but is 
inhibited in cells overexpressing a catalytically inactive Nedd4 (Nedd4(CS)) or 
in cells expressing CNrasGEFDelta2PY, which cannot bind Nedd4. Moreover, 
pulse-chase experiments have demonstrated that the half-life of CNrasGEF is 
reduced 5-fold (from approximately 10 to approximately 2 h) in cells 
co-expressing Nedd4 with CNrasGEF but not with CNrasGEFDelta2PY (t(0.5) 
approximately 14 h). CNrasGEF is also stabilized in cells co-expressing 
Nedd4(CS) or following treatment with lactacystin, indicating proteasomal 
degradation of this protein. Deletion/mutation of the CDC25 domain to abrogate 
Ras (or Rap-1) binding leads to impaired ubiquitination of CNrasGEF, suggesting 
that such binding is critical for ubiquitination. Treatment of cells with the 
cAMP analogue 8-bromo-cAMP does not affect the ability of CNrasGEF to bind Nedd4 
nor its level of ubiquitination, suggesting that Ras binding per se and not its 
activation is the critical step in triggering ubiquitination of CNrasGEF. These 
results suggest that CNrasGEF is a substrate for Nedd4, which regulates its 
ubiquitination and stability in cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M108373200
PMID: 11598133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
