---
pmid: '21899677'
title: Cdc42 regulates multiple membrane traffic events in fission yeast.
authors:
- Estravís M
- Rincón SA
- Santos B
- Pérez P
journal: Traffic
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01275.x
---

# Cdc42 regulates multiple membrane traffic events in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Estravís M, Rincón SA, Santos B, Pérez P
**Journal:** Traffic (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01275.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01275.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2011 Dec;12(12):1744-58. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01275.x. Epub 
2011 Sep 30.

Cdc42 regulates multiple membrane traffic events in fission yeast.

Estravís M(1), Rincón SA, Santos B, Pérez P.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología funcional y Genómica, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas CSIC/Departamento de Microbiología y Genética, 
Universidad de Salamanca, 30007 Salamanca, Spain.

Fission yeast Cdc42 regulates polarized growth and is involved in For3 formin 
activation and actin cable assembly. We show here that a thermosensitive strain 
carrying the cdc42L160S allele has membrane traffic defects independent of the 
actin cable defects. This strain has decreased acid phosphatase (AP) secretion, 
intracellular accumulation of vesicles and fragmentation of vacuoles. In 
addition, the exocyst is not localized to the tips of these cells. 
Overproduction of the scaffold protein Pob1 suppressed cdc42L160S 
thermosensitive growth and restored exocyst localization and AP secretion. The 
GTPase Rho3 also suppressed cdc42L160S thermosensitivity, restored exocyst 
localization and AP secretion. However, Rho3 did not restore the actin cables in 
these cells as Pob1 does. Similarly, overexpression of psy1(+) , coding a 
syntaxin (t-SNARE) homolog, or of ypt2(+) , coding an SEC4 homolog in fission 
yeast, rescued growth at high temperature but did not restore actin cables, nor 
the exocyst-polarized localization. cdc42L160S cells also have defects in 
vacuole formation that were rescued by Pob1, Rho3 and Psy1. All together, we 
propose that Cdc42 and the scaffold Pob1 are required for membrane trafficking 
and fusion, contributing to polarized secretion, endosome recycling, vacuole 
formation and growth.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2011.01275.x
PMID: 21899677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
