---
pmid: '9305902'
title: Complete rescue of lethal albino c14CoS mice by null mutation of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
  dioxygenase and induction of apoptosis of hepatocytes in these mice by in vivo retrieval
  of the tyrosine catabolic pathway.
authors:
- Endo F
- Kubo S
- Awata H
- Kiwaki K
- Katoh H
- Kanegae Y
- Saito I
- Miyazaki J
- Yamamoto T
- Jakobs C
- Hattori S
- Matsuda I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24426
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Complete rescue of lethal albino c14CoS mice by null mutation of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase and induction of apoptosis of hepatocytes in these mice by in vivo retrieval of the tyrosine catabolic pathway.
**Authors:** Endo F, Kubo S, Awata H, Kiwaki K, Katoh H, Kanegae Y, Saito I, Miyazaki J, Yamamoto T, Jakobs C, Hattori S, Matsuda I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.39.24426](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.39.24426)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Sep 26;272(39):24426-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24426.

Complete rescue of lethal albino c14CoS mice by null mutation of 
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase and induction of apoptosis of hepatocytes in 
these mice by in vivo retrieval of the tyrosine catabolic pathway.

Endo F(1), Kubo S, Awata H, Kiwaki K, Katoh H, Kanegae Y, Saito I, Miyazaki J, 
Yamamoto T, Jakobs C, Hattori S, Matsuda I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Honjo 
1-1-1, Kumamoto 860, Japan. endo@kaiju.medic.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Hereditary tyrosinemia 1 (HT1) is characterized by progressive liver damage, 
from infancy, and by a high risk for hepatocellular carcinoma. HT1 is due to 
mutations in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene Fah, encoding the last 
enzyme in the tyrosine catabolic pathway. Lethal albino deletion c14CoS mice and 
mice with target-disrupted Fah are models for HT1, but they die in the perinatal 
period, albeit with a different phenotype from that seen in HT1 in humans. We 
first asked whether homozygous null mutation of the 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate 
dioxygenase gene Hpd could rescue the homozygous c14CoS mice (c14CoS/c14CoS or 
Fah-/-). The double mutant Fah-/- Hpd-/- mice appeared normal, at least until 
age 18 months, and there was no evidence of liver disease, findings that 
facilitated examination of the effect of Fah-/- on mature and unmodified 
hepatocytes in vivo. The hepatocytes of Fah-/- undergo rapid apoptosis, and 
acute death follows. Essentially the same phenomena were observed when Fah-/- 
Hpd-/- mice were administered homogentisate intraperitoneally. These changes in 
liver pathology in Fah-/- Hpd-/- mice after the administration of homogentisate 
were associated with massive urinary excretion of succinylacetone. These results 
suggest that accumulation of fumarylacetoacetate, maleylacetoacetate, or 
succinylacetone seems to trigger the endogenous process of apoptosis in 
hepatocytes that lack fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase activity. This apoptosis may 
be related to the development of hepatocellular carcinomas seen in HT1 patients 
and pharmaceutically treated fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase-deficient mice.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.39.24426
PMID: 9305902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
