---
pmid: '9034336'
title: Fission yeast pheromone blocks S-phase by inhibiting the G1 cyclin B-p34cdc2
  kinase.
authors:
- Stern B
- Nurse P
journal: EMBO J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1169657
doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.3.534
---

# Fission yeast pheromone blocks S-phase by inhibiting the G1 cyclin B-p34cdc2 kinase.
**Authors:** Stern B, Nurse P
**Journal:** EMBO J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/16.3.534](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.3.534)
**PMC:** [PMC1169657](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1169657/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1997 Feb 3;16(3):534-44. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.3.534.

Fission yeast pheromone blocks S-phase by inhibiting the G1 cyclin B-p34cdc2 
kinase.

Stern B(1), Nurse P.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Yeast pheromones block cell cycle progression in G1 in order to prepare mating 
partners for conjugation. We have investigated the mechanism underlying 
pheromone-induced G1 arrest in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. We 
find that the G1-specific transcription factor p65cdc10-p72res1/sct1 which 
controls the expression of S-phase genes is fully activated in pheromone, unlike 
the analogous control in budding yeast. In contrast, the G1 function of p34cdc2 
acting after activation of the G1-specific transcription is blocked. Pheromone 
inhibits the p34cdc2 kinase associated with both the G1-specific B-type cyclin 
p45cig2 and the B-type cyclin p56cdc13 and overexpression of p45cig2 or 
p47cdc13delta90 overcomes the pheromone-induced G1 arrest. G1 arrest is 
compromised in enlarged cells. We suggest that onset of S-phase is controlled by 
pheromone inhibiting the B-cyclin-associated kinase in G1, and that increasing 
cell size contributes to the mechanism for pheromone adaptation. Thus, pheromone 
in fission and budding yeast acts similarly in inhibiting the G1 
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), but differs in its effects on the G1/S 
transcriptional control, suggesting that inhibition of CDKs may be a more 
general mechanism for the control of G1 progression compared with G1/S 
transcriptional control.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/16.3.534
PMCID: PMC1169657
PMID: 9034336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Yeast pheromones block cell cycle progression in G1 in order to prepare mating partners for conjugation. We have investigated the mechanism underlying pheromone-induced G1 arrest in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. We find that the G1-specific transcription factor p65cdc10-p72res1/sct1 which controls the expression of S-phase genes is fully activated in pheromone, unlike the analogous control in budding yeast. In contrast, the G1 function of p34cdc2 acting after activation of the G1-specific transcription is blocked. Pheromone inhibits the p34cdc2 kinase associated with both the G1-specific B-type cyclin p45cig2 and the B-type cyclin p56cdc13 and overexpression of p45cig2 or p47cdc13delta90 overcomes the pheromone-induced G1 arrest. G1 arrest is compromised in enlarged cells. We suggest that onset of S-phase is controlled by pheromone inhibiting the B-cyclin-associated kinase in G1, and that increasing cell size contributes to the mechanism for pheromone adaptation. Thus, pheromone in fission and budding yeast acts similarly in inhibiting the G1 cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), but differs in its effects on the G1/S transcriptional control, suggesting that inhibition of CDKs may be a more general mechanism for the control of G1 progression compared with G1/S transcriptional control.
