---
pmid: '12011437'
title: Identification of four candidate cGMP targets in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Goldberg JM
- Bosgraaf L
- Van Haastert PJ
- Smith JL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC124474
doi: 10.1073/pnas.102167299
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of four candidate cGMP targets in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Goldberg JM, Bosgraaf L, Van Haastert PJ, Smith JL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.102167299](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.102167299)
**PMC:** [PMC124474](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC124474/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 14;99(10):6749-54. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.102167299.

Identification of four candidate cGMP targets in Dictyostelium.

Goldberg JM(1), Bosgraaf L, Van Haastert PJ, Smith JL.

Author information:
(1)Boston Biomedical Research Institute, 64 Grove Street, Watertown, MA 
02472-2829, USA.

In Dictyostelium, a transient increase in intracellular cGMP is important for 
cytoskeletal rearrangements during chemotaxis. There must be cGMP-binding 
proteins in Dictyostelium that regulate key cytoskeletal components after 
treatment with chemoattractants, but to date, no such proteins have been 
identified. Using a bioinformatics approach, we have found four candidate 
cGMP-binding proteins (GbpA-D). GbpA and -B have two tandem cGMP-binding sites 
downstream of a metallo beta-lactamase domain, a superfamily that includes cAMP 
phosphodiesterases. GbpC contains the following nine domains (in order): 
leucine-rich repeats, Ras, MEK kinase, Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor 
N-terminal (RasGEF-N), DEP, RasGEF, cGMP-binding, GRAM, and a second 
cGMP-binding domain. GbpD is related to GbpC, but is much shorter; it begins 
with the RasGEF-N domain, and lacks the DEP domain. Disruption of the gbpC gene 
results in loss of all high-affinity cGMP-binding activity present in the 
soluble cellular fraction. GbpC mRNA levels increase dramatically 8 h after 
starvation is initiated. GbpA, -B, and -D mRNA levels show less dramatic 
changes, with gbpA mRNA levels highest 4 h into starvation, gbpB mRNA levels 
highest in vegetative cells, and gbpD levels highest at 8 h. The identification 
of these genes is the first step in a molecular approach to studying downstream 
effects of cGMP signaling in Dictyostelium.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.102167299
PMCID: PMC124474
PMID: 12011437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Dictyostelium , a transient
increase in intracellular cGMP is important for cytoskeletal
rearrangements during chemotaxis. There must be cGMP-binding
proteins in Dictyostelium that regulate
key cytoskeletal components after treatment with chemoattractants, but
to date, no such proteins have been identified. Using a bioinformatics
approach, we have found four candidate cGMP-binding proteins (GbpA–D).
GbpA and -B have two tandem cGMP-binding sites downstream of a
metallo β-lactamase domain, a superfamily that includes cAMP
phosphodiesterases. GbpC contains the following nine domains (in
order): leucine-rich repeats, Ras, MEK kinase, Ras guanine nucleotide
exchange factor N-terminal (RasGEF-N), DEP, RasGEF, cGMP-binding, GRAM,
and a second cGMP-binding domain. GbpD is related to GbpC, but is much
shorter; it begins with the RasGEF-N domain, and lacks the DEP domain.
Disruption of the gbp C gene results in loss of all
high-affinity cGMP-binding activity present in the soluble cellular
fraction. Gbp C mRNA levels increase dramatically 8
h after starvation is initiated. Gbp A, -B, and -D mRNA
levels show less dramatic changes, with gbp A mRNA levels
highest 4 h into starvation, gbp B mRNA levels
highest in vegetative cells, and gbp D levels highest at
8 h. The identification of these genes is the first step in a
molecular approach to studying downstream effects of cGMP signaling in Dictyostelium .
