---
pmid: '1847001'
title: 'Chrysotile asbestos and health in Zimbabwe: I. Analysis of miners and millers
  compensated for asbestos-related diseases since independence (1980).'
authors:
- Cullen MR
- Baloyi RS
journal: Am J Ind Med
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ajim.4700190204
---

# Chrysotile asbestos and health in Zimbabwe: I. Analysis of miners and millers compensated for asbestos-related diseases since independence (1980).
**Authors:** Cullen MR, Baloyi RS
**Journal:** Am J Ind Med (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajim.4700190204](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.4700190204)

## Abstract

1. Am J Ind Med. 1991;19(2):161-9. doi: 10.1002/ajim.4700190204.

Chrysotile asbestos and health in Zimbabwe: I. Analysis of miners and millers 
compensated for asbestos-related diseases since independence (1980).

Cullen MR(1), Baloyi RS.

Author information:
(1)Yale New Haven Occupational Medicine Program, Yale University School of 
Medicine, CT 06511.

Data on the health effects caused by locally mined chrysotile asbestos in 
Zimbabwe have been very limited. The prevailing local view has been that risk is 
minimal. In this report we critically reassess the cases of 51 individuals with 
asbestos exposure who have been compensated by the Central Pneumoconiosis Bureau 
since independence in 1980. Results demonstrate that the major health risks of 
exposure reported elsewhere--morbid asbestosis, nonmalignant pleural disease, 
malignant mesothelioma, and lung cancer--all occur in Zimbabwe, at least among 
workers in the asbestos mines and mills. It is concluded that further 
investigation and control measures in the industry are warranted.

DOI: 10.1002/ajim.4700190204
PMID: 1847001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
