---
pmid: '24819975'
title: Small ubiquitin-related modifier-1 modification regulates all-trans-retinoic
  acid-induced differentiation via stabilization of retinoic acid receptor α.
authors:
- Zhou Q
- Zhang L
- Chen Z
- Zhao P
- Ma Y
- Yang B
- He Q
- Ying M
journal: FEBS J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/febs.12840
---

# Small ubiquitin-related modifier-1 modification regulates all-trans-retinoic acid-induced differentiation via stabilization of retinoic acid receptor α.
**Authors:** Zhou Q, Zhang L, Chen Z, Zhao P, Ma Y, Yang B, He Q, Ying M
**Journal:** FEBS J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.12840](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.12840)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2014 Jul;281(13):3032-47. doi: 10.1111/febs.12840. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Small ubiquitin-related modifier-1 modification regulates all-trans-retinoic 
acid-induced differentiation via stabilization of retinoic acid receptor α.

Zhou Q(1), Zhang L, Chen Z, Zhao P, Ma Y, Yang B, He Q, Ying M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of 
Anti-Cancer Drug Research, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China.

Small ubiquitin-related modifier-1 (SUMO-1) modification has been implicated in 
many important cellular processes, including cell cycle progression, apoptosis, 
cellular proliferation, and development, but its role in all-trans-retinoic acid 
(ATRA)-induced differentiation processes of cancer cells remains unclear. Here, 
we report for the first time that ATRA-induced differentiation of leukemia and 
osteosarcoma is accompanied by a decrease in the level of SUMO-1 protein. Our 
results also demonstrated that depletion or inhibition of SUMO-1 blocks 
ATRA-induced differentiation, suggesting that SUMO-1 is critical for the 
differentiation effect of ATRA. Further studies indicated that SUMO-1-promoted 
ATRA-induced differentiation might be associated with the stabilization of 
retinoic acid receptor α (RARα), protecting it from degradation. Moreover, our 
results suggested that Lys399 is a major site for SUMO-1 conjugation of RARα. We 
also found that RARα enhanced the transcription of its target genes, which might 
also contribute to the enhanced differentiating effects of ATRA; however, 
mutation of Lys399 of RARα inhibits the extents of both SUMO-1 modification and 
ATRA-induced differentiation. Together, these results indicate that SUMO-1 
modification of RARα is a potent mechanism for balancing proliferation and 
differentiation by controlling the stability of RARα in cancer cells. SUMO-1 
modification may thus serve an important role in controlling ATRA-induced cell 
differentiation in cancers.

© 2014 FEBS.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.12840
PMID: 24819975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
