---
pmid: '23173940'
title: The substrate specificity of the human ADP/ATP carrier AAC1.
authors:
- Mifsud J
- Ravaud S
- Krammer EM
- Chipot C
- Kunji ER
- Pebay-Peyroula E
- Dehez F
journal: Mol Membr Biol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.3109/09687688.2012.745175
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The substrate specificity of the human ADP/ATP carrier AAC1.
**Authors:** Mifsud J, Ravaud S, Krammer EM, Chipot C, Kunji ER, Pebay-Peyroula E, Dehez F
**Journal:** Mol Membr Biol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3109/09687688.2012.745175](https://doi.org/10.3109/09687688.2012.745175)

## Abstract

1. Mol Membr Biol. 2013 Mar;30(2):160-8. doi: 10.3109/09687688.2012.745175. Epub 
2012 Nov 23.

The substrate specificity of the human ADP/ATP carrier AAC1.

Mifsud J(1), Ravaud S, Krammer EM, Chipot C, Kunji ER, Pebay-Peyroula E, Dehez 
F.

Author information:
(1)The Medical Research Council, Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge, UK.

The mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier imports ADP from the cytosol into the 
mitochondrial matrix for its conversion to ATP by ATP synthase and exports ATP 
out of the mitochondrion to replenish the eukaryotic cell with chemical energy. 
Here the substrate specificity of the human mitochondrial ADP/ATP carrier AAC1 
was determined by two different approaches. In the first the protein was 
functionally expressed in Escherichia coli membranes as a fusion protein with 
maltose binding protein and the effect of excess of unlabeled compounds on the 
uptake of [(32)P]-ATP was measured. In the second approach the protein was 
expressed in the cytoplasmic membrane of Lactococcus lactis. The uptake of 
[(14)C]-ADP in whole cells was measured in the presence of excess of unlabeled 
compounds and in fused membrane vesicles loaded with unlabeled compounds to 
demonstrate their transport. A large number of nucleotides were tested, but only 
ADP and ATP are suitable substrates for human AAC1, demonstrating a very narrow 
specificity. Next we tried to understand the molecular basis of this specificity 
by carrying out molecular-dynamics simulations with selected nucleotides, which 
were placed at the entrance of the central cavity. The binding of the phosphate 
groups of guanine and adenine nucleotides is similar, yet there is a low 
probability for the base moiety to be bound, likely to be rooted in the greater 
polarity of guanine compared to adenine. AMP is unlikely to engage fully with 
all contact points of the substrate binding site, suggesting that it cannot 
trigger translocation.

DOI: 10.3109/09687688.2012.745175
PMID: 23173940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
