---
pmid: '21642987'
title: IFIT1 is an antiviral protein that recognizes 5'-triphosphate RNA.
authors:
- Pichlmair A
- Lassnig C
- Eberle CA
- Górna MW
- Baumann CL
- Burkard TR
- Bürckstümmer T
- Stefanovic A
- Krieger S
- Bennett KL
- Rülicke T
- Weber F
- Colinge J
- Müller M
- Superti-Furga G
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni.2048
---

# IFIT1 is an antiviral protein that recognizes 5'-triphosphate RNA.
**Authors:** Pichlmair A, Lassnig C, Eberle CA, Górna MW, Baumann CL, Burkard TR, Bürckstümmer T, Stefanovic A, Krieger S, Bennett KL, Rülicke T, Weber F, Colinge J, Müller M, Superti-Furga G
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni.2048](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.2048)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun 5;12(7):624-30. doi: 10.1038/ni.2048.

IFIT1 is an antiviral protein that recognizes 5'-triphosphate RNA.

Pichlmair A(1), Lassnig C, Eberle CA, Górna MW, Baumann CL, Burkard TR, 
Bürckstümmer T, Stefanovic A, Krieger S, Bennett KL, Rülicke T, Weber F, Colinge 
J, Müller M, Superti-Furga G.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 
Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Jun 17;11(7):440. doi: 10.1038/nri3011.
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun 20;12(7):588-90. doi: 10.1038/ni.2061.

Antiviral innate immunity relies on the recognition of microbial structures. One 
such structure is viral RNA that carries a triphosphate group on its 5' terminus 
(PPP-RNA). By an affinity proteomics approach with PPP-RNA as the 'bait', we 
found that the antiviral protein IFIT1 (interferon-induced protein with 
tetratricopeptide repeats 1) mediated binding of a larger protein complex 
containing other IFIT family members. IFIT1 bound PPP-RNA with nanomolar 
affinity and required the arginine at position 187 in a highly charged 
carboxy-terminal groove of the protein. In the absence of IFIT1, the growth and 
pathogenicity of viruses containing PPP-RNA was much greater. In contrast, IFIT 
proteins were dispensable for the clearance of pathogens that did not generate 
PPP-RNA. On the basis of this specificity and the great abundance of IFIT 
proteins after infection, we propose that the IFIT complex antagonizes viruses 
by sequestering specific viral nucleic acids.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.2048
PMID: 21642987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
