---
pmid: '9714535'
title: Oligomerization properties of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum stress protein.
authors:
- Mkrtchian S
- Baryshev M
- Matvijenko O
- Sharipo A
- Sandalova T
- Schneider G
- Ingelman-Sundberg M
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00786-8
---

# Oligomerization properties of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum stress protein.
**Authors:** Mkrtchian S, Baryshev M, Matvijenko O, Sharipo A, Sandalova T, Schneider G, Ingelman-Sundberg M
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00786-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00786-8)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1998 Jul 24;431(3):322-6. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00786-8.

Oligomerization properties of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum stress protein.

Mkrtchian S(1), Baryshev M, Matvijenko O, Sharipo A, Sandalova T, Schneider G, 
Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. soumkr@ki.se

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1998 Aug 21;433(3):335. Mkrtchiana S [corrected to Mkrtchian S].

ERp29, a novel and ubiquitously expressed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress-inducible protein, was recently isolated and cDNA cloned in our 
laboratory. Using size exclusion chromatography and chemical cross-linking we 
have assessed the oligomerization properties of ERp29. Purified ERp29 in 
solution as well as in rat hepatoma cells self-associates predominantly into 
homodimers. Labeling of the cells with [35S]methionine with subsequent 
cross-linking and immunoprecipitation showed that ERp29 interacts with a number 
of ER proteins, one of which was previously identified as BiP/GRP78. Secondary 
structure prediction and fold recognition methods indicate that the native 
conformation of ERp29 resembles the thioredoxin fold, a structural motif 
characteristic of a number of enzymes with the redox function, including protein 
disulfide isomerase (with which ERp29 shares limited sequence similarity). 
Dimerization of the protein is suggested to be advantageous for the protein 
binding potential of ERp29.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00786-8
PMID: 9714535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
