---
pmid: '16940051'
title: ERp27, a new non-catalytic endoplasmic reticulum-located human protein disulfide
  isomerase family member, interacts with ERp57.
authors:
- Alanen HI
- Williamson RA
- Howard MJ
- Hatahet FS
- Salo KE
- Kauppila A
- Kellokumpu S
- Ruddock LW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M604314200
---

# ERp27, a new non-catalytic endoplasmic reticulum-located human protein disulfide isomerase family member, interacts with ERp57.
**Authors:** Alanen HI, Williamson RA, Howard MJ, Hatahet FS, Salo KE, Kauppila A, Kellokumpu S, Ruddock LW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M604314200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M604314200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 3;281(44):33727-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M604314200. Epub
2006  Aug 28.

ERp27, a new non-catalytic endoplasmic reticulum-located human protein disulfide 
isomerase family member, interacts with ERp57.

Alanen HI(1), Williamson RA, Howard MJ, Hatahet FS, Salo KE, Kauppila A, 
Kellokumpu S, Ruddock LW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, P. O. Box 
3000, FIN-90014, Finland.

Protein folding and quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum are critical 
processes for which our current understanding is far from complete. Here we 
describe the functional characterization of a new human 27.7-kDa protein 
(ERp27). We show that ERp27 is a two-domain protein located in the endoplasmic 
reticulum that is homologous to the non-catalytic b and b' domains of protein 
disulfide isomerase. ERp27 was shown to bind Delta-somatostatin, the standard 
test peptide for protein disulfide isomerase-substrate binding, and this ability 
was localized to the second domain of ERp27. An alignment of human ERp27 and 
human protein disulfide isomerase allowed for the putative identification of the 
peptide binding site of ERp27 indicating conservation of the location of the 
primary substrate binding site within the protein disulfide isomerase family. 
NMR studies revealed a significant conformational change in the b'-like domain 
of ERp27 upon substrate binding, which was not just localized to the substrate 
binding site. In addition, we report that ERp27 is bound by ERp57 both in vitro 
and in vivo by a similar mechanism by which ERp57 binds calreticulin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M604314200
PMID: 16940051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
