---
pmid: '19815549'
title: Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein MKS3 is required for endoplasmic reticulum-associated
  degradation of surfactant protein C.
authors:
- Wang M
- Bridges JP
- Na CL
- Xu Y
- Weaver TE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2785181
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034371
---

# Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein MKS3 is required for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation of surfactant protein C.
**Authors:** Wang M, Bridges JP, Na CL, Xu Y, Weaver TE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.034371](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.034371)
**PMC:** [PMC2785181](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2785181/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 27;284(48):33377-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034371. Epub 
2009 Oct 8.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome protein MKS3 is required for endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated degradation of surfactant protein C.

Wang M(1), Bridges JP, Na CL, Xu Y, Weaver TE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Autosomal dominant mutations in the SFTPC gene are associated with idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis, a progressive lethal interstitial lung disease. Mutations 
that cause misfolding of the encoded proprotein surfactant protein C (SP-C) 
trigger endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation, a pathway that 
segregates terminally misfolded substrate for retrotranslocation to the cytosol 
and degradation by proteasome. Microarray screens for genes involved in SP-C 
ER-associated degradation identified MKS3/TMEM67, a locus previously linked to 
the ciliopathy Meckel-Gruber syndrome. In this study, MKS3 was identified as a 
membrane glycoprotein predominantly localized to the ER. Expression of MKS3 was 
up-regulated by genetic or pharmacological inducers of ER stress. The ER lumenal 
domain of MKS3 interacted with a complex that included mutant SP-C and 
associated chaperones, whereas the region predicted to encode the transmembrane 
domains of MKS3 interacted with cytosolic p97. Deletion of the transmembrane and 
cytosolic domains abrogated interaction of MKS3 with p97 and resulted in 
accumulation of mutant SP-C proprotein; knockdown of MKS3 also inhibited 
degradation of mutant SP-C. These results support a model in which MKS3 links 
the ER lumenal quality control machinery with the cytosolic degradation 
apparatus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.034371
PMCID: PMC2785181
PMID: 19815549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
