---
pmid: '10792726'
title: Hyperactive forms of the Pdr1p transcription factor fail to respond to positive
  regulation by the hsp70 protein Pdr13p.
authors:
- Hallstrom TC
- Moye-Rowley WS
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01858.x
---

# Hyperactive forms of the Pdr1p transcription factor fail to respond to positive regulation by the hsp70 protein Pdr13p.
**Authors:** Hallstrom TC, Moye-Rowley WS
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01858.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01858.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Apr;36(2):402-13. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01858.x.

Hyperactive forms of the Pdr1p transcription factor fail to respond to positive 
regulation by the hsp70 protein Pdr13p.

Hallstrom TC(1), Moye-Rowley WS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Program and the Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
5-430 Bowen Science Building, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Multidrug resistance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is commonly associated with the 
overproduction of ATP-binding cassette transporter proteins such as Pdr5p or 
Yor1p. The Cys6-Zn(II)2 cluster-containing transcription factors Pdr1p and Pdr3p 
are key regulators of expression of these pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) 
loci. Previous experiments have demonstrated that the Hsp70 protein encoded by 
the PDR13 gene is a positive regulator of Pdr1p function. We have examined the 
mechanism underlying the control of Pdr1p by Pdr13p. Expression of deletion, 
insertion and amino acid substitution mutant variants of Pdr1p suggest that the 
centre region of the transcription factor is the target for Pdr13p-mediated 
positive regulation. Immunological and fusion protein analyses demonstrate that 
Pdr13p is located in the cytoplasm, while Pdr1p is found in the nucleus. 
Biochemical fractionation experiments indicate that Pdr13p is associated with a 
high-molecular-weight complex and suggest the association of some fraction of 
Pdr13p with ribosomes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01858.x
PMID: 10792726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
