---
pmid: '28007894'
title: The pseudophosphatase STYX targets the F-box of FBXW7 and inhibits SCFFBXW7
  function.
authors:
- Reiterer V
- Figueras-Puig C
- Le Guerroue F
- Confalonieri S
- Vecchi M
- Jalapothu D
- Kanse SM
- Deshaies RJ
- Di Fiore PP
- Behrends C
- Farhan H
journal: EMBO J
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5286380
doi: 10.15252/embj.201694795
---

# The pseudophosphatase STYX targets the F-box of FBXW7 and inhibits SCFFBXW7 function.
**Authors:** Reiterer V, Figueras-Puig C, Le Guerroue F, Confalonieri S, Vecchi M, Jalapothu D, Kanse SM, Deshaies RJ, Di Fiore PP, Behrends C, Farhan H
**Journal:** EMBO J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201694795](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201694795)
**PMC:** [PMC5286380](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5286380/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2017 Feb 1;36(3):260-273. doi: 10.15252/embj.201694795. Epub 2016 Dec 
22.

The pseudophosphatase STYX targets the F-box of FBXW7 and inhibits SCFFBXW7 
function.

Reiterer V(1)(2), Figueras-Puig C(2), Le Guerroue F(3), Confalonieri S(4)(5), 
Vecchi M(6)(7), Jalapothu D(1), Kanse SM(1), Deshaies RJ(6)(7), Di Fiore 
PP(4)(5)(8), Behrends C(9)(10), Farhan H(11)(2)(12).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Biotechnology Institute Thurgau, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry II, Medical School Goethe University, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(4)The FIRC Institute for Molecular Oncology, IFOM, Milan, Italy.
(5)Molecular Medicine Program, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(6)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
(7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(9)Institute of Biochemistry II, Medical School Goethe University, Frankfurt, 
Germany christian.behrends@mail03.med.uni-muenchen.de 
hesso.farhan@medisin.uio.no.
(10)Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 
Munich, Germany.
(11)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 
christian.behrends@mail03.med.uni-muenchen.de hesso.farhan@medisin.uio.no.
(12)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2018 Mar 15;37(6):e99170. doi: 10.15252/embj.201899170.

Comment in
    Sci Signal. 2017 Feb 14;10(466):eaam9607. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.aam9607.

The F-box protein FBXW7 is the substrate-recruiting subunit of an SCF ubiquitin 
ligase and a major tumor-suppressor protein that is altered in several human 
malignancies. Loss of function of FBXW7 results in the stabilization of numerous 
proteins that orchestrate cell proliferation and survival. Little is known about 
proteins that directly regulate the function of this protein. In the current 
work, we have mapped the interactome of the enigmatic pseudophosphatase STYX We 
reasoned that a catalytically inactive phosphatase might have adopted novel 
mechanisms of action. The STYX interactome contained several F-box proteins, 
including FBXW7. We show that STYX binds to the F-box domain of FBXW7 and 
disables its recruitment into the SCF complex. Therefore, STYX acts as a direct 
inhibitor of FBXW7, affecting the cellular levels of its substrates. 
Furthermore, we find that levels of STYX and FBXW7 are anti-correlated in breast 
cancer patients, which affects disease prognosis. We propose the STYX-FBXW7 
interaction as a promising drug target for future investigations.

© 2016 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201694795
PMCID: PMC5286380
PMID: 28007894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The F‐box protein FBXW7 is the substrate‐recruiting subunit of an SCF ubiquitin ligase and a major tumor‐suppressor protein that is altered in several human malignancies. Loss of function of FBXW7 results in the stabilization of numerous proteins that orchestrate cell proliferation and survival. Little is known about proteins that directly regulate the function of this protein. In the current work, we have mapped the interactome of the enigmatic pseudophosphatase STYX. We reasoned that a catalytically inactive phosphatase might have adopted novel mechanisms of action. The STYX interactome contained several F‐box proteins, including FBXW7. We show that STYX binds to the F‐box domain of FBXW7 and disables its recruitment into the SCF complex. Therefore, STYX acts as a direct inhibitor of FBXW7, affecting the cellular levels of its substrates. Furthermore, we find that levels of STYX and FBXW7 are anti‐correlated in breast cancer patients, which affects disease prognosis. We propose the STYX–FBXW7 interaction as a promising drug target for future investigations.

Introduction

Phosphorylation and ubiquitinylation are two major post‐translational modifications that regulate fundamental cellular processes such as proliferation, growth, and differentiation. Enzymes that catalyze the transfer or removal of ubiquitin and phosphate are the major regulators of these signaling networks. Besides the undoubted importance of these enzymes in cell homeostasis, mounting evidence indicated that pseudoenzymes play prominent roles in regulating signaling pathways. Pseudoenzymes are proteins that contain mutations in the enzyme domain that are predicted to render them catalytically inactive (Reiterer et al , 2014 ). Despite some advances in the field, pseudoenzymes largely remain enigmatic and much has to be learned about their basic mechanisms of action and their roles in health and disease.

STYX is the archetype pseudophosphatase that belongs to the family of protein tyrosine phosphatases. Within its phosphatase domain, STYX has a glycine residue at position 120 that is responsible for its catalytic inactivity (Wishart & Dixon, 1998 ; Reiterer et al , 2014 ). Mutation of G120 to cysteine restores the ability of STYX to dephosphorylate substrates (Reiterer et al , 2013 ). We showed previously that the pseudophosphatase STYX binds to the mitogen‐activated protein kinases ERK1 and ERK2 to modulate their nucleo‐cytoplasmic shuttling and biologic activities (Reiterer et al , 2013 ). However, it is conceivable that pseudophosphatases such as STYX have evolved to regulate proteins beyond kinases.

Cullin–RING ligases (CRLs) are the largest family of ubiquitin ligases and are composed of several subunits: a cullin scaffold, a RING finger protein (RBX1 or RBX2), and a substrate adaptor (Petroski & Deshaies, 2005 ). The founding member of the CRL family is the SKP1/CUL1/F‐box (SCF) complex. In this complex, CUL1 serves as a scaffold and substrate recognition is mediated by one of the ~70 F‐box proteins (FBPs) (Jin et al , 2004 ). In addition, CUL1 and FBPs are linked via the protein SKP1. Three types of FBPs are known: FBXWs (contain a WD40 domain), FBXLs (contain leucine‐rich repeats), and FBXOs (contain diverse types of domains). All FBPs share a conserved region called the F‐box, which is the site where the FBP binds to SKP1. FBPs recruit substrates through variable C‐terminal protein–protein interaction domains (Jin et al , 2004 ; Petroski & Deshaies, 2005 ). The large number and variety of FBPs, which are responsible for substrate binding, allows modular organization of the SCF complex and expands substrate specificity. A remarkable feature of FBPs is that they typically interact with their targets in a phosphorylation‐dependent manner, thereby offering a link between kinase/phosphatase signaling and ubiquitylation. The FBP binding motifs in substrates are referred to as phosphodegrons because their phosphorylation is a signal for FBP binding, ubiquitin transfer, and subsequent degradation. One of the best‐characterized FBPs is FBXW7 (also known as Fbw7, Ago, Cdc4, or Sel10), which was proposed to act as an important tumor‐suppressor (Welcker & Clurman, 2008 ; Cremona et al , 2016 ). FBXW7 controls the levels of several proteins involved in the regulation of cell cycle or of cell growth such as cyclin E, c‐myc, mTOR, KLF5, or the Notch intracellular domain (Koepp et al , 2001 ; Oberg et al , 2001 ; Strohmaier et al , 2001 ; Welcker et al , 2004 ; Mao et al , 2008 ; Zhao et al , 2010 ).

In the current work, we mapped the interactome of STYX and found that it binds to several FBPs, including FBXW7. We show that STYX binds to the F‐box of FBXW7, thereby uncoupling it from the SCF FBXW7 complex and consequently inhibiting its activity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that a SCF complex is regulated by direct protein–protein interaction with an FBP. Furthermore, we find the levels of STYX and FBXW7 to be anti‐correlated in breast cancer patients and that patient survival is modulated by disruption of the balance between STYX and FBXW7 levels.

Discussion

FBXW7 regulates a wide range of biologic processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation, and survival. In addition, it is considered a major tumor‐suppressor (Welcker & Clurman, 2008 ; Davis et al , 2014 ; Cremona et al , 2016 ), although in few cases FBXW7 deletion was shown to be therapeutically beneficial (Busino et al , 2012 ; Takeishi et al , 2013 ). Given their biologic importance, it is conceivable that cells have evolved mechanisms to regulate the function of FBPs. In the current work, we identify the enigmatic pseudophosphatase STYX as an inhibitor of FBXW7. By binding to the F‐box, STYX prevents the assembly of FBXW7 into the SCF complex, and thereby inhibits degradation of its substrates (Fig 7 ). Given that many of these substrates have well‐known oncogenic roles, we propose that the STYX–FBXW7 interaction might represent a useful therapeutic target for future pharmacologic interventions.

With respect to FBXW7, the vast majority of regulatory mechanisms described so far are limited to the regulation of FBXW7 expression by transcriptional regulators or microRNAs (reviewed by Wang et al , 2014 ) or through the regulation of FBXW7 dimerization (Welcker & Clurman, 2007 ; Min et al , 2012 ; Welcker et al , 2013 ), or through the phosphorylation of its substrates. In its dimeric form, FBXW7 is trans‐ubiquitylated and thereby promotes its own degradation. Another level of regulation is by phosphorylation. Protein kinase C‐dependent phosphorylation of FBXW7α was shown to control its nuclear localization (Durgan & Parker, 2010 ). The PI3 kinase pathway was also shown to regulate stability of FBXW7 (Schülein et al , 2011 ). The de‐ubiquitinating enzymes USP28 was shown to functionally counteract FBXW7 by removing ubiquitin from the substrates of this FBP (Popov et al , 2007 ), which could explain why deletion of USP28 was found to promote colorectal cancer (Diefenbacher et al , 2015 ). On the other hand, USP28 also de‐ubiquitinates FBXW7 itself and promotes its stabilization (Schülein‐Völk et al , 2014 ). The effect of USP28 on FBXW7 is dose‐dependent and therefore dependent on the relative expression levels of these proteins in different tissues.

However, FBPs act as part of an SCF complex, and therefore, it appears intuitive that they are regulated by remodeling of the architecture of SCF complexes to activate or deactivate them. The importance of targeting SCF complex assembly has been highlighted by the development of engineered ubiquitin variants that target the interfaces between SKP1, F‐Box, and CUL1 (Gorelik et al , 2016 ) as well as by the fact that the broad‐spectrum CRL inhibitor MLN4924 is currently being used in clinical trial (Swords et al , 2015 ). However, whether cellular proteins are capable of regulating SCF complexes has remained elusive for a long time after the discovery of SCF complexes. The first demonstration of an SCF complex regulator was made for Cand1, which was proposed to act as an exchanger of FBPs within the SCF complex (Pierce et al , 2013 ). An analogy was drawn to small GTPases where GEFs exchange GDP for GTP and thereby regulate the activity status of these proteins. In yeast, cadmium stress was shown to induce autoubiquitinylation of the F‐box protein Met30, which is followed by recruitment of Cdc48 and disassembly of the SCF complex through a mechanism that remains to be determined (Yen et al , 2012 ). Whether Cdc48 competes with the interaction between the F‐box and SKP1 using the mechanism that we have uncovered for STYX remains to be elucidated. Previous chemical genetics screens demonstrated that the FBP–SKP1 interaction is druggable. There, a small molecule was identified that selectively blocked the interaction of SKP1 with the FBP Met30 but not that with Cdc4 (the homolog of FBXW7) (Aghajan et al , 2010 ). A similar finding was made for SKP2 (FBXL1) (Chan et al , 2013 ). Of note, SKP2 has a pro‐tumorigenic role, and thus, its pharmacologic inhibition is desired. FBXW7, on the other hand, has been mostly proposed to act as a tumor‐suppressor. Thus, future efforts should be dedicated to identify strategies to block the interaction between STYX and FBXW7 selectively. Our finding that STYX inhibits the function of FBXW7 by binding to its F‐box domain tempts to consider STYX as a general inhibitor of FBPs. However, our preliminary data indicate this might not be the case, because STYX bound to FBXO31 in a manner independent from the F‐box and that STYX did not interact with all FBPs that we tested and was unable to displace CUL1‐SKP1 from most FBPs examined (Reiterer & Farhan, unpublished observations). Future work is needed to systematically compare the STYX‐FBP interactions and to identify small molecular compounds that selectively prevent STYX from binding to FBXW7, thereby rescuing this FBP from inhibition and restoring its tumor‐suppressive effects.
