---
pmid: '2470098'
title: The CD4 and CD8 antigens are coupled to a protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck)
  that phosphorylates the CD3 complex.
authors:
- Barber EK
- Dasgupta JD
- Schlossman SF
- Trevillyan JM
- Rudd CE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC287114
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.9.3277
---

# The CD4 and CD8 antigens are coupled to a protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck) that phosphorylates the CD3 complex.
**Authors:** Barber EK, Dasgupta JD, Schlossman SF, Trevillyan JM, Rudd CE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.86.9.3277](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.9.3277)
**PMC:** [PMC287114](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC287114/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 May;86(9):3277-81. doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.9.3277.

The CD4 and CD8 antigens are coupled to a protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck) that 
phosphorylates the CD3 complex.

Barber EK(1), Dasgupta JD, Schlossman SF, Trevillyan JM, Rudd CE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Tumor Immunology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115.

Many mammalian receptors have been found to regulate cell growth by virtue of a 
protein-tyrosine kinase domain in their cytoplasmic tail. We recently described 
an association of the CD4 antigen with a T-cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase 
(p56lck; formerly termed pp58lck; EC 2.7.1.112). This interaction represents a 
potential mechanism by which T-cell growth may be regulated and offers a model 
by which other members of the src family (products of c-src, c-yes, c-fgr, etc.) 
may interact with mammalian growth factor receptors. As in the case of the CD4 
antigen, the CD8 antigen appears to serve as a receptor for nonpolymorphic 
regions of products of the major histocompatibility complex and has been 
implicated in the regulation of T-cell growth. In this study, we reveal that the 
human CD8 antigen is also associated with the T-cell-specific protein-tyrosine 
kinase (p56lck). The associated p56lck kinase was detected by use of both in 
vitro and in vivo labeling regimes using an antiserum to the C terminus of 
p56lck. Two-dimensional nonequilibrium pH-gradient gel electrophoresis and 
sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis demonstrated the 
similarity of p56lck to the protein-tyrosine kinase associated with the CD4 
antigen. The catalytic activity of p56lck was revealed by the 
autophosphorylation of the 55- to 60-kDa kinase and the occasional labeling of a 
35-kDa protein. Last, we demonstrate directly that members of the CD3 complex, 
including the gamma, delta, and epsilon chains, as well as a putative zeta 
subunit, can be phosphorylated at tyrosine residues by the CD4/CD8.p56lck 
complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.9.3277
PMCID: PMC287114
PMID: 2470098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Many mammalian receptors have been found to regulate cell growth by virtue of a protein-tyrosine kinase domain in their cytoplasmic tail. We recently described an association of the CD4 antigen with a T-cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck; formerly termed pp58lck; EC 2.7.1.112). This interaction represents a potential mechanism by which T-cell growth may be regulated and offers a model by which other members of the src family (products of c-src, c-yes, c-fgr, etc.) may interact with mammalian growth factor receptors. As in the case of the CD4 antigen, the CD8 antigen appears to serve as a receptor for nonpolymorphic regions of products of the major histocompatibility complex and has been implicated in the regulation of T-cell growth. In this study, we reveal that the human CD8 antigen is also associated with the T-cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase (p56lck). The associated p56lck kinase was detected by use of both in vitro and in vivo labeling regimes using an antiserum to the C terminus of p56lck. Two-dimensional nonequilibrium pH-gradient gel electrophoresis and sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis demonstrated the similarity of p56lck to the protein-tyrosine kinase associated with the CD4 antigen. The catalytic activity of p56lck was revealed by the autophosphorylation of the 55- to 60-kDa kinase and the occasional labeling of a 35-kDa protein. Last, we demonstrate directly that members of the CD3 complex, including the gamma, delta, and epsilon chains, as well as a putative zeta subunit, can be phosphorylated at tyrosine residues by the CD4/CD8.p56lck complex.
