---
pmid: '25728771'
title: MCRIP1, an ERK substrate, mediates ERK-induced gene silencing during epithelial-mesenchymal
  transition by regulating the co-repressor CtBP.
authors:
- Ichikawa K
- Kubota Y
- Nakamura T
- Weng JS
- Tomida T
- Saito H
- Takekawa M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023
---

# MCRIP1, an ERK substrate, mediates ERK-induced gene silencing during epithelial-mesenchymal transition by regulating the co-repressor CtBP.
**Authors:** Ichikawa K, Kubota Y, Nakamura T, Weng JS, Tomida T, Saito H, Takekawa M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58(1):35-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023. Epub 2015
 Feb 26.

MCRIP1, an ERK substrate, mediates ERK-induced gene silencing during 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by regulating the co-repressor CtBP.

Ichikawa K(1), Kubota Y(2), Nakamura T(2), Weng JS(3), Tomida T(4), Saito H(5), 
Takekawa M(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department 
of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of Environmental 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan; Division of 
Molecular Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, 
Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, 
Japan.
(2)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department 
of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of Environmental 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.
(3)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(4)Division of Molecular Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(5)Division of Molecular Cell Signaling, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department of Biophysics 
and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address: h-saito@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(6)Division of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan; Department 
of Cell Signaling and Molecular Medicine, Research Institute of Environmental 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan; Department of 
Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. Electronic address: 
takekawa@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

The ERK pathway not only upregulates growth-promoting genes, but also 
downregulates anti-proliferative and tumor-suppressive genes. In particular, 
ERK signaling contributes to repression of the E-cadherin gene during 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The CtBP transcriptional co-repressor 
is also involved in gene silencing of E-cadherin. However, the functional 
relationship between ERK signaling and CtBP is unknown. Here, we identified an 
ERK substrate, designated MCRIP1, which bridges ERK signaling and CtBP-mediated 
gene silencing. CtBP is recruited to promoter elements of target genes by 
interacting with the DNA-binding transcriptional repressor ZEB1. We found that 
MCRIP1 binds to CtBP, thereby competitively inhibiting CtBP-ZEB1 interaction. 
When phosphorylated by ERK, MCRIP1 dissociates from CtBP, allowing CtBP to 
interact with ZEB1. In this manner, the CtBP co-repressor complex is recruited 
to, and silences, the E-cadherin promoter by inducing chromatin modifications. 
Our findings reveal a molecular mechanism underlying ERK-induced epigenetic gene 
silencing during EMT and its dysregulation in cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.023
PMID: 25728771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
