---
pmid: '33513601'
title: RhoG deficiency abrogates cytotoxicity of human lymphocytes and causes hemophagocytic
  lymphohistiocytosis.
authors:
- Kalinichenko A
- Perinetti Casoni G
- Dupré L
- Trotta L
- Huemer J
- Galgano D
- German Y
- Haladik B
- Pazmandi J
- Thian M
- Yüce Petronczki Ö
- Chiang SC
- Taskinen M
- Hekkala A
- Kauppila S
- Lindgren O
- Tapiainen T
- Kraakman MJ
- Vettenranta K
- Lomakin AJ
- Saarela J
- Seppänen MRJ
- Bryceson YT
- Boztug K
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8057258
doi: 10.1182/blood.2020008738
---

# RhoG deficiency abrogates cytotoxicity of human lymphocytes and causes hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
**Authors:** Kalinichenko A, Perinetti Casoni G, Dupré L, Trotta L, Huemer J, Galgano D, German Y, Haladik B, Pazmandi J, Thian M, Yüce Petronczki Ö, Chiang SC, Taskinen M, Hekkala A, Kauppila S, Lindgren O, Tapiainen T, Kraakman MJ, Vettenranta K, Lomakin AJ, Saarela J, Seppänen MRJ, Bryceson YT, Boztug K
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2020008738](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2020008738)
**PMC:** [PMC8057258](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8057258/)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2021 Apr 15;137(15):2033-2045. doi: 10.1182/blood.2020008738.

RhoG deficiency abrogates cytotoxicity of human lymphocytes and causes 
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Kalinichenko A(1)(2), Perinetti Casoni G(3), Dupré L(2)(4)(5), Trotta L(6), 
Huemer J(1)(2), Galgano D(3), German Y(2)(4), Haladik B(1)(2), Pazmandi J(1)(2), 
Thian M(1)(2), Yüce Petronczki Ö(1)(2), Chiang SC(3), Taskinen M(7), Hekkala 
A(8), Kauppila S(8), Lindgren O(8), Tapiainen T(8), Kraakman MJ(1)(2), 
Vettenranta K(7), Lomakin AJ(1)(2), Saarela J(6)(9)(10), Seppänen MRJ(7), 
Bryceson YT(3)(11), Boztug K(1)(2)(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)St Anna Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine 
Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Toulouse Institute for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases (INFINITy), 
INSERM, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Toulouse III Paul 
Sabatier University, Toulouse, France.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Rare Disease and Pediatric Research Centers, University of Helsinki and 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(10)Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway, University of Oslo, Norway.
(11)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Department of Clinical Sciences, University 
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(12)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(13)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; and.
(14)St Anna Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Blood. 2021 Apr 15;137(15):1990-1991. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021010837.

Exocytosis of cytotoxic granules (CG) by lymphocytes is required for the 
elimination of infected and malignant cells. Impairments in this process underly 
a group of diseases with dramatic hyperferritinemic inflammation termed 
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Although genetic and functional 
studies of HLH have identified proteins controlling distinct steps of CG 
exocytosis, the molecular mechanisms that spatiotemporally coordinate CG release 
remain partially elusive. We studied a patient exhibiting characteristic 
clinical features of HLH associated with markedly impaired cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte (CTL) and natural killer (NK) cell exocytosis functions, who beared 
biallelic deleterious mutations in the gene encoding the small GTPase RhoG. 
Experimental ablation of RHOG in a model cell line and primary CTLs from healthy 
individuals uncovered a hitherto unappreciated role of RhoG in retaining CGs in 
the vicinity of the plasma membrane (PM), a fundamental prerequisite for CG 
exocytotic release. We discovered that RhoG engages in a protein-protein 
interaction with Munc13-4, an exocytosis protein essential for CG fusion with 
the PM. We show that this interaction is critical for docking of Munc13-4+ CGs 
to the PM and subsequent membrane fusion and release of CG content. Thus, our 
study illuminates RhoG as a novel essential regulator of human lymphocyte 
cytotoxicity and provides the molecular pathomechanism behind the identified 
here and previously unreported genetically determined form of HLH.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2020008738
PMCID: PMC8057258
PMID: 33513601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.
