---
pmid: '10779361'
title: Mutagenesis of the pRB pocket reveals that cell cycle arrest functions are
  separable from binding to viral oncoproteins.
authors:
- Dick FA
- Sailhamer E
- Dyson NJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC85672
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.10.3715-3727.2000
---

# Mutagenesis of the pRB pocket reveals that cell cycle arrest functions are separable from binding to viral oncoproteins.
**Authors:** Dick FA, Sailhamer E, Dyson NJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.10.3715-3727.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.10.3715-3727.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85672](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85672/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3715-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.10.3715-3727.2000.

Mutagenesis of the pRB pocket reveals that cell cycle arrest functions are 
separable from binding to viral oncoproteins.

Dick FA(1), Sailhamer E, Dyson NJ.

Author information:
(1)MGH Cancer Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

The pocket domain of pRB is required for pRB to arrest the cell cycle. This 
domain was originally defined as the region of the protein that is necessary and 
sufficient for pRB's interaction with adenovirus E1A and simian virus s40 large 
T antigen. These oncoproteins, and other pRB-binding proteins that are encoded 
by a variety of plant and animal viruses, use a conserved LXCXE motif to 
interact with pRB. Similar sequences have been identified in multiple cellular 
pRB-binding proteins, suggesting that the viruses have evolved to target a 
highly conserved binding site of pRB that is critical for its function. Here we 
have constructed a panel of pRB mutants in which conserved amino acids that are 
predicted to make close contacts with an LXCXE peptide were altered. Despite the 
conservation of the LXCXE binding site throughout evolution, pRB mutants that 
lack this site are able to induce a cell cycle arrest in a pRB-deficient tumor 
cell line. This G(1) arrest is overcome by cyclin D-cdk4 complexes but is 
resistant to inactivation by E7. Consequently, mutants lacking the LXCXE binding 
site were able to induce a G(1) arrest in HeLa cells despite the expression of 
HPV-18 E7. pRB mutants lacking the LXCXE binding site are defective in binding 
to adenovirus E1A and human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein but exhibit 
wild-type binding to E2F or DP, and they retain the ability to interact with 
CtIP and HDAC1, two transcriptional corepressors that contain LXCXE-like 
sequences. Consistent with these observations, the pRB mutants are able to 
actively repress transcription. These observations suggest that viral 
oncoproteins depend on the LXCXE-binding site of pRB for interaction to a far 
greater extent than cellular proteins that are critical for cell cycle arrest or 
transcriptional repression. Mutation of this binding site allows pRB to function 
as a cell cycle regulator while being resistant to inactivation by viral 
oncoproteins.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.10.3715-3727.2000
PMCID: PMC85672
PMID: 10779361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The pocket domain of pRB is required for pRB to arrest the cell cycle. This domain was originally defined as the region of the protein that is necessary and sufficient for pRB's interaction with adenovirus E1A and simian virus s40 large T antigen. These oncoproteins, and other pRB-binding proteins that are encoded by a variety of plant and animal viruses, use a conserved LXCXE motif to interact with pRB. Similar sequences have been identified in multiple cellular pRB-binding proteins, suggesting that the viruses have evolved to target a highly conserved binding site of pRB that is critical for its function. Here we have constructed a panel of pRB mutants in which conserved amino acids that are predicted to make close contacts with an LXCXE peptide were altered. Despite the conservation of the LXCXE binding site throughout evolution, pRB mutants that lack this site are able to induce a cell cycle arrest in a pRB-deficient tumor cell line. This G 1 arrest is overcome by cyclin D-cdk4 complexes but is resistant to inactivation by E7. Consequently, mutants lacking the LXCXE binding site were able to induce a G 1 arrest in HeLa cells despite the expression of HPV-18 E7. pRB mutants lacking the LXCXE binding site are defective in binding to adenovirus E1A and human papillomavirus type 16 E7 protein but exhibit wild-type binding to E2F or DP, and they retain the ability to interact with CtIP and HDAC1, two transcriptional corepressors that contain LXCXE-like sequences. Consistent with these observations, the pRB mutants are able to actively repress transcription. These observations suggest that viral oncoproteins depend on the LXCXE-binding site of pRB for interaction to a far greater extent than cellular proteins that are critical for cell cycle arrest or transcriptional repression. Mutation of this binding site allows pRB to function as a cell cycle regulator while being resistant to inactivation by viral oncoproteins.

DISCUSSION

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRB) has an important impact on cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and cell survival ( 18 , 68 , 86 ). A detailed structure-function analysis of pRB has been hampered by the fact that many of its functional properties require the pocket domain, a structure that has proven difficult to analyze by systematic mutagenesis. The recently published crystal structure of the pRB pocket shows why this domain has been so difficult to study. Formation of the proper structure for this domain depends on an extensive interface between the A and B halves of the pocket ( 52 ). Most tumor-derived mutations of pRB generate large deletions or truncations that would remove this part of the molecule ( 33 , 40 ). Similarly many tumor-derived point mutations in pRB affect amino acids that are buried in this interface and cause changes that are likely to destabilize the entire structure ( 52 ). Moreover, many of the amino acids that are highly conserved between pRB family members, which may have appeared to be attractive sites for mutagenesis, are buried within the structure and unlikely to be directly involved in intermolecular interactions ( 52 ).

Using the crystal structure as a guide, it is finally possible to target specific surfaces of the pRB pocket for mutation. In this study we have used this information to specifically eliminate the cleft in the B half of the pocket that allows pRB to interact with LXCXE peptides. A panel of mutants was prepared that perturbs the interaction between LXCXE and pRB in several different ways. These mutants have similar properties in cell cycle and transcription assays, and the effect of combining mutations does not appear to change their potency. We found that combining the RB9 and RB10 alleles creates a protein capable of arresting cells in G 1 and repressing transcription as effectively as the RB6, RB9, or RB10 mutants alone, and is similarly rescued by cyclin D-cdk4 (data not shown). This indicates that RB6, RB9, and RB10 each can effectively eliminate the activity of this structure. Analysis of single amino acid substitutions reveals that Tyr 709 is a particularly important residue, as mutations of this site alone severely reduce binding to E1A. Taken together, these results confirm that the cleft identified in the crystal structure is essential for stable interaction between pRB and E7, even though short peptides containing the LXCXE motif bind to pRB with only 1/20 of the affinity of the full length E7 protein ( 45 , 52 ).

The results described here show that mutation of the LXCXE-binding site prevents E7 from targeting pRB, yet the pRB mutant retains its ability to induce a cell cycle arrest and to repress transcription at E2F containing promoters, two activities that are thought to be central to pRB function. As a result, the expression of these mutants in cells that are transformed by HPV18 E6 and E7 restores a pRB-mediated cell cycle arrest. The properties of these mutants show that in principle, it is possible to prevent E7 from binding to pRB without inactivating normal functions of pRB. This study provides strong support for the idea that small compounds that are able to bind to the LXCXE-binding cleft might prevent viral proteins from inactivating pRB.

There is a great deal of circumstantial evidence indicating that the LXCXE-binding site is likely to be important for pRB function. One aspect of this argument is that the amino acids that form this groove are highly conserved between pRB homologues of different species ( 1 , 52 , 56 ). Divergent families of viruses have evolved proteins, typically expressed early during viral infection, which use an LXCXE motif to inactivate pRB. Multiple cellular pRB-binding proteins also contain LXCXE sequences. The simplest model is that pRB uses the LXCXE binding site to interact with an essential target, and viruses have evolved an LXCXE motif to mimic this interaction. How then does one explain that pRB can arrest the cell cycle, or repress transcription, without the LXCXE-binding cleft? We envision several possibilities.

First, it is possible that pRB can arrest the cell cycle in several different ways and that the interactions between pRB and cellular LXCXE-containing proteins contribute to this process without being essential. The relative importance of these interactions may vary between cell types or with types of arrest, and these results do not exclude the possibility that the pRB LXCXE-binding cleft is important for cell cycle arrest at a specific developmental stage or in response to a particular type of stimulus. Similarly, pRB appears to be able to interact with several different transcriptional repressors ( 4 , 57 , 58 , 60 , 80 , 83 ), and redundancy between these mechanisms may allow the LXCXE-binding site mutants to repress E2F-dependent transcription in these assays, even though the repression of some E2F target genes may be mediated by LXCXE-binding proteins. In addition to the possibilities discussed above, it cannot be ruled out that some loss of binding between cellular LXCXE-containing proteins and our mutants occurs; however, this is masked by the overexpressed levels of pRB in these experiments. We observed a slight but consistent decrease in the ability of the RB mutants to repress transcription, particularly when fused to Gal4 and recruited to a heterologous promoter (Fig. 3 g). However, the functional significance of this is unclear.

Another explanation for why the LXCXE-binding cleft is so well conserved but is dispensable in these experiments is that it may contribute to a specific pRB function that is distinct from cell cycle or E2F regulation. The pocket domain is required for a variety of pRB activities, including cell differentiation ( 10 , 68 ), and the activation of transcription ( 10 , 11 , 65 , 68 , 76 ). Sellers et al. have identified RB mutants which are unable to regulate cell proliferation yet retain the ability of pRB to induce differentiation and activate transcription ( 74 ). These mutations are distant from the LXCXE-binding cleft and thus are not expected to affect binding to that site. Furthermore, expression of viral oncoproteins like E7 has been shown to block cellular differentiation ( 44 , 59 , 69 ). While proteins like E7 are able to use their LXCXE sequence to overcome pRB's functions in cell cycle regulation, there is no evidence that the cellular proteins that use this site are primarily involved in the cell cycle aspect of pRB function.

A third possible explanation stems from the idea that viral proteins may depend on the LXCXE motif to interact with pRB to a far greater extent than cellular pRB-binding proteins. This situation might arise if most cellular pRB proteins have a more extensive binding site on the surface of pRB or if they are components of complexes that have multiple contacts with pRB. It is clear that HDAC1 and CtIP, for example, have to bind to pRB in a manner independent of the LXCXE motif, since they are able to interact with mutants lacking the LXCXE-binding cleft. At first glance it might appear paradoxical for this cleft to remain so well conserved if it is not essential. Protein-protein interactions that require rigid conservation are usually ones in which the means of interaction is critical to their collective function, and thus alterations are selected against. However, interactions that are shared by numerous different proteins and a common binding site are also well conserved, since the simultaneous coevolution of a new interface between these molecules would be improbable. In this way the LXCXE-binding cleft might be maintained, because it contributes in some degree to pRB's interaction with many cellular partners.

In support of the idea that viral and cellular LXCXE proteins might bind differently to pRB, we note that few of the cellular LXCXE-containing proteins contain all of the features that are conserved between viral RB-binding proteins (Fig. 8 ). The homology between E1A, E7, and T-antigen sequences includes an additional acidic residue 3 or 4 amino acids before the leucine ( 45 ), the presence of a hydrophobic side chain two or three residues after the glutamate ( 45 , 52 ), and a series of acidic amino acids found C terminal to the LXCXE motif ( 45 ). Peptide competition assays have shown that the N-terminal acidic amino acid and the C-terminal hydrophobic residue have an important effect on the affinity of the interaction ( 45 ). Additionally, the importance of the hydrophobic amino acid just after the glutamate is also predicted by crystallographic data and supported by peptide competition experiments ( 45 , 52 ). The conserved acidic sequence 5 or 6 amino acids C terminal to the LXCXE might also form ionic interactions with conserved lysine residues that surround the LXCXE binding cleft on pRB ( 52 ), adding to the strength of the interaction.

These results are consistent with the idea that viral and cellular pRB-binding proteins evolve under very different selective pressures. pRB's interaction with its cellular partners is regulated, and these interactions need to be reversible. In contrast, viral proteins bind to pRB in order to inactivate it, a process that is likely to be favored by high-affinity interactions. As a result, viral proteins may evolve a high-affinity pRB-binding site that only loosely mirrors the cellular proteins on which it is based. This study demonstrates that pRB's interaction with E7 is distinct from its interaction with any cellular protein that is essential to mediating cell cycle arrest within the context of the assays used here. However, further studies will be needed to determine whether such mutants can provide the full range of pRB functions that are needed for animal development.
