---
pmid: '19850029'
title: A critical role for sFRP proteins in maintaining caudal neural tube closure
  in mice via inhibition of BMP signaling.
authors:
- Misra K
- Matise MP
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.015
---

# A critical role for sFRP proteins in maintaining caudal neural tube closure in mice via inhibition of BMP signaling.
**Authors:** Misra K, Matise MP
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.015)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):74-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.015. Epub 2009
 Oct 19.

A critical role for sFRP proteins in maintaining caudal neural tube closure in 
mice via inhibition of BMP signaling.

Misra K(1), Matise MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical 
School, University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane, 
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. misrakp@umdnj.edu

Both the BMP and Wnt pathways have been implicated in directing aspects of 
dorsal neural tube closure and cell fate specification. However, the mechanisms 
that control the diverse responses to these signals are poorly understood. In 
this study, we provide genetic and functional evidence that the secreted sFRP1 
and sFRP2 proteins, which have been primarily implicated as negative regulators 
of Wnt signaling, can also antagonize BMP signaling in the caudal neural tube 
and that this function is critical to maintain proper neural tube closure and 
dorsal cell fate segregation. Our studies thus reveal a novel role for specific 
sFRP proteins in balancing the response of cells to two critical extracellular 
signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.015
PMID: 19850029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
