---
pmid: '17604727'
title: A mammalian microRNA expression atlas based on small RNA library sequencing.
authors:
- Landgraf P
- Rusu M
- Sheridan R
- Sewer A
- Iovino N
- Aravin A
- Pfeffer S
- Rice A
- Kamphorst AO
- Landthaler M
- Lin C
- Socci ND
- Hermida L
- Fulci V
- Chiaretti S
- Foà R
- Schliwka J
- Fuchs U
- Novosel A
- Müller RU
- Schermer B
- Bissels U
- Inman J
- Phan Q
- Chien M
- Weir DB
- Choksi R
- De Vita G
- Frezzetti D
- Trompeter HI
- Hornung V
- Teng G
- Hartmann G
- Palkovits M
- Di Lauro R
- Wernet P
- Macino G
- Rogler CE
- Nagle JW
- Ju J
- Papavasiliou FN
- Benzing T
- Lichter P
- Tam W
- Brownstein MJ
- Bosio A
- Borkhardt A
- Russo JJ
- Sander C
- Zavolan M
- Tuschl T
journal: Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2681231
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040
---

# A mammalian microRNA expression atlas based on small RNA library sequencing.
**Authors:** Landgraf P, Rusu M, Sheridan R, Sewer A, Iovino N, Aravin A, Pfeffer S, Rice A, Kamphorst AO, Landthaler M, Lin C, Socci ND, Hermida L, Fulci V, Chiaretti S, Foà R, Schliwka J, Fuchs U, Novosel A, Müller RU, Schermer B, Bissels U, Inman J, Phan Q, Chien M, Weir DB, Choksi R, De Vita G, Frezzetti D, Trompeter HI, Hornung V, Teng G, Hartmann G, Palkovits M, Di Lauro R, Wernet P, Macino G, Rogler CE, Nagle JW, Ju J, Papavasiliou FN, Benzing T, Lichter P, Tam W, Brownstein MJ, Bosio A, Borkhardt A, Russo JJ, Sander C, Zavolan M, Tuschl T
**Journal:** Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040)
**PMC:** [PMC2681231](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2681231/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2007 Jun 29;129(7):1401-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040.

A mammalian microRNA expression atlas based on small RNA library sequencing.

Landgraf P(1), Rusu M, Sheridan R, Sewer A, Iovino N, Aravin A, Pfeffer S, Rice 
A, Kamphorst AO, Landthaler M, Lin C, Socci ND, Hermida L, Fulci V, Chiaretti S, 
Foà R, Schliwka J, Fuchs U, Novosel A, Müller RU, Schermer B, Bissels U, Inman 
J, Phan Q, Chien M, Weir DB, Choksi R, De Vita G, Frezzetti D, Trompeter HI, 
Hornung V, Teng G, Hartmann G, Palkovits M, Di Lauro R, Wernet P, Macino G, 
Rogler CE, Nagle JW, Ju J, Papavasiliou FN, Benzing T, Lichter P, Tam W, 
Brownstein MJ, Bosio A, Borkhardt A, Russo JJ, Sander C, Zavolan M, Tuschl T.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of RNA Molecular Biology, Box 
186, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2007 Sep;25(9):996-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt0907-996.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding regulatory RNAs that reduce stability 
and/or translation of fully or partially sequence-complementary target mRNAs. In 
order to identify miRNAs and to assess their expression patterns, we sequenced 
over 250 small RNA libraries from 26 different organ systems and cell types of 
human and rodents that were enriched in neuronal as well as normal and malignant 
hematopoietic cells and tissues. We present expression profiles derived from 
clone count data and provide computational tools for their analysis. 
Unexpectedly, a relatively small set of miRNAs, many of which are ubiquitously 
expressed, account for most of the differences in miRNA profiles between cell 
lineages and tissues. This broad survey also provides detailed and accurate 
information about mature sequences, precursors, genome locations, maturation 
processes, inferred transcriptional units, and conservation patterns. We also 
propose a subclassification scheme for miRNAs for assisting future experimental 
and computational functional analyses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.04.040
PMCID: PMC2681231
PMID: 17604727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (~22-nucleotide) non-coding regulatory RNA molecules encoded by plants, animals and some viruses (reviewed in Bartel, 2004 ; Berezikov and Plasterk, 2005 ; Cullen, 2006 ; Mallory and Vaucheret, 2006 ). They were first discovered in Caenorhabditis elegans and were shown to regulate expression of partially complementary mRNAs ( Lee et al., 1993 ; Wightman et al., 1993 ; Moss et al., 1997 ). Most miRNAs are evolutionary conserved in related species and some even show conservation between invertebrates and vertebrates ( Pasquinelli et al., 2000 ; Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001 ; Lau et al., 2001 ; Lee and Ambros, 2001 ). Many miRNAs have well-defined developmental and cell-type specific expression patterns (reviewed in Wienholds and Plasterk, 2005 ). However, for most mammalian miRNAs the relative abundance and specificity of expression remain to be investigated.

miRNAs regulate a variety of developmental and physiological processes (reviewed in Cao et al., 2006 ; Plasterk, 2006 ; Shivdasani, 2006 ). The analysis of miRNA function in animals is either performed genetically or by delivery of synthetic miRNA precursors or antisense oligonucleotides (antagomirs) (reviewed recently in Krützfeldt et al., 2006 ). Such analysis revealed that 100 to 200 target mRNAs are repressed and destabilized by a single miRNA ( Krützfeldt et al., 2005 ; Lim et al., 2005 ; Linsley et al., 2007 ). Other mRNAs appear to be under selective pressure to avoid complementarity to co-expressed highly-abundant miRNAs ( Farh et al., 2005 ; Stark et al., 2005 ; Sood et al., 2006 ). Many computational studies have been conducted to define miRNA regulatory networks (reviewed in Rajewsky, 2006 ), yet most molecular targets of miRNAs remain experimentally undefined.

Posttranscriptional editing of some double-stranded precursor miRNAs by adenosine deamination ( Luciano et al., 2004 ; Pfeffer et al., 2005 ; Blow et al., 2006 ; Kawahara et al., 2007 ) can further control targeting specificity as well as modulate the stability and processing of miRNA precursor transcripts ( Gottwein et al., 2006 ; Yang et al., 2006 ). Polymorphic sequence variation identified in some other pre-miRNA sequences, in contrast, had no effect on miRNA processing ( Iwai and Naraba, 2005 ; Diederichs and Haber, 2006 ). Regulated processing of miRNA precursor transcripts has also been reported in the context of cell-type and stage-specific expression ( Obernosterer et al., 2006 ; Thomson et al., 2006 ).

The increasing number of studies addressing the role of miRNAs in development and in various diseases including cancer emphasizes the need for a comprehensive catalogue of accurate sequence, expression and conservation information for the large number of recently proposed miRNAs. Here we present a database and analysis of over 250 small RNA cDNA libraries obtained by cloning and sequencing. We have developed interactive analysis tools, and illustrate their utility in discovering miRNA expression changes associated with hematopoietic and nervous system differentiation and malignant transformation.

Discussion

The estimated number of miRNA genes in mammalian genomes has been steadily increasing, reaching currently tens of thousands ( Berezikov et al., 2005 ; Xie et al., 2005 ; Rigoutsos et al., 2006 ). These numbers appear to be supported, at least at first glance, by studies using deep sequencing technologies ( Berezikov et al., 2006a ; Berezikov et al., 2006b ; Cummins et al., 2006 ; Kloosterman et al., 2006a ) or specialized small RNA isolation and cloning procedures ( Bentwich et al., 2005 ; Takada et al., 2006 ). Furthermore, the cell-type specific expression of some miRNAs suggested that many more miRNAs could surface if only a sufficiently large number of cell types or tissues were studied. In order to derive a miRNA gene expression atlas that sets into perspective the number and functional relevance of miRNA genes, we have taken the approach of cloning and sequencing over 250 small RNA libraries from different cell types and tissues, with ~1,000 miRNA clones per library. We provide the data as well as analysis tools on a web-accessible interface. We believe that these will be instrumental in guiding the rapidly developing field of miRNA biology.

We characterized the profiles of complex tissues, sorted cells, and individual cell lines and found on average ~70 miRNA genes expressed per sample. Only a small fraction of these appeared to be regulated in cell differentiation experiments. We did not find evidence for substantial induction of many of the new candidate miRNAs identified as rare cloning events in deep sequencing surveys, despite the analysis of over 330,000 small RNA clones obtained from 256 small RNA libraries from different cell types and tissues.

The large overall number of miRNA clones obtained from human, mouse and rat samples allowed us to analyze the processing patterns for each miRNA. We found that at least 40% of miRNA sequences deposited in miRBase (v8.2) do not represent the predominantly cloned sequence either because of differences in 3′ or 5′ end processing, or because of miRNA/miRNA* strand selection. In addition, we analyzed a large number of features of miRNA genes, including sequence conservation and their relationship to genomic repeats. This analysis led us to conclude that more than 97% of all miRNA clones originated from less than 300 miRNA genes per species, genes that satisfied a series of general properties expected to be met by prototypical miRNAs ( Ambros et al., 2003 ; Bartel, 2004 ). Surprisingly, only 17% of all miRNA sequences identified by a recent deep-sequencing study ( Cummins et al., 2006 ) were prototypical. The remaining miRNAs, though clearly originating from hairpin precursors, showed unusual maturation or sequence conservation patterns. With rare exceptions, these miRNAs were also found at low levels and/or did not exhibit cell-type specific expression. For many more recently reported miRNA candidates, we do not have cloning evidence. We speculate that these small RNAs originate from dsRNA structures that only accidentally enter the RNAi pathway, such as fold-back elements controlled by dsRNA deaminases or the binding sites of RNAi-unrelated dsRNA-binding proteins.

Several different methods have been used in the past years for miRNA expression profiling (reviewed in Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 ). Unfortunately, there was no universal or synthetic miRNA reference standard available to assess the correlation of signal intensities with the absolute miRNA concentration of the sample. We therefore compared some miRNA profiles from small RNA cloning to those obtained from our newly developed miRNA array platform as well as to absolute amounts determined by quantitative Northern blotting of a small subset of miRNAs. For the new miRNA array platform, we synthesized a universal miRNA standard, from which we also prepared small RNA libraries that we cloned and sequenced. Relative clone frequencies for a given miRNA correlate significantly with quantitative Northern blotting results for these miRNAs across samples, but we also detect a systematic bias in our library preparation method. When we compared our brain and liver cloning profiles with those obtained by various other methods in the literature, we generally observed a good correlation, suggesting that the discrepancies between actual miRNA concentrations and those measured by various high-throughput methods are intrinsic to the miRNA sequence and their specific secondary self-structure.

From our miRNA expression atlas we computed the tissue and cell type specificity of miRNA expression. Our data are in good agreement with previously published in situ analysis in mouse ( Kloosterman et al., 2006b ). A more detailed comparison of miRNA profiles originating from similar tissues showed differences not only in cell-type specific miRNAs, but also in ubiquitously expressed miRNAs. The relative expression of these ubiquitous miRNAs in different cell types is difficult to quantify by in situ analysis.

We included in our study a large number of cell lines and primary patient material from many cancers to define starting points for higher-throughput approaches like miRNA microarrays. Understanding deregulation of miRNA expression, and making decisions on the selection of candidates to examine in a certain disease context, is much more informative in the context of a large expression database. We have provided a thorough overview of miRNA profiles in diverse leukemia, lymphoma, and brain tumors, and defined a conservative set of relevant miRNA cistrons mediating miRNA regulation in these diseases.

Although we explicitly searched in all of our libraries for possible mutations in miRNAs that might impair or change function, we found only low abundant variations that could be explained by RNA editing events such as deamination or 3′ end processing of stable intermediates or miRNAs by transferases and poly(A) and poly(U) polymerases. The frequency of these modifications was low for the vast majority of miRNAs, suggesting that these modifications play a limited role in miRNA function.

In summary, we established a first mammalian miRNA gene atlas based on sequencing from small RNA libraries. We included miRNA profiles from a large collection of mammalian cell and tissue samples and we developed tools for miRNA profile analysis and presentation, which will assist future research on miRNA function and its implication in disease. This atlas will continue to grow in utility as additional libraries are cloned and sequenced.
