---
pmid: '30876804'
title: Chaperone Function of Hgh1 in the Biogenesis of Eukaryotic Elongation Factor
  2.
authors:
- Mönkemeyer L
- Klaips CL
- Balchin D
- Körner R
- Hartl FU
- Bracher A
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.034
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Chaperone Function of Hgh1 in the Biogenesis of Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 2.
**Authors:** Mönkemeyer L, Klaips CL, Balchin D, Körner R, Hartl FU, Bracher A
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.034)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2019 Apr 4;74(1):88-100.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.034. Epub 
2019 Mar 12.

Chaperone Function of Hgh1 in the Biogenesis of Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 2.

Mönkemeyer L(1), Klaips CL(1), Balchin D(1), Körner R(1), Hartl FU(2), Bracher 
A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. Electronic address: 
uhartl@biochem.mpg.de.
(3)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. Electronic address: 
bracher@biochem.mpg.de.

Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) is an abundant and essential component of 
the translation machinery. The biogenesis of this 93 kDa multi-domain protein is 
assisted by the chaperonin TRiC/CCT. Here, we show in yeast cells that the 
highly conserved protein Hgh1 (FAM203 in humans) is a chaperone that cooperates 
with TRiC in eEF2 folding. In the absence of Hgh1, a substantial fraction of 
newly synthesized eEF2 is degraded or aggregates. We solved the crystal 
structure of Hgh1 and analyzed the interaction of wild-type and mutant Hgh1 with 
eEF2. These experiments revealed that Hgh1 is an armadillo repeat protein that 
binds to the dynamic central domain III of eEF2 via a bipartite interface. Hgh1 
binding recruits TRiC to the C-terminal eEF2 module and prevents unproductive 
interactions of domain III, allowing efficient folding of the N-terminal GTPase 
module. eEF2 folding is completed upon dissociation of TRiC and Hgh1.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.034
PMID: 30876804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
