---
pmid: '33174727'
title: Yeast Chd1p Unwraps the Exit Side DNA upon ATP Binding to Facilitate the Nucleosome
  Translocation Occurring upon ATP Hydrolysis.
authors:
- Kirk J
- Lee JY
- Lee Y
- Kang C
- Shin S
- Lee E
- Song JJ
- Hohng S
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00747
---

# Yeast Chd1p Unwraps the Exit Side DNA upon ATP Binding to Facilitate the Nucleosome Translocation Occurring upon ATP Hydrolysis.
**Authors:** Kirk J, Lee JY, Lee Y, Kang C, Shin S, Lee E, Song JJ, Hohng S
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00747](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00747)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2020 Dec 1;59(47):4481-4487. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00747. 
Epub 2020 Nov 11.

Yeast Chd1p Unwraps the Exit Side DNA upon ATP Binding to Facilitate the 
Nucleosome Translocation Occurring upon ATP Hydrolysis.

Kirk J(1), Lee JY(1), Lee Y(2), Kang C(1), Shin S(1), Lee E(2), Song JJ(2), 
Hohng S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Institute of Applied Physics, Seoul 
National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.

Chromodomain-helicase-DNA-binding protein 1 (CHD1) remodels chromatin by 
translocating nucleosomes along DNA, but its mechanism remains poorly 
understood. We use single-molecule fluorescence experiments to clarify the 
mechanism by which yeast CHD1 (Chd1p) remodels nucleosomes. We find that binding 
of ATP to Chd1p induces transient unwrapping of the DNA on the exit side of the 
nucleosome, facilitating nucleosome translocation. ATP hydrolysis is required to 
induce nucleosome translocation. The unwrapped DNA after translocation is then 
rewrapped after the release of the hydrolyzed nucleotide and phosphate, 
revealing that each step of the ATP hydrolysis cycle is responsible for a 
distinct step of nucleosome remodeling. These results show that Chd1p remodels 
nucleosomes via a mechanism that is unique among the other ATP-dependent 
chromatin remodelers.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00747
PMID: 33174727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
