---
reference_id: PMID:32201888
title: Spatially regulated editing of genetic information within a neuron.
authors:
- Vallecillo-Viejo IC
- Liscovitch-Brauer N
- Diaz Quiroz JF
- Montiel-Gonzalez MF
- Nemes SE
- Rangan KJ
- Levinson SR
- Eisenberg E
- Rosenthal JJC
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa172
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spatially regulated editing of genetic information within a neuron.
**Authors:** Vallecillo-Viejo IC, Liscovitch-Brauer N, Diaz Quiroz JF, Montiel-Gonzalez MF, Nemes SE, Rangan KJ, Levinson SR, Eisenberg E, Rosenthal JJC
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa172](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa172)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 May 7;48(8):3999-4012. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa172.

Spatially regulated editing of genetic information within a neuron.

Vallecillo-Viejo IC(1), Liscovitch-Brauer N(2), Diaz Quiroz JF(1), 
Montiel-Gonzalez MF(1), Nemes SE(1), Rangan KJ(1), Levinson SR(3), Eisenberg 
E(2), Rosenthal JJC(1).

Author information:
(1)The Eugene Bell Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, 7 MBL Street, Woods 
Hole, MA 02540, USA.
(2)Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Colorado at Denver, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

In eukaryotic cells, with the exception of the specialized genomes of 
mitochondria and plastids, all genetic information is sequestered within the 
nucleus. This arrangement imposes constraints on how the information can be 
tailored for different cellular regions, particularly in cells with complex 
morphologies like neurons. Although messenger RNAs (mRNAs), and the proteins 
that they encode, can be differentially sorted between cellular regions, the 
information itself does not change. RNA editing by adenosine deamination can 
alter the genome's blueprint by recoding mRNAs; however, this process too is 
thought to be restricted to the nucleus. In this work, we show that ADAR2 
(adenosine deaminase that acts on RNA), an RNA editing enzyme, is expressed 
outside of the nucleus in squid neurons. Furthermore, purified axoplasm exhibits 
adenosine-to-inosine activity and can specifically edit adenosines in a known 
substrate. Finally, a transcriptome-wide analysis of RNA editing reveals that 
tens of thousands of editing sites (>70% of all sites) are edited more 
extensively in the squid giant axon than in its cell bodies. These results 
indicate that within a neuron RNA editing can recode genetic information in a 
region-specific manner.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa172
PMCID: PMC7192619
PMID: 32201888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]