---
pmid: '9371805'
title: All cyclophilins and FK506 binding proteins are, individually and collectively,
  dispensable for viability in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Dolinski K
- Muir S
- Cardenas M
- Heitman J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC24268
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.24.13093
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# All cyclophilins and FK506 binding proteins are, individually and collectively, dispensable for viability in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Dolinski K, Muir S, Cardenas M, Heitman J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.24.13093](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.24.13093)
**PMC:** [PMC24268](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC24268/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Nov 25;94(24):13093-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.24.13093.

All cyclophilins and FK506 binding proteins are, individually and collectively, 
dispensable for viability in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Dolinski K(1), Muir S, Cardenas M, Heitman J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The cyclophilins and FK506 binding proteins (FKBPs) bind to cyclosporin A, 
FK506, and rapamycin and mediate their immunosuppressive and toxic effects, but 
the physiological functions of these proteins are largely unknown. Cyclophilins 
and FKBPs are ubiquitous and highly conserved enzymes that catalyze 
peptidyl-prolyl isomerization, a rate-limiting step during in vitro protein 
folding. We have addressed their functions by a genetic approach in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Five cyclophilins and three FKBPs previously were 
identified in yeast. We identified four additional enzymes: Cpr6 and Cpr7, which 
are homologs of mammalian cyclophilin 40 that have also recently been 
independently isolated by others, Cpr8, a homolog of the secretory pathway 
cyclophilin Cpr4, and Fpr4, a homolog of the nucleolar FKBP, Fpr3. None of the 
eight cyclophilins or four FKBPs were essential. Surprisingly, yeast mutants 
lacking all 12 immunophilins were viable, and the phenotype of the dodecuplet 
mutant resulted from simple addition of the subtle phenotypes of each individual 
mutation. We conclude that cyclophilins and FKBPs do not play an essential 
general role in protein folding and find little evidence of functional overlap 
between the different enzymes. We propose that each cyclophilin and FKBP instead 
regulates a restricted number of unique partner proteins that remain to be 
identified.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.24.13093
PMCID: PMC24268
PMID: 9371805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
