---
pmid: '19696738'
title: FoxM1, a critical regulator of oxidative stress during oncogenesis.
authors:
- Park HJ
- Carr JR
- Wang Z
- Nogueira V
- Hay N
- Tyner AL
- Lau LF
- Costa RH
- Raychaudhuri P
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2760115
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.239
---

# FoxM1, a critical regulator of oxidative stress during oncogenesis.
**Authors:** Park HJ, Carr JR, Wang Z, Nogueira V, Hay N, Tyner AL, Lau LF, Costa RH, Raychaudhuri P
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.239](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.239)
**PMC:** [PMC2760115](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2760115/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Oct 7;28(19):2908-18. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.239. Epub 2009 Aug 
20.

FoxM1, a critical regulator of oxidative stress during oncogenesis.

Park HJ(1), Carr JR, Wang Z, Nogueira V, Hay N, Tyner AL, Lau LF, Costa RH, 
Raychaudhuri P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The transcription factor FoxM1 is over-expressed in most human malignancies. 
Although it is evident that FoxM1 has critical functions in tumour development 
and progression, the mechanisms by which FoxM1 participates in those processes 
are not understood. Here, we describe an essential role of FoxM1 in the 
regulation of oxidative stress that contributes to malignant transformation and 
tumour cell survival. We identify a negative feedback loop involving FoxM1 that 
regulates reactive oxygen species (ROS) in proliferating cells. We show that 
induction of FoxM1 by oncogenic Ras requires ROS. Elevated FoxM1, in turn, 
downregulates ROS levels by stimulating expression of ROS scavenger genes, such 
as MnSOD, catalase and PRDX3. FoxM1 depletion sensitizes cells to oxidative 
stress and increases oncogene-induced premature senescence. Moreover, tumour 
cells expressing activated AKT1 are 'addicted' to FoxM1, as they require 
continuous presence of FoxM1 for survival. Together, our results identify FoxM1 
as a key regulator of ROS in dividing cells, and provide insights into the 
mechanism how tumour cells use FoxM1 to control oxidative stress to escape 
premature senescence and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.239
PMCID: PMC2760115
PMID: 19696738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
