---
pmid: '10395918'
title: 'Regulation of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase regulatory subunit (GLCLR)
  gene expression: identification of the major transcriptional start site in HT29
  cells.'
authors:
- Galloway DC
- Blake DG
- McLellan LI
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0167-4781(99)00073-1
---

# Regulation of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase regulatory subunit (GLCLR) gene expression: identification of the major transcriptional start site in HT29 cells.
**Authors:** Galloway DC, Blake DG, McLellan LI
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0167-4781(99)00073-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-4781(99)00073-1)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jul 7;1446(1-2):47-56. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4781(99)00073-1.

Regulation of gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase regulatory subunit (GLCLR) gene 
expression: identification of the major transcriptional start site in HT29 
cells.

Galloway DC(1), Blake DG, McLellan LI.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and 
Medical School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

gamma-Glutamylcysteine synthetase (GCS) is of major importance in glutathione 
homeostasis. The GCS heterodimer is composed of catalytic (heavy subunit, GCSh) 
and regulatory (light subunit, GCSl) subunits. Regulation of the human GCSl 
subunit gene (GLCLR) expression was studied as GCSl has a critical role in 
glutathione synthesis. The minimal basal expression of GLCLR was found to be 
mediated by a region between nt -205 and -318. The major transcriptional start 
site in HT29 cells was located within this region at nt -283. A region between 
nt -411 and -447 was identified as having a potential involvement in the 
negative regulation of GLCLR expression. In order to study the transcriptional 
regulation of GCSl by oxidant stress, HepG2 cells were treated with sodium 
nitroprusside (SNP). SNP (1.5 mM) was found to increase glutathione levels by 
2-fold, as well as GCS activity by 6-fold. This is accompanied by a co-ordinate 
increase in the levels of the both the GCSl and GCSh subunits, each by 
approximately 2-fold. The transcriptional activity of the GLCLR gene was 
increased by approximately 2.5-fold in SNP-treated cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4781(99)00073-1
PMID: 10395918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
