---
pmid: '7590749'
title: Chromosomal localization of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human
  transcription factor nuclear factor I by FISH.
authors:
- Qian F
- Kruse U
- Lichter P
- Sippel AE
journal: Genomics
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1107
---

# Chromosomal localization of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human transcription factor nuclear factor I by FISH.
**Authors:** Qian F, Kruse U, Lichter P, Sippel AE
**Journal:** Genomics (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1995.1107](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1995.1107)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1995 Jul 1;28(1):66-73. doi: 10.1006/geno.1995.1107.

Chromosomal localization of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human 
transcription factor nuclear factor I by FISH.

Qian F(1), Kruse U, Lichter P, Sippel AE.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biologie III, Universität Freiburg, Germany.

Nuclear Factor I (NFI) proteins constitute a family of dimeric DNA-binding 
proteins with very similar, possibly identical, DNA-binding specificity. They 
function as cellular transcription factors and as replication factors for 
adenovirus DNA replication. Diversity in this protein family is generated by 
multiple genes, differential splicing, and heterodimerization. To determine the 
chromosomal position of NFI genes in the human genome, we isolated partial cDNA 
sequences derived from four independent genes: NFIA, NFIB, NFIC, and NFIX. 
Corresponding clones of genomic DNA served as probes for fluorescence in situ 
hybridization on human metaphase chromosomes. The NFIA and NFIB genes map to 
positions 1p31.2-p31.3 and 9p24.1, respectively. The NFIC and the NFIX genes 
were both localized to position 19p13.3 in the order 
centromere-NFIX-NFIC-telomere. Comparison of the position of NFI genes and JUN 
genes revealed a close physical linkage between members of the NFI and JUN gene 
families in the human genome.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1995.1107
PMID: 7590749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
