---
pmid: '15024011'
title: Role of mammalian vacuolar protein-sorting proteins in endocytic trafficking
  of a non-ubiquitinated G protein-coupled receptor to lysosomes.
authors:
- Hislop JN
- Marley A
- Von Zastrow M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311062200
---

# Role of mammalian vacuolar protein-sorting proteins in endocytic trafficking of a non-ubiquitinated G protein-coupled receptor to lysosomes.
**Authors:** Hislop JN, Marley A, Von Zastrow M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M311062200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M311062200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):22522-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M311062200. Epub 
2004 Mar 15.

Role of mammalian vacuolar protein-sorting proteins in endocytic trafficking of 
a non-ubiquitinated G protein-coupled receptor to lysosomes.

Hislop JN(1), Marley A, Von Zastrow M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, California 
94143-2140, USA. jhislop@itsa.ucsf.edu

Many signaling receptors require covalent modification by ubiquitin for 
agonist-induced down-regulation via endocytic trafficking to lysosomes, a 
process that is mediated by a conserved set of endosome-associating proteins 
also required for vacuolar protein-sorting (VPS) in yeast. The delta opioid 
receptor (DOR) is a G protein-coupled receptor that can undergo agonist-induced 
proteolysis via endocytic trafficking to lysosomes but does not require covalent 
modification by ubiquitin to do so. This raises the question of whether 
lysosomal down-regulation of this "ubiquitination-independent" GPCR is mediated 
by a completely distinct biochemical mechanism or if similar VPS machinery is 
involved. Agonist-induced proteolysis of DOR was significantly inhibited by 
dominant negative mutant versions of Vps4/Skd1, an AAA-family ATPase required 
for a late step in lysosomal sorting of ubiquitinated membrane cargo. 
Furthermore, overexpression and interfering RNA-mediated knockdown indicated 
that lysosomal trafficking of opioid receptors is also dependent on Hrs, a VPS 
protein that mediates an early step in lysosomal sorting of ubiquitinated cargo. 
However, interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Tsg101, a VPS protein that is 
essential for an intermediate step of the conserved lysosomal sorting mechanism, 
did not detectably affect agonist-induced proteolysis of DOR in the same cells 
in which (ubiquitination-dependent) lysosomal trafficking of epidermal growth 
factor receptors was clearly inhibited. These results indicate that opioid 
receptors, despite their ability to undergo efficient agonist-induced 
trafficking to lysosomes in the absence of covalent modification by ubiquitin, 
utilize some (Vps4 and Hrs) but perhaps not all (Tsg101) of the VPS machinery 
required for lysosomal sorting of ubiquitinated membrane cargo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M311062200
PMID: 15024011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
