---
pmid: '8700553'
title: The human FGF-8 gene localizes on chromosome 10q24 and is subjected to induction
  by androgen in breast cancer cells.
authors:
- Payson RA
- Wu J
- Liu Y
- Chiu IM
journal: Oncogene
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human FGF-8 gene localizes on chromosome 10q24 and is subjected to induction by androgen in breast cancer cells.
**Authors:** Payson RA, Wu J, Liu Y, Chiu IM
**Journal:** Oncogene (1996)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 1996 Jul 4;13(1):47-53.

The human FGF-8 gene localizes on chromosome 10q24 and is subjected to induction 
by androgen in breast cancer cells.

Payson RA(1), Wu J, Liu Y, Chiu IM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Androgen-induced growth factor (AIGF or FGF-8) was originally isolated from the 
conditioned medium of an androgen-dependent Shionogi carcinoma, SC-3, cell line. 
It shares structural similarity with other members of the FGF family. The 
temporal and spatial expression patterns of the FGF-8 gene suggest its 
involvement in gastrulation, regionalization of the brain, and organogenesis of 
the limb and face as an embryonic epithelial factor. In the adult, expression of 
FGF-8 is restricted to gonads including testes and ovaries. Since FGF-8 is 
identified as a corroborating gene in MMTV-induced mammary tumors in Wnt-1 
transgenic mice and because FGF-8 manifested its autocrine mitogenic activity in 
SC-3 cells, it is possible that aberrant expression of FGF-8 may be present in 
human cancers which are hormone dependent. However, very little is known about 
human FGF-8. To determine whether FGF-8 plays a role in human breast cancer, we 
have isolated the full-length cDNA from SK-BR-3 breast cancer cells. We have 
also isolated the corresponding genomic DNA in a P1 cloning vector. The FGF-8 
gene has been mapped to chromosome 1Oq24 using both somatic cell hybrid genetic 
analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Finally, we show that FGF-8 
gene expression in a human breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, is inducible by 
androgen. The findings presented here will facilitate our understanding of the 
molecular mechanism underlying hormone-responsive breast and prostate cancers.

PMID: 8700553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
