---
pmid: '15499027'
title: Angiotensin II impairs neurovascular coupling in neocortex through NADPH oxidase-derived
  radicals.
authors:
- Kazama K
- Anrather J
- Zhou P
- Girouard H
- Frys K
- Milner TA
- Iadecola C
journal: Circ Res
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000148637.85595.c5
---

# Angiotensin II impairs neurovascular coupling in neocortex through NADPH oxidase-derived radicals.
**Authors:** Kazama K, Anrather J, Zhou P, Girouard H, Frys K, Milner TA, Iadecola C
**Journal:** Circ Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.RES.0000148637.85595.c5](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000148637.85595.c5)

## Abstract

1. Circ Res. 2004 Nov 12;95(10):1019-26. doi: 10.1161/01.RES.0000148637.85595.c5.
 Epub 2004 Oct 21.

Angiotensin II impairs neurovascular coupling in neocortex through NADPH 
oxidase-derived radicals.

Kazama K(1), Anrather J, Zhou P, Girouard H, Frys K, Milner TA, Iadecola C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill 
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) exerts detrimental effects on cerebral circulation, the 
mechanisms of which have not been elucidated. In particular, Ang II impairs the 
increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF) produced by neural activity, a critical 
mechanism that matches substrate delivery with energy demands in brain. We 
investigated whether Ang II exerts its deleterious actions by activating Ang II 
type 1 (AT1) receptors on cerebral blood vessels and producing reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) through NADPH oxidase. Somatosensory cortex CBF was monitored in 
anesthetized mice by laser-Doppler flowmetry. Ang II (0.25 microg/kg per minute 
IV) attenuated the CBF increase produced by mechanical stimulation of the 
vibrissae. The effect was blocked by the AT1 antagonist losartan and by ROS 
scavenger superoxide dismutase or tiron and was not observed in mice lacking the 
gp91phox subunit of NADPH oxidase or in wild-type mice treated with the NADPH 
oxidase peptide inhibitor gp91ds-tat. Ang II increased ROS production in 
cerebral microvessels, an effect blocked by the ROS scavenger Mn(III)tetrakis 
(4-benzoic acid) porphyrin and by the NADPH oxidase assembly inhibitor apocynin. 
Ang II did not increase ROS production in gp91-null mice. Double-label 
immunoelectron microscopy demonstrated that AT1 and gp91phox immunoreactivities 
were present in endothelium and adventitia of neocortical arterioles. 
Collectively, these findings suggest that Ang II impairs functional hyperemia by 
activating AT1 receptors and inducing ROS production via a gp91phox containing 
NADPH oxidase. The data provide the mechanistic basis for the cerebrovascular 
dysregulation induced by Ang II and suggest novel therapeutic strategies to 
counteract the effects of hypertension on the brain.

DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000148637.85595.c5
PMID: 15499027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
