---
pmid: '15126635'
title: Nedd4.1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent recruitment of Tsg101 ensure
  HTLV-1 Gag trafficking towards the multivesicular body pathway prior to virus budding.
authors:
- Blot V
- Perugi F
- Gay B
- Prévost MC
- Briant L
- Tangy F
- Abriel H
- Staub O
- Dokhélar MC
- Pique C
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01095
---

# Nedd4.1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent recruitment of Tsg101 ensure HTLV-1 Gag trafficking towards the multivesicular body pathway prior to virus budding.
**Authors:** Blot V, Perugi F, Gay B, Prévost MC, Briant L, Tangy F, Abriel H, Staub O, Dokhélar MC, Pique C
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01095](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01095)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2004 May 1;117(Pt 11):2357-67. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01095.

Nedd4.1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent recruitment of Tsg101 ensure 
HTLV-1 Gag trafficking towards the multivesicular body pathway prior to virus 
budding.

Blot V(1), Perugi F, Gay B, Prévost MC, Briant L, Tangy F, Abriel H, Staub O, 
Dokhélar MC, Pique C.

Author information:
(1)Département de Biologie Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 8104 and INSERM U567, Institut 
Cochin, 75014 Paris, France.

One of the most exciting recent developments in the field of retroviruses is the 
finding that their Gag proteins hijack cellular proteins from the mutivesicular 
body (MVB) pathway during the budding process. The Gag proteins of 
oncoretroviruses possess a PPxY motif that recruits a ubiquitin ligase from the 
Nedd4 family, whereas those of the human immunodeficiency virus interact through 
a PTAP motif with Tsg101, a protein of the ESCRT-1 complex. It is currently 
assumed that Nedd4 and Tsg101 represent equivalent entry gates towards the same 
cellular process leading to budding, and that both partners are recruited to the 
plasma membrane where viral budding occurs. However, we report here that the 
budding of the human oncoretrovirus HTLV-1, the Gag proteins of which possess 
tandem PPPY/PTAP motifs, requires both Nedd4 and Tsg101. We show that Nedd4.1, 
but not Nedd4.2, is recruited by the PPPY motif of Gag and subsequently 
catalyzes Gag ubiquitination. We also demonstrate that Gag interacts first with 
Nedd4.1 at the plasma membrane and then with Tsg101 in late endosomes/MVBs. 
Consistently, we found that HTLV-1 particles mutated in the PPPY motif remain 
underneath the plasma membrane, blocked at an early step of the budding process, 
whereas PTAP-mutated viruses accumulate in intracellular vesicles, blocked at a 
later step. Our findings indicate that Nedd4.1 and Tsg101 act successively in 
the assembly process of HTLV-1 to ensure proper Gag trafficking through the 
endocytic pathway up to late endosomes where the late steps of retroviral 
release occur.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01095
PMID: 15126635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
