---
pmid: '19696785'
title: Hsp90 is regulated by a switch point in the C-terminal domain.
authors:
- Retzlaff M
- Stahl M
- Eberl HC
- Lagleder S
- Beck J
- Kessler H
- Buchner J
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2759728
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.153
---

# Hsp90 is regulated by a switch point in the C-terminal domain.
**Authors:** Retzlaff M, Stahl M, Eberl HC, Lagleder S, Beck J, Kessler H, Buchner J
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.153](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.153)
**PMC:** [PMC2759728](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2759728/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Oct;10(10):1147-53. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.153. Epub 2009 Aug 
21.

Hsp90 is regulated by a switch point in the C-terminal domain.

Retzlaff M(1), Stahl M, Eberl HC, Lagleder S, Beck J, Kessler H, Buchner J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrated Protein Science, Department of Chemistry, Technische 
Universität München, Garching, Germany.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2009 Oct;10(10):1093-4. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.212.

Heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) is an abundant, dimeric ATP-dependent molecular 
chaperone, and ATPase activity is essential for its in vivo functions. 
S-nitrosylation of a residue located in the carboxy-terminal domain has been 
shown to affect Hsp90 activity in vivo. To understand how variation of a 
specific amino acid far away from the amino-terminal ATP-binding site regulates 
Hsp90 functions, we mutated the corresponding residue and analysed yeast and 
human Hsp90 variants both in vivo and in vitro. Here, we show that this residue 
is a conserved, strong regulator of Hsp90 functions, including ATP hydrolysis 
and chaperone activity. Unexpectedly, the variants alter both the C-terminal and 
N-terminal association properties of Hsp90, and shift its conformational 
equilibrium within the ATPase cycle. Thus, S-nitrosylation of this residue 
allows the fast and efficient fine regulation of Hsp90.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.153
PMCID: PMC2759728
PMID: 19696785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
