---
pmid: '9792704'
title: The mechanism underlying cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
  transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome includes Sec61beta and
  a cytosolic, deglycosylated intermediary.
authors:
- Bebök Z
- Mazzochi C
- King SA
- Hong JS
- Sorscher EJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.45.29873
---

# The mechanism underlying cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome includes Sec61beta and a cytosolic, deglycosylated intermediary.
**Authors:** Bebök Z, Mazzochi C, King SA, Hong JS, Sorscher EJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.45.29873](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.45.29873)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 6;273(45):29873-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.45.29873.

The mechanism underlying cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the proteasome includes Sec61beta 
and a cytosolic, deglycosylated intermediary.

Bebök Z(1), Mazzochi C, King SA, Hong JS, Sorscher EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294, USA.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) degradation pathways can selectively route proteins 
away from folding and maturation. Both soluble and integral membrane proteins 
can be targeted from the ER to proteasomal degradation in this fashion. The 
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is an integral, 
multidomain membrane protein localized to the apical surface of epithelial cells 
that functions to facilitate Cl- transport. CFTR was among the first membrane 
proteins for which a role of the proteasome in ER-related degradation was 
described. However, the signals that route CFTR to ubiquitination and subsequent 
degradation are not known. Moreover, limited information is available concerning 
the subcellular localization of polyubiquitinated CFTR or mechanisms underlying 
retrograde dislocation of CFTR from the ER membrane to the proteasome either 
before or after ubiquitination. In the present study, we show that proteasome 
inhibition with clasto-lactacystin beta-lactone (4 microM, 1 h) stabilizes the 
presence of a deglycosylated CFTR intermediate for up to 5 h without increasing 
the core glycosylated (band B) form of CFTR. Deglycosylated CFTR is present 
under the same conditions that result in accumulation of polyubiquitinated CFTR. 
Moreover, the deglycosylated form of both wild type and DeltaF508 CFTR can be 
found in the cytosolic fraction. Both the level and stability of cytosolic, 
deglycosylated CFTR are increased by proteasome blockade. During retrograde 
translocation from the ER to the cytosol, CFTR associates with the Sec61 
trimeric complex. Sec61 is the key component of the mammalian co-translational 
protein translocation system and has been proposed to function as a two way 
channel that transports proteins both into the ER and back to the cytosol for 
degradation. We show that the level of the Sec61.CFTR complexes are highest when 
CFTR degradation proceeds at the greatest rate (approximately 90 min after pulse 
labeling). Quantities of Sec61.CFTR complexes are also increased by inhibition 
of the proteasome. Based on these results, we propose a model in which complex 
membrane proteins such as CFTR are transported through the Sec61 trimeric 
complex back to the cytosol, escorted by the beta subunit of Sec61, and degraded 
by the proteasome or by other proteolytic systems.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.45.29873
PMID: 9792704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
