---
pmid: '15220348'
title: Mammalian wax biosynthesis. I. Identification of two fatty acyl-Coenzyme A
  reductases with different substrate specificities and tissue distributions.
authors:
- Cheng JB
- Russell DW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2757098
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406225200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mammalian wax biosynthesis. I. Identification of two fatty acyl-Coenzyme A reductases with different substrate specificities and tissue distributions.
**Authors:** Cheng JB, Russell DW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M406225200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M406225200)
**PMC:** [PMC2757098](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2757098/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):37789-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M406225200. Epub
2004  Jun 27.

Mammalian wax biosynthesis. I. Identification of two fatty acyl-Coenzyme A 
reductases with different substrate specificities and tissue distributions.

Cheng JB(1), Russell DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

The conversion of fatty acids to fatty alcohols is required for the synthesis of 
wax monoesters and ether lipids. The mammalian enzymes that synthesize fatty 
alcohols have not been identified. Here, an in silico approach was used to 
discern two putative reductase enzymes designated FAR1 and FAR2. Expression 
studies in intact cells showed that FAR1 and FAR2 cDNAs encoded isozymes that 
reduced fatty acids to fatty alcohols. Fatty acyl-CoA esters were the substrate 
of FAR1, and the enzyme required NADPH as a cofactor. FAR1 preferred saturated 
and unsaturated fatty acids of 16 or 18 carbons as substrates, whereas FAR2 
preferred saturated fatty acids of 16 or 18 carbons. Confocal light microscopy 
indicated that FAR1 and FAR2 were localized in the peroxisome. The FAR1 mRNA was 
detected in many mouse tissues with the highest level found in the preputial 
gland, a modified sebaceous gland. The FAR2 mRNA was more restricted in 
distribution and most abundant in the eyelid, which contains wax-laden meibomian 
glands. Both FAR mRNAs were present in the brain, a tissue rich in ether lipids. 
The data suggest that fatty alcohol synthesis in mammals is accomplished by two 
fatty acyl-CoA reductase isozymes that are expressed at high levels in tissues 
known to synthesize wax monoesters and ether lipids.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M406225200
PMCID: PMC2757098
PMID: 15220348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
