---
pmid: '10757788'
title: In vitro assembly of human H/ACA small nucleolar RNPs reveals unique features
  of U17 and telomerase RNAs.
authors:
- Dragon F
- Pogacić V
- Filipowicz W
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC85579
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.9.3037-3048.2000
---

# In vitro assembly of human H/ACA small nucleolar RNPs reveals unique features of U17 and telomerase RNAs.
**Authors:** Dragon F, Pogacić V, Filipowicz W
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.9.3037-3048.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.9.3037-3048.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC85579](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC85579/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):3037-48. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.9.3037-3048.2000.

In vitro assembly of human H/ACA small nucleolar RNPs reveals unique features of 
U17 and telomerase RNAs.

Dragon F(1), Pogacić V, Filipowicz W.

Author information:
(1)Friedrich Miescher-Institut, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

The H/ACA small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are involved in pseudouridylation of 
pre-rRNAs. They usually fold into a two-domain hairpin-hinge-hairpin-tail 
structure, with the conserved motifs H and ACA located in the hinge and tail, 
respectively. Synthetic RNA transcripts and extracts from HeLa cells were used 
to reconstitute human U17 and other H/ACA ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) in vitro. 
Competition and UV cross-linking experiments showed that proteins of about 60, 
29, 23, and 14 kDa interact specifically with U17 RNA. Except for U17, RNPs 
could be reconstituted only with full-length H/ACA snoRNAs. For U17, the 
3'-terminal stem-loop followed by box ACA (U17/3'st) was sufficient to form an 
RNP, and U17/3'st could compete other full-length H/ACA snoRNAs for assembly. 
The H/ACA-like domain that constitutes the 3' moiety of human telomerase RNA 
(hTR), and its 3'-terminal stem-loop (hTR/3'st), also could form an RNP by 
binding H/ACA proteins. Hence, the 3'-terminal stem-loops of U17 and hTR have 
some specific features that distinguish them from other H/ACA RNAs. Antibodies 
that specifically recognize the human GAR1 (hGAR1) protein could 
immunoprecipitate H/ACA snoRNAs and hTR from HeLa cell extracts, which 
demonstrates that hGAR1 is a component of H/ACA snoRNPs and telomerase in vivo. 
Moreover, we show that in vitro-reconstituted RNPs contain hGAR1 and that 
binding of hGAR1 does not appear to be a prerequisite for the assembly of the 
other H/ACA proteins.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.9.3037-3048.2000
PMCID: PMC85579
PMID: 10757788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
