---
pmid: '16998468'
title: Distinct catalytic and non-catalytic roles of ARGONAUTE4 in RNA-directed DNA
  methylation.
authors:
- Qi Y
- He X
- Wang XJ
- Kohany O
- Jurka J
- Hannon GJ
journal: Nature
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature05198
---

# Distinct catalytic and non-catalytic roles of ARGONAUTE4 in RNA-directed DNA methylation.
**Authors:** Qi Y, He X, Wang XJ, Kohany O, Jurka J, Hannon GJ
**Journal:** Nature (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature05198](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05198)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2006 Oct 26;443(7114):1008-12. doi: 10.1038/nature05198. Epub 2006 Sep
 24.

Distinct catalytic and non-catalytic roles of ARGONAUTE4 in RNA-directed DNA
methylation.

Qi Y(1), He X, Wang XJ, Kohany O, Jurka J, Hannon GJ.

Author information:
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Watson School of Biological Sciences and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, New York
11724, USA.

DNA methylation has important functions in stable, transcriptional gene
silencing, immobilization of transposable elements and genome organization. In
Arabidopsis, DNA methylation can be induced by double-stranded RNA through the
RNA interference (RNAi) pathway, a response known as RNA-directed DNA
methylation. This requires a specialized set of RNAi components, including
ARGONAUTE4 (AGO4). Here we show that AGO4 binds to small RNAs including small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) originating from transposable and repetitive elements,
and cleaves target RNA transcripts. Single mutations in the Asp-Asp-His
catalytic motif of AGO4 do not affect siRNA-binding activity but abolish its
catalytic potential. siRNA accumulation and non-CpG DNA methylation at some loci
require the catalytic activity of AGO4, whereas others are less dependent on
this activity. Our results are consistent with a model in which AGO4 can
function at target loci through two distinct and separable mechanisms. First,
AGO4 can recruit components that signal DNA methylation in a manner independent
of its catalytic activity. Second, AGO4 catalytic activity can be crucial for
the generation of secondary siRNAs that reinforce its repressive effects.

DOI: 10.1038/nature05198
PMID: 16998468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
