---
pmid: '15060137'
title: Regulation of mammalian epithelial differentiation and intestine development
  by class I histone deacetylases.
authors:
- Tou L
- Liu Q
- Shivdasani RA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC381684
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.8.3132-3139.2004
---

# Regulation of mammalian epithelial differentiation and intestine development by class I histone deacetylases.
**Authors:** Tou L, Liu Q, Shivdasani RA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.8.3132-3139.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.8.3132-3139.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC381684](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC381684/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(8):3132-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.8.3132-3139.2004.

Regulation of mammalian epithelial differentiation and intestine development by 
class I histone deacetylases.

Tou L(1), Liu Q, Shivdasani RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The biochemical mechanisms underlying epigenetic control of gene expression are 
increasingly well known. In contrast, the contributions of individual 
modifications toward activation of lineage-specific genes during vertebrate 
development are poorly understood. Class II histone deacetylases (HDACs), which 
show restricted tissue distribution, regulate muscle-specific gene expression, 
in part through interactions with myogenic transcription factors. We have 
combined gene expression profiling with manipulation of fetal mouse intestinal 
tissue to define roles for other regulatory factors. We found that in the 
developing mouse intestine class I HDACs are confined to the prospective 
epithelium and that their levels decline coincidently with activation of 
differentiation genes, suggesting a functional relationship between these 
events. Overexpression of wild-type but not of mutant HDACs 1 and 2 in fetal 
intestine explants reverses expression of certain maturation markers. HDAC 
inhibitors, including the selective class I antagonist valproic acid, activate 
the same genes prematurely and accelerate cytodifferentiation. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation of freshly isolated organs reveals early HDAC2 occupancy at 
differentiation gene promoters and corresponding histone hypoacetylation that 
reverses as HDAC levels fall. Thus, modulation of endogenous class I HDAC levels 
represents a previously unappreciated mechanism to enable onset of 
tissue-restricted gene expression in a developing mammalian organ.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.8.3132-3139.2004
PMCID: PMC381684
PMID: 15060137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
