---
pmid: '18270207'
title: Atlastin GTPases are required for Golgi apparatus and ER morphogenesis.
authors:
- Rismanchi N
- Soderblom C
- Stadler J
- Zhu PP
- Blackstone C
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2902292
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn046
---

# Atlastin GTPases are required for Golgi apparatus and ER morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Rismanchi N, Soderblom C, Stadler J, Zhu PP, Blackstone C
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddn046](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddn046)
**PMC:** [PMC2902292](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2902292/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jun 1;17(11):1591-604. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn046. Epub 2008 
Feb 12.

Atlastin GTPases are required for Golgi apparatus and ER morphogenesis.

Rismanchi N(1), Soderblom C, Stadler J, Zhu PP, Blackstone C.

Author information:
(1)Cellular Neurology Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The hereditary spastic paraplegias (SPG1-33) comprise a cluster of inherited 
neurological disorders characterized principally by lower extremity spasticity 
and weakness due to a length-dependent, retrograde axonopathy of corticospinal 
motor neurons. Mutations in the gene encoding the large oligomeric GTPase 
atlastin-1 are responsible for SPG3A, a common autosomal dominant hereditary 
spastic paraplegia. Here we describe a family of human GTPases, atlastin-2 and 
-3 that are closely related to atlastin-1. Interestingly, while atlastin-1 is 
predominantly localized to vesicular tubular complexes and cis-Golgi cisternae, 
mostly in brain, atlastin-2 and -3 are localized to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) and are most enriched in other tissues. Knockdown of atlastin-2 and -3 
levels in HeLa cells using siRNA (small interfering RNA) causes disruption of 
Golgi morphology, and these Golgi structures remain sensitive to brefeldin A 
treatment. Interestingly, expression of SPG3A mutant or dominant-negative 
atlastin proteins lacking GTPase activity causes prominent inhibition of ER 
reticularization, suggesting a role for atlastin GTPases in the formation of 
three-way junctions in the ER. However, secretory pathway trafficking as 
assessed using vesicular stomatitis virus G protein fused to green fluorescent 
protein (VSVG-GFP) as a reporter was essentially normal in both knockdown and 
dominant-negative overexpression conditions for all atlastins. Thus, the 
atlastin family of GTPases functions prominently in both ER and Golgi 
morphogenesis, but they do not appear to be required generally for anterograde 
ER-to-Golgi trafficking. Abnormal morphogenesis of the ER and Golgi resulting 
from mutations in atlastin-1 may ultimately underlie SPG3A by interfering with 
proper membrane distribution or polarity of the long corticospinal motor 
neurons.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn046
PMCID: PMC2902292
PMID: 18270207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
