---
pmid: '10382761'
title: 'Fcgamma receptor-mediated inhibition of human B cell activation: the role
  of SHP-2 phosphatase.'
authors:
- Koncz G
- Pecht I
- Gergely J
- Sármay G
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199906)29:06<1980::AID-IMMU1980>3.0.CO;2-B
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Fcgamma receptor-mediated inhibition of human B cell activation: the role of SHP-2 phosphatase.
**Authors:** Koncz G, Pecht I, Gergely J, Sármay G
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199906)29:06<1980::AID-IMMU1980>3.0.CO;2-B](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199906)29:06<1980::AID-IMMU1980>3.0.CO;2-B)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Jun;29(6):1980-9. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199906)29:06<1980::AID-IMMU1980>3.0.CO;2-B.

Fcgamma receptor-mediated inhibition of human B cell activation: the role of 
SHP-2 phosphatase.

Koncz G(1), Pecht I, Gergely J, Sármay G.

Author information:
(1)Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Science at the Department of 
Immunology, L. Eötvös University, Göd.

Co-clustering of the type II receptors binding the Fc part of IgG (FcgammaRIIb) 
and B cell receptors results in the translocation of cytosolic, negative 
regulatory molecules to the phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-based 
inhibitory motif (P-ITIM) of the FcgammaRIIb. SH2 domain-containing protein 
tyrosine phosphatases (SHP-1 and SHP-2), and the polyphosphoinositol 
5'-phosphatase (SHIP) have been reported earlier to bind to murine FcgammaRIIb 
P-ITIM. However, neither the functional substrates of these enzymes, nor the 
mechanism of the inhibition are fully resolved. We show here that the human 
FcgammaRIIb binds SHP-2 when co-clustered with the B cell receptors, whereas its 
synthetic P-ITIM peptide bindes SHP-2 and SHIP in lysates of the Burkitt's 
lymphoma cell line BL41. The P-ITIM peptide binding enhances SHP-2 activity, 
resulting in dephosphorylation and release of P-ITIM-bound SHIP and Shc. 
Moreover, P-ITIM-bound SHP-2 dephosphorylates synthetic peptides corresponding 
to the sites of tyrosine phosphorylation on SHIP and Shc, indicating that these 
proteins are its potential substrates. Thus SHP-2-induced dephosphorylation may 
modulate the intracellular localization and/or activity of SHIP and Shc, thereby 
inhibiting further activation pathways which they mediate.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199906)29:06<1980::AID-IMMU1980>3.0.CO;2-B
PMID: 10382761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
