---
reference_id: PMID:37199759
title: A selectivity filter in the ER membrane protein complex limits protein misinsertion at the ER.
authors:
- Pleiner T
- Hazu M
- Pinton Tomaleri G
- Nguyen VN
- Januszyk K
- Voorhees RM
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1083/jcb.202212007
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# A selectivity filter in the ER membrane protein complex limits protein misinsertion at the ER.
**Authors:** Pleiner T, Hazu M, Pinton Tomaleri G, Nguyen VN, Januszyk K, Voorhees RM
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.202212007](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202212007)

## Content

1. J Cell Biol. 2023 Aug 7;222(8):e202212007. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202212007. Epub
2023  May 18.

A selectivity filter in the ER membrane protein complex limits protein 
misinsertion at the ER.

Pleiner T(#)(1), Hazu M(#)(1), Pinton Tomaleri G(#)(1), Nguyen VN(1), Januszyk 
K(1), Voorhees RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology , Pasadena, CA, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    J Cell Biol. 2023 Aug 7;222(8):e202306035. doi: 10.1083/jcb.202306035.

Tail-anchored (TA) proteins play essential roles in mammalian cells, and their 
accurate localization is critical for proteostasis. Biophysical similarities 
lead to mistargeting of mitochondrial TA proteins to the ER, where they are 
delivered to the insertase, the ER membrane protein complex (EMC). Leveraging an 
improved structural model of the human EMC, we used mutagenesis and 
site-specific crosslinking to map the path of a TA protein from its cytosolic 
capture by methionine-rich loops to its membrane insertion through a hydrophilic 
vestibule. Positively charged residues at the entrance to the vestibule function 
as a selectivity filter that uses charge-repulsion to reject mitochondrial TA 
proteins. Similarly, this selectivity filter retains the positively charged 
soluble domains of multipass substrates in the cytosol, thereby ensuring they 
adopt the correct topology and enforcing the "positive-inside" rule. Substrate 
discrimination by the EMC provides a biochemical explanation for one role of 
charge in TA protein sorting and protects compartment integrity by limiting 
protein misinsertion.

© 2023 Pleiner et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.202212007
PMCID: PMC10200711
PMID: 37199759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: R.M. Voorhees reported personal 
fees from Gate Biosciences and grants from Gate Biosciences outside the 
submitted work. R.M. Voorhees and G. Pinton Tomaleri are consultants for Gates 
Biosciences, and R.M. Voorhees is an equity holder. No other disclosures were 
reported.