---
pmid: '21474779'
title: Species-specific collaboration of heat shock proteins (Hsp) 70 and 100 in thermotolerance
  and protein disaggregation.
authors:
- Miot M
- Reidy M
- Doyle SM
- Hoskins JR
- Johnston DM
- Genest O
- Vitery MC
- Masison DC
- Wickner S
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3084080
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1102828108
---

# Species-specific collaboration of heat shock proteins (Hsp) 70 and 100 in thermotolerance and protein disaggregation.
**Authors:** Miot M, Reidy M, Doyle SM, Hoskins JR, Johnston DM, Genest O, Vitery MC, Masison DC, Wickner S
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1102828108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1102828108)
**PMC:** [PMC3084080](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3084080/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 26;108(17):6915-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1102828108. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Species-specific collaboration of heat shock proteins (Hsp) 70 and 100 in 
thermotolerance and protein disaggregation.

Miot M(1), Reidy M, Doyle SM, Hoskins JR, Johnston DM, Genest O, Vitery MC, 
Masison DC, Wickner S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Yeast Hsp104 and its bacterial homolog, ClpB, are Clp/Hsp100 molecular 
chaperones and AAA+ ATPases. Hsp104 and ClpB collaborate with the Hsp70 and DnaK 
chaperone systems, respectively, to retrieve and reactivate stress-denatured 
proteins from aggregates. The action of Hsp104 and ClpB in promoting cell 
survival following heat stress is species-specific: Hsp104 cannot function in 
bacteria and ClpB cannot act in yeast. To determine the regions of Hsp104 and 
ClpB necessary for this specificity, we tested chimeras of Hsp104 and ClpB in 
vivo and in vitro. We show that the Hsp104 and ClpB middle domains dictate the 
species-specificity of Hsp104 and ClpB for cell survival at high temperature. In 
protein reactivation assays in vitro, chimeras containing the Hsp104 middle 
domain collaborate with Hsp70 and those with the ClpB middle domain function 
with DnaK. The region responsible for the specificity is within helix 2 and 
helix 3 of the middle domain. Additionally, several mutants containing amino 
acid substitutions in helix 2 of the ClpB middle domain are defective in protein 
disaggregation in collaboration with DnaK. In a bacterial two-hybrid assay, DnaK 
interacts with ClpB and with chimeras that have the ClpB middle domain, implying 
that species-specificity is due to an interaction between DnaK and the middle 
domain of ClpB. Our results suggest that the interaction between Hsp70/DnaK and 
helix 2 of the middle domain of Hsp104/ClpB determines the specificity required 
for protein disaggregation both in vivo and in vitro, as well as for cellular 
thermotolerance.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1102828108
PMCID: PMC3084080
PMID: 21474779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
