---
pmid: '8613547'
title: Hepatic and neuromuscular forms of glycogen storage disease type IV caused
  by mutations in the same glycogen-branching enzyme gene.
authors:
- Bao Y
- Kishnani P
- Wu JY
- Chen YT
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC507139
doi: 10.1172/JCI118517
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Hepatic and neuromuscular forms of glycogen storage disease type IV caused by mutations in the same glycogen-branching enzyme gene.
**Authors:** Bao Y, Kishnani P, Wu JY, Chen YT
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118517](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118517)
**PMC:** [PMC507139](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC507139/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1996 Feb 15;97(4):941-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI118517.

Hepatic and neuromuscular forms of glycogen storage disease type IV caused by 
mutations in the same glycogen-branching enzyme gene.

Bao Y(1), Kishnani P, Wu JY, Chen YT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina 27710, USA.

Glycogen storage disease type IV (GSD-IV) is an autosomal recessive disease 
resulting from deficient glycogen-branching enzyme (GBE) activity. The classic 
and most common form is progressive liver cirrhosis and failure leading to 
either liver transplantation or death by 5 yr of age. However, the liver disease 
is not always progressive. In addition, a neuromuscular type of the disease has 
been reported. The molecular basis of GSD-IV is not known, nor is there a known 
reason for the clinical variability. We studied the GBE gene in patients with 
various presentations of GSD-IV. Three point mutations in the GBE gene were 
found in two patients with the classical presentation: R515C, F257L, and R524X. 
Transient expression experiments showed that these mutations inactivated GBE 
activity. Two point mutations, L224P and Y329S, were detected in two separate 
alleles of a patient with the nonprogressive hepatic form. The L224P resulted in 
complete loss of GBE activity, whereas the Y329S resulted in loss of 
approximately 50% of GBE activity. The Y329S allele was also detected in another 
patient with the nonprogressive form of GSD-IV but not in 35 unrelated controls 
or in patients with the more severe forms of GSD-IV. A 210-bp deletion from 
nucleotide 873 to 1082 of the GBE cDNA was detected in a patient with the fatal 
neonatal neuromuscular presentation. This deletion, representing the loss of one 
full exon, was caused by a 3' acceptor splicing site mutation (ag to aa). The 
deletion abolished GBE activity. Our studies indicate that the three different 
forms of GSD-IV were caused by mutations in the same GBE gene. The data also 
suggest that the significant retention of GBE activity in the Y329S allele may 
be a reason for the mild disease. Further study of genotype/phenotype 
correlations may yield useful information in predicting the clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118517
PMCID: PMC507139
PMID: 8613547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
