---
pmid: '21376595'
title: IQGAP-related Rng2p organizes cortical nodes and ensures position of cell division
  in fission yeast.
authors:
- Padmanabhan A
- Bakka K
- Sevugan M
- Naqvi NI
- D'souza V
- Tang X
- Mishra M
- Balasubramanian MK
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.059
---

# IQGAP-related Rng2p organizes cortical nodes and ensures position of cell division in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Padmanabhan A, Bakka K, Sevugan M, Naqvi NI, D'souza V, Tang X, Mishra M, Balasubramanian MK
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.059)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2011 Mar 22;21(6):467-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.059. Epub 2011
 Mar 3.

IQGAP-related Rng2p organizes cortical nodes and ensures position of cell 
division in fission yeast.

Padmanabhan A(1), Bakka K, Sevugan M, Naqvi NI, D'souza V, Tang X, Mishra M, 
Balasubramanian MK.

Author information:
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, The National University of Singapore, 1 
Research Link, Singapore 117604, Singapore.

Correct positioning of the cell division machinery is crucial for genomic 
stability and cell fate determination. The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe, like animal cells, divides using an actomyosin ring and is an attractive 
model to study eukaryotic cytokinesis. In S. pombe, positioning of the 
actomyosin ring depends on the anillin-related protein Mid1p. Mid1p arrives 
first at the medial cortex and recruits actomyosin ring components to node-like 
structures, although how this is achieved is unknown. Here we show that the 
IQGAP-related protein Rng2p, an essential component of the actomyosin ring, is a 
key element downstream of Mid1p. Rng2p physically interacts with Mid1p and is 
required for the organization of other actomyosin ring components into cortical 
nodes. Failure of localization of Rng2p to the nodes prevents medial retention 
of Mid1p and leads to actomyosin ring assembly in a node-independent manner at 
nonmedial locations. We conclude that Mid1p recruits Rng2p to cortical nodes at 
the division site and that Rng2p, in turn, recruits other components of the 
actomyosin ring to cortical nodes, thereby ensuring correct placement of the 
division site.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.01.059
PMID: 21376595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
