---
pmid: '20810650'
title: A genetic screen identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage signaling
  and ATM and ATR stability.
authors:
- Hurov KE
- Cotta-Ramusino C
- Elledge SJ
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2932975
doi: 10.1101/gad.1934210
---

# A genetic screen identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage signaling and ATM and ATR stability.
**Authors:** Hurov KE, Cotta-Ramusino C, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1934210](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1934210)
**PMC:** [PMC2932975](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2932975/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2010 Sep 1;24(17):1939-50. doi: 10.1101/gad.1934210.

A genetic screen identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage 
signaling and ATM and ATR stability.

Hurov KE(1), Cotta-Ramusino C, Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical 
School, Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In response to DNA damage, cells activate a complex signal transduction network 
called the DNA damage response (DDR). To enhance our current understanding of 
the DDR network, we performed a genome-wide RNAi screen to identify genes 
required for resistance to ionizing radiation (IR). Along with a number of known 
DDR genes, we discovered a large set of novel genes whose depletion leads to 
cellular sensitivity to IR. Here we describe TTI1 (Tel two-interacting protein 
1) and TTI2 as highly conserved regulators of the DDR in mammals. TTI1 and TTI2 
protect cells from spontaneous DNA damage, and are required for the 
establishment of the intra-S and G2/M checkpoints. TTI1 and TTI2 exist in 
multiple complexes, including a 2-MDa complex with TEL2 (telomere maintenance 
2), called the Triple T complex, and phosphoinositide-3-kinase-related protein 
kinases (PIKKs) such as ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM). The components of 
the TTT complex are mutually dependent on each other, and act as critical 
regulators of PIKK abundance and checkpoint signaling.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1934210
PMCID: PMC2932975
PMID: 20810650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
