---
pmid: '19411066'
title: Regulation of XIAP translation and induction by MDM2 following irradiation.
authors:
- Gu L
- Zhu N
- Zhang H
- Durden DL
- Feng Y
- Zhou M
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2696306
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.002
---

# Regulation of XIAP translation and induction by MDM2 following irradiation.
**Authors:** Gu L, Zhu N, Zhang H, Durden DL, Feng Y, Zhou M
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.002)
**PMC:** [PMC2696306](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2696306/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2009 May 5;15(5):363-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.002.

Regulation of XIAP translation and induction by MDM2 following irradiation.

Gu L(1), Zhu N, Zhang H, Durden DL, Feng Y, Zhou M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Aflac Cancer Center and Blood Disorders Service, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Increases in protein levels of XIAP in cancer cells have been associated with 
resistance to apoptosis induced by cellular stress. Herein we demonstrate that 
the upregulation of XIAP protein levels is regulated by MDM2 at the 
translational level. MDM2 was found to physically interact with the IRES of the 
XIAP 5'-UTR, and to positively regulate XIAP IRES activity. This XIAP 
IRES-dependent translation was significantly increased in MDM2-transfected cells 
where MDM2 accumulated in the cytoplasm. Cellular stress and DNA damage 
triggered by irradiation induced the dephosphorylation and cytoplasmic 
localization of MDM2, which also led to an increase in IRES-dependent XIAP 
translation. Upregulation of XIAP in MDM2-overexpressing cancer cells in 
response to irradiation resulted in resistance of these cells to 
radiation-induced apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2009.03.002
PMCID: PMC2696306
PMID: 19411066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Inhibitor-of-Apoptosis Proteins (IAP) form a family of caspase inhibitors that block the downstream portion of the apoptosis pathway and inhibit cell death in response to multiple stimuli. There are currently eight known human IAP family members and XIAP is a very important inhibitor of apoptosis among the members ( Schimmer, 2004 ; Eckelman et al., 2006 ). XIAP has been shown to bind specifically to caspase-3, -7, and -9, inhibiting them; but not the remaining caspases ( Riedl et al., 2001 ; Shiozaki et al., 2003 ). The distinct cascades of caspase activation regulate different apoptosis pathways that can be triggered via intrinsic and extrinsic signals ( Green, 2005 ). For example, activation of caspase-9 initiates the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway of apoptosis, which is the major mechanism involved in cell death induced by cellular stress and DNA damage, such as from exposure to UV and ionizing radiation (IR) ( Kuida et al., 1998 ). Activation of caspase-3 and -7 are distal steps in this intrinsic apoptosis pathway ( Lakhani et al., 2006 ). The specific inhibition of these caspases by XIAP suggests that XIAP is a molecule that is critical for regulating sensitivity to apoptosis induced by cellular stress and DNA damage.

Previous studies have demonstrated that the expression of XIAP mRNA in most tissues and cells is fairly consistent ( Liston et al., 1996 ). Cellular stresses such as exposure to IR will induce alteration of XIAP protein expression, without concomitant changes in XIAP mRNA levels, in a variety of cancer cells ( Holcik et al., 1999 ). These observations suggest that the expression of XIAP is mainly regulated at the translational level. Initiation of translation can occur by two distinct mechanisms, cap-dependent scanning and internal ribosome entry. The latter mechanism requires an internal ribosome entry segment (IRES) located in the 5′-UTR of the mRNA and the interaction of IRES trans -acting factor (ITAF)/ribonucleoprotein (RNP) ( Stoneley et al., 2004 ). So far, IRES elements have been found mainly in mRNAs involved in regulating gene expression during development, differentiation, cell growth and survival ( Bonnal et al., 2003 ). In particular, IRES of certain anti-apoptotic genes become activated under conditions where cap-dependent protein synthesis is greatly reduced, such as upon cellular stress and DNA damage; thus, activated IRES initiates translation of proteins that can protect cells from stress ( Komar et al., 2005 ). It is known that XIAP translation is uniquely regulated by the IRES mechanism. There is a 162-nucleotide (nt) IRES sequence in the 5′-UTR of XIAP mRNA ( Holcik et al., 1999 ). Three ITAFs/RNPs, namely La, hnRNP C1/C2, and hnRNP A1, have been identified as able to regulate XIAP IRES activity ( Holcik et al., 2000a ; Holcik et al., 2003 ; Lewis et al., 2007 ). Reports show that IRES-regulated XIAP translation is activated in cancer cells in response to IR, and that upregulation of XIAP results in increased resistance to apoptosis induced by this stress stimulation ( Holcik et al., 2000b ; Lewis et al., 2005 ).

The MDM2 protein is a multifunctional oncoprotein, and its ability to inactivate the p53 function through interaction with this tumor suppressor has been well characterized. In addition to interacting with and regulating p53, it has been demonstrated that MDM2 interacts with other molecules including specific protein and RNA, which may play a p53-independent role in oncogenesis. For example, MDM2 was shown to bind to and ubiquitinate Rb, resulting in Rb degradation and release of the E2F1 that promotes cell cycle progression ( Xiao et al., 1995 ). MDM2 was also found to bind E2F1 directly, and to enhance E2F1 stability ( Zhang et al., 2005 ). The C-terminal RING finger domain of MDM2 was found to exhibit specific RNA binding ability. A SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment) procedure yielded a subset of RNA molecules that bind efficiently to MDM2 in vitro ( Elenbaas et al., 1996 ).

Aside from regulating other cellular molecules, MDM2 itself is modulated by various cellular signals. Phosphorylation and subcellular distribution of MDM2 is regulated by the PI3K/Akt pathway ( Mayo et al., 2001 ). Cell growth/survival factor-induced activation of PI3K and its downstream target Akt will phosphorylate cytoplasmic MDM2 on serines 166 and 186. Phosphorylation of these sites is required for translocation of MDM2 from the cytoplasm into the nucleus. In contrast to survival signals that induce MDM2 phosphorylation, cellular stress and DNA damage invoke dephosphorylation of MDM2 ( Meek et al., 2003 ; Blattner et al., 2002 ). It has been shown that dephosphorylation of the central acidic domain of MDM2 is essential for accumulation and stabilization of p53 in stressed wild-type (wt)-p53 cells. Stress also induces signaling for dephosphorylation of MDM2 at serine 166 ( Okamoto et al., 2002 ), which may lead to inhibition of nuclear entry of MDM2 or an increase in its translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Once MDM2 is released from p53 and is localized in the cytoplasm, it could play a p53-independent role. Since MDM2 is able to bind RNA and shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, which are the properties of most ITAFs/RNPs, we hypothesize that the dephosphorylated cytoplasmic MDM2 may act as an ITAF/RNP to exhibit a p53-independent role in regulating translation through binding of its C-terminus to specific RNA.

We have previously demonstrated a link between MDM2 and XIAP. In a study utilizing transfection of MDM2 into a p53-null leukemia cell line, we found that the expression of XIAP protein is upregulated in the MDM2-transfected cells ( Gu et al., 2002 ). Because the expression of XIAP is primarily regulated at the translational level though the IRES-dependent mechanism, we have now investigated the possible regulation of XIAP translation by MDM2 and the mechanism by which MDM2 acts as an ITAF/RNP to regulate XIAP IRES activity. Furthermore, we investigated the impact of MDM2-mediated XIAP expression on irradiation-induced apoptosis in human cancer cells.

Discussion

It is noted that overexpression of MDM2 independently of p53 is involved in chemoresistance and tumor progression. However, the mechanisms underlying all these activities are presently not well defined. For example, it is not clear why many alternatively spliced forms of MDM2 lacking the N-terminal p53 binding domain are overexpressed in a number of human cancers, nor exactly how transfection of p53-negative cells with these MDM2 variants results in tumor promotion ( Bartel et al., 2002 ; Fridman et al., 2003 ). Several studies have noted that the C-terminal RING domain of MDM2 regulates cell proliferation via a p53-independent pathway ( Argentini et al., 2000 ; Gu et al., 2003 ). Here we show that the RING finger domain of MDM2 interacted with the XIAP IRES mRNA. Importantly, cytoplasmic redistribution of MDM2, which is modulated by IR, causes a significant increase in XIAP protein levels in MDM2-overexpressing cancer cells, resulting in resistance to apoptosis. These results provide a mechanism by which MDM2 plays a p53-independent role in regulating expression of the anti-apoptotic factor XIAP, which may be involved in resistance to cancer treatment and disease progression.

A quite recent study showed that the RING finger domain of MDM2 binds to p53 mRNA in vivo , which increases p53 synthesis ( Candeias et al., 2008 ). Our results from the present study indicate that MDM2 binds to the XIAP IRES mRNA in a manner similar to binding to p53 mRNA as well as the RNA molecule, clone A, from the SELEX procedure ( Elenbaas et al., 1996 ): The amino acids 425–491 of the RING domain of MDM2 are definitely necessary and sufficient for XIAP IRES binding and the single point mutation G448S abolished that binding. We have further demonstrated that deletions of the first 10 amino acids or the last 11 amino acids of the RING domain of MDM2 disturb binding, suggesting that the entire RING domain of MDM2 is necessary for XIAP IRES binding to occur. This is also consistent with the results reported by Lai et al ( Lai et al., 1998 ), showing that the first 10 amino acids and the last 11 amino acids of the RING domain of MDM2 are critical for binding to the clone A RNA and a fragment (328–406) of human ribosomal RNA. Interestingly, in comparing the nucleotide sequences between clone A RNA and the MDM2-binding region of XIAP IRES, no similar consensus sequences were identified in these two RNAs. However, the predicted secondary structure of the MDM2-binding region within XIAP IRES was similar to that of clone A RNA. The structure of clone A RNA consists of a 3′ stem-loop (6 bp) and a 5′ stem-loop (9 bp) that are connected with a large single-stranded region of 13 nt ( Elenbaas et al., 1996 ). A recent study using enzymatic probing with RNase T1, RNase T2, and RNase V1 proposed the XIAP IRES RNA secondary structure model (Baird et al., 2007). An analogous structure to clone A RNA was found in the MDM2-binding region of XIAP IRES that consists of a 3′ stem-loop (6 bp) connecting with a large single-stranded region of 14 nt and a 5′ 9-bp incomplete stem-loop (2 bp mismatches). Binding of MDM2 to both clone A RNA and the XIAP IRES suggests that the specific secondary structure, but not the primary nucleotide sequence, is critical for MDM2 binding.

Importantly, we have demonstrated that cytoplasmic relocalization of MDM2 is required to regulate XIAP translation. MDM2 is a nuclear phosphoprotein that is constitutively phosphorylated under normal growth conditions, but becomes hypophosphorylated in response to IR ( Meek et al., 2003 ; Blattner et al., 2002 ; Okamoto et al., 2002 ). Our results indicate that IR-induced hypophosphorylation (dephosphorylation) of MDM2 led to the translocation of this protein from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. In a previous report, it has been shown that the basal levels of XIAP protein in growing/unstressed cells are similar ( Holcik et al., 2000 ). Consistent with this observation, our results showed that 5 of 6 cultured cancer cell lines studied expressed similar level of XIAP, no matter whether the cells expressed high or low levels of MDM2. This suggested that phosphorylated MDM2 in the nucleus under normal growth conditions is unable to regulate XIAP translation; thus, that MDM2 overexpression in cultured or growing cells does not necessarily relate with high levels of XIAP. However, it was IR-induced dephosphorylation of MDM2 and its movement to the cytoplasm that influenced XIAP. We have not only demonstrated that upregulation of XIAP translation following IR occurs in MDM2-overexpressing cells, but have also shown that transfection of a mutant MDM2 that localizes in the cytoplasm significantly increased XIAP IRES activity. Our findings support the notion that the subcellular compartmentalization of ITAFs controls their trans -acting activity ( Lewis et al., 2007 ).

The XIAP mRNA has both a short and long form of 5′-UTR, suggesting that XIAP translation is most likely regulated by both cap-dependent (use of short 5′-UTR) and cap-independent (use of long 5′-UTR containing IRES) mechanisms. Previous studies demonstrate that during induced cellular stresses such as exposure to IR, cap-dependent translation is rapidly inhibited ( Sheikn et al., 1999 ; Spriggs et al., 2005 ); while cap-independent (IRES-dependent) translation can persist for certain anti-apoptotic genes, including XIAP ( Stoneley et al., 2004 ; Hellen et al., 2001 ). Because the cap-independent translation of these anti-apoptotic genes under stress stimulation might delay apoptosis, allowing time for the cells to repair any damage that has incurred, it could lead to the development of resistance to apoptosis. Because MDM2 is a stress-responsive protein, the MDM2-mediated IRES-dependent translation of XIAP may be critical for resistance to radiation therapy.

It is well known that genotoxic stress such as exposure to IR activates p53, which regulates the transcription of many genes controlling cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. Less study has been done to evaluate genotoxic stress-regulated protein translation, which also forms an important component of the total cellular stress response ( Kaufman et al., 1999 ). Previous studies have claimed that the IRES-mediated translation of certain genes (such as XIAP and HIAP2) following IR confers resistance of cells to this stimulation ( Lewis et al., 2005 ). However, the mechanisms by which IRES-mediated translation contributes to IR-induced resistance are unknown. Many efforts have been made to discover the mediators involved in the modification of IRES-regulated translation in cells. In the case of XIAP, the ITAF/RNP (La, hnRNP C1/C2, and hnRNP A1) have been shown to modify XIAP IRES function ( Holcik et al., 2000 ; Holcik et al., 2003 ; Lewis et al., 2007 ); however, the association of this modification with cell stress-induced signaling is as yet unclear. Results from the present study show that stress-induced signaling regulated cytoplasmic translocation of MDM2, which subsequently induced XIAP IRES activity, resulting in upregulation of XIAP protein, conferring resistance to apoptosis. The mechanistic insights generated in this study would suggest a functional role for MDM2 in the regulation of XIAP IRES-dependent translation during cellular stress and DNA damage, extending our current understanding of resistance to radiotherapy in cancer.
