---
pmid: '19696025'
title: Stomatin-like protein-1 interacts with stomatin and is targeted to late endosomes.
authors:
- Mairhofer M
- Steiner M
- Salzer U
- Prohaska R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2781465
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014993
---

# Stomatin-like protein-1 interacts with stomatin and is targeted to late endosomes.
**Authors:** Mairhofer M, Steiner M, Salzer U, Prohaska R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.014993](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.014993)
**PMC:** [PMC2781465](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2781465/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):29218-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014993. Epub 
2009 Aug 20.

Stomatin-like protein-1 interacts with stomatin and is targeted to late 
endosomes.

Mairhofer M(1), Steiner M, Salzer U, Prohaska R.

Author information:
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna A-1030, Austria.

The human stomatin-like protein-1 (SLP-1) is a membrane protein with a 
characteristic bipartite structure containing a stomatin domain and a sterol 
carrier protein-2 (SCP-2) domain. This structure suggests a role for SLP-1 in 
sterol/lipid transfer and transport. Because SLP-1 has not been investigated, we 
first studied the molecular and cell biological characteristics of the expressed 
protein. We show here that SLP-1 localizes to the late endosomal compartment, 
like stomatin. Unlike stomatin, SLP-1 does not localize to the plasma membrane. 
Overexpression of SLP-1 leads to the redistribution of stomatin from the plasma 
membrane to late endosomes suggesting a complex formation between these 
proteins. We found that the targeting of SLP-1 to late endosomes is caused by a 
GYXXPhi (Phi being a bulky, hydrophobic amino acid) sorting signal at the N 
terminus. Mutation of this signal results in plasma membrane localization. SLP-1 
and stomatin co-localize in the late endosomal compartment, they 
co-immunoprecipitate, thus showing a direct interaction, and they associate with 
detergent-resistant membranes. In accordance with the proposed lipid transfer 
function, we show that, under conditions of blocked cholesterol efflux from late 
endosomes, SLP-1 induces the formation of enlarged, cholesterol-filled, weakly 
LAMP-2-positive, acidic vesicles in the perinuclear region. This massive 
cholesterol accumulation clearly depends on the SCP-2 domain of SLP-1, 
suggesting a role for this domain in cholesterol transfer to late endosomes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014993
PMCID: PMC2781465
PMID: 19696025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The human stomatin-like protein-1 (SLP-1) is a membrane protein with a characteristic bipartite structure containing a stomatin domain and a sterol carrier protein-2 (SCP-2) domain. This structure suggests a role for SLP-1 in sterol/lipid transfer and transport. Because SLP-1 has not been investigated, we first studied the molecular and cell biological characteristics of the expressed protein. We show here that SLP-1 localizes to the late endosomal compartment, like stomatin. Unlike stomatin, SLP-1 does not localize to the plasma membrane. Overexpression of SLP-1 leads to the redistribution of stomatin from the plasma membrane to late endosomes suggesting a complex formation between these proteins. We found that the targeting of SLP-1 to late endosomes is caused by a GY XX Φ (Φ being a bulky, hydrophobic amino acid) sorting signal at the N terminus. Mutation of this signal results in plasma membrane localization. SLP-1 and stomatin co-localize in the late endosomal compartment, they co-immunoprecipitate, thus showing a direct interaction, and they associate with detergent-resistant membranes. In accordance with the proposed lipid transfer function, we show that, under conditions of blocked cholesterol efflux from late endosomes, SLP-1 induces the formation of enlarged, cholesterol-filled, weakly LAMP-2-positive, acidic vesicles in the perinuclear region. This massive cholesterol accumulation clearly depends on the SCP-2 domain of SLP-1, suggesting a role for this domain in cholesterol transfer to late endosomes.

DISCUSSION

Nothing is known about the molecular and cell biological characteristics of the human stomatin-like protein SLP-1 except for its bipartite structure consisting of a stomatin and SCP-2/nonspecific lipid transfer protein domain ( 7 ). In the absence of antibodies to the native protein, despite many immunization attempts, we started to investigate the subcellular localization of various tagged forms (myc, HA, and GFP) of SLP-1 in various cell lines at varying expression levels. Independent of these variations, expressed SLP-1 was always identified in perinuclear vesicles that co-localized with markers for the late endosomal/lysosomal compartment. Late endosomal targeting was further supported by immunoelectron microscopy and co-localization with acidic vesicles and endocytosed TRITC-dextran. Therefore, and because of the canonical sorting signal, GY XX Φ, it is most likely that the endogenous SLP-1 is also residing in the late endosomal compartment.

Stomatin localizes to the plasma membrane and the late endosomal compartment ( 28 ). Our present study shows that SLP-1 and stomatin co-localize well in late endosomes but not at the plasma membrane, which is only positive for stomatin. Interestingly, SLP-1 overexpression led to a shift in stomatin distribution from the plasma membrane to late endosomes. This regulatory effect of SLP-1 on stomatin distribution is reminiscent of but different from the situation in C. elegans . There, the stomatin orthologue UNC-1 is localized to the plasma membrane in the presence of the SLP-1 orthologue UNC-24; however, when UNC-24 is mutated, UNC-1 localizes to perinuclear vesicles ( 41 ). Thus, UNC-24 regulates the localization of UNC-1. Although this regulation may be similar in human cells, the localization of the human orthologues is different. The regulated co-localization nevertheless, suggests an interaction between these proteins in C. elegans and human cells. Moreover, the interaction of UNC-24 with stomatin-like protein MEC-2 ( 36 ) suggests a general tendency of stomatin-like proteins to associate. We proved the postulated interaction of SLP-1 with stomatin by co-immunoprecipitation and localized the interaction site to the conserved stomatin part of SLP-1. SLP-1 does not contain a C-terminal interaction domain as described for stomatin ( 49 ) and it is currently not clear whether the hydrophobic domain, PHB domain, or the connecting region between the PHB and SCP-2 domains (residues 224–288) is responsible for interaction with stomatin. Other possible interaction sites may include the flanking residues of the respective PHB domains that are involved in trimerization of stomatin ( 53 ) or the hydrophobic domain in analogy to the caveolin-1 and -2 interaction ( 54 ). The exact interaction site remains to be identified.

A hallmark of stomatin and similar proteins is their association with DRMs/lipid rafts. Therefore, we studied DRM association of SLP-1 and stomatin by analyzing their distribution in density gradients. SLP-1 is partially associated with DRMs and its distribution resembles that of stomatin and cholesterol. DRM association of mutants SLP-1-(1–288) and SLP-1-(1–224) suggests that the PHB domain is involved, possibly in combination with the hydrophobic domain and/or palmitoylation, as described for flotillin/reggie proteins ( 55 – 57 ). This property of SLP-1 is in contrast to stomatin, which loses DRM association when mutated near the C-terminal end ( 49 ).

Analysis of the N terminus of SLP-1 revealed the canonical sorting signal, GY XX Φ, which is essential for late endosomal targeting of integral membrane proteins like LAMP-1 and -2 ( 50 ). Deletion or mutation of this signal affected the correct targeting and led to accumulation of the respective mutants at the plasma membrane. The importance of this signal was also demonstrated by the exclusive, late endosomal targeting of a chimeric protein consisting of the WT N terminus of SLP-1 and an N-terminal deletion mutant of stomatin. Mutations within the GY XX Φ motif of this chimeric protein led to plasma membrane localization. These data show that an active transport mechanism is responsible for the late endosomal targeting of SLP-1, which relies on the N-terminal sorting signal. Although the Y-based sorting signals on lysosomal-associated membrane proteins are found at the extreme C terminus within a short, well defined range from the transmembrane domain ( 50 , 58 ), we show here that this signal also functions at the N terminus of SLP-1. Apparently, the structure of the N-terminal region allows interaction of the signal with adapter protein complexes. Depending on the adapter, the cargo can be transported to the endosomal system either directly from the trans-Golgi network or indirectly via the plasma membrane ( 50 ). Because we never observed significant plasma membrane staining of SLP-1 in steady state, a direct transport mechanism may be suggested. However, the SLP-1-induced redistribution of stomatin from the plasma membrane to late endosomes argues for intermediary targeting of the plasma membrane. Moreover, strong staining of the plasma membrane when the Y-based signal is impaired may also argue for intermediary plasma membrane targeting of WT SLP-1. More detailed studies will have to clarify this issue.

To study the effect of SLP-1 on cholesterol distribution in the cell, we analyzed the concomitant localization of SLP-1-GFP and cholesterol by filipin staining. The overexpression of SLP-1-GFP in HeLa cells did not visibly change cholesterol distribution, however, it has to be considered that there are many lipid binding and transfer proteins in the cell ( 17 ) that regulate cholesterol homeostasis ( 59 ) and therefore the gain or loss of only one such protein may not result in observable changes in cholesterol distribution. To interfere with a major pathway of cholesterol efflux from the late endosomal compartment, we treated the SLP-1-GFP expressing cells with the amino steroid U18666A, which leads to cholesterol accumulation in this compartment as in Niemann-Pick type C disease ( 60 ). Under these conditions, large, cholesterol-rich vesicles or vacuoles were formed that were much larger than those produced by the drug in normal HeLa cells. In contrast, U18666A treatment of cells expressing SLP-1-(1–288)-GFP, which is lacking the SCP-2 domain, did not show this massive effect and yielded smaller vesicles like those generated in normal HeLa cells. Thus, our data suggest that the SCP-2 domain of SLP-1 is responsible for the formation of the enlarged, cholesterol-rich vesicles. Interestingly, these vesicles showed little LAMP-2 staining but were LysoTracker Red-positive, whereas a large fraction of the SLP-1-(1–288)-GFP and filipin-stained vesicles was clearly LAMP-2-positive. It is possible that LAMP-2 is degraded by cathepsins under these cholesterol accumulating conditions, as described ( 61 ). Although the identity of the enlarged, cholesterol-rich vesicles remains to be clarified, we nevertheless, show involvement of the SCP-2 domain in their generation.

SLP-1 contains two cholesterol recognition/interaction amino acid consensus motifs ( 62 ), one in the juxtamembrane region (residues 81–86) and one in the SCP-2- domain. Cholesterol recognition/interaction amino acid consensus motifs are thought to play a role in the association of proteins with cholesterol-rich domains ( 63 ). Although cholesterol binding of the first motif has yet to be demonstrated, SCP-2 binds and transfers cholesterol, fatty acids, and other lipids ( 14 ). Our data suggest that the SCP-2 domain of SLP-1 plays a role in the transfer of cholesterol to the late endosomes, whereas specific targeting of SLP-1 is based on the GY XX Φ signal. Interestingly, mutation of this signal also prevents the formation of the enlarged vesicles. This may be explained by the inability of GY XX Φ-mutated SLP-1 to transport cholesterol to the late endosomes. In contrast to SLP-1, the late endosomal/lysosomal cholesterol-binding membrane proteins NPC1 and MLN64/MENTHO are involved in cholesterol efflux from the late endosomes back to the plasma membrane and other membranes ( 64 , 65 ). Mutations of NPC1 cause inefficient cholesterol efflux and thus cholesterol accumulation in the late endosomal compartment leading to Niemann-Pick type C disease ( 66 ). Similarly, deletion of the START domain of MLN64 causes cholesterol accumulation in lysosomes ( 67 ). Diseases due to mutations of SLP-1 have not been reported to date but it may be predicted that SLP-1 dysfunction should lead to enhanced cholesterol efflux from the late endosomal compartment.

The stomatin-like proteins podocin and MEC-2 bind cholesterol and associate with ion channels in protein-cholesterol complexes thereby regulating the ion channel activity ( 40 ). Possibly, all PHB domain proteins may be involved in the formation and function of large protein-cholesterol complexes in membranes. Other proteins with a similar topology like caveolins, flotillin/reggie proteins, and reticulons may function as regulated, oligomeric, integral coat proteins with high affinity for particular lipids, thereby creating lipid microdomains ( 68 ). In addition to the structural features of these proteins, SLP-1 has a domain that is thought to be involved in cholesterol/lipid transfer. Our data are in line with this concept and suggest that SLP-1 is involved in membrane trafficking and cytoplasmic lipid distribution.
