---
pmid: '23619365'
title: MicroRNA-146a is a therapeutic target and biomarker for peripartum cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Halkein J
- Tabruyn SP
- Ricke-Hoch M
- Haghikia A
- Nguyen NQ
- Scherr M
- Castermans K
- Malvaux L
- Lambert V
- Thiry M
- Sliwa K
- Noel A
- Martial JA
- Hilfiker-Kleiner D
- Struman I
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3638905
doi: 10.1172/JCI64365
---

# MicroRNA-146a is a therapeutic target and biomarker for peripartum cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Halkein J, Tabruyn SP, Ricke-Hoch M, Haghikia A, Nguyen NQ, Scherr M, Castermans K, Malvaux L, Lambert V, Thiry M, Sliwa K, Noel A, Martial JA, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Struman I
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI64365](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI64365)
**PMC:** [PMC3638905](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3638905/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2013 May;123(5):2143-54. doi: 10.1172/JCI64365. Epub 2013 Apr
24.

MicroRNA-146a is a therapeutic target and biomarker for peripartum 
cardiomyopathy.

Halkein J(1), Tabruyn SP, Ricke-Hoch M, Haghikia A, Nguyen NQ, Scherr M, 
Castermans K, Malvaux L, Lambert V, Thiry M, Sliwa K, Noel A, Martial JA, 
Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Struman I.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, GIGA, University of Liège, 
Liège, Belgium.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 May;123(5):1925-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI69286.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a life-threatening pregnancy-associated 
cardiomyopathy in previously healthy women. Although PPCM is driven in part by 
the 16-kDa N-terminal prolactin fragment (16K PRL), the underlying molecular 
mechanisms are poorly understood. We found that 16K PRL induced microRNA-146a 
(miR-146a) expression in ECs, which attenuated angiogenesis through 
downregulation of NRAS. 16K PRL stimulated the release of miR-146a-loaded 
exosomes from ECs. The exosomes were absorbed by cardiomyocytes, increasing 
miR-146a levels, which resulted in a subsequent decrease in metabolic activity 
and decreased expression of Erbb4, Notch1, and Irak1. Mice with 
cardiomyocyte-restricted Stat3 knockout (CKO mice) exhibited a PPCM-like 
phenotype and displayed increased cardiac miR-146a expression with coincident 
downregulation of Erbb4, Nras, Notch1, and Irak1. Blocking miR-146a with locked 
nucleic acids or antago-miRs attenuated PPCM in CKO mice without interrupting 
full-length prolactin signaling, as indicated by normal nursing activities. 
Finally, miR-146a was elevated in the plasma and hearts of PPCM patients, but 
not in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. These results demonstrate that 
miR-146a is a downstream-mediator of 16K PRL that could potentially serve as a 
biomarker and therapeutic target for PPCM.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI64365
PMCID: PMC3638905
PMID: 23619365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a life-threatening pregnancy-associated
cardiomyopathy in previously healthy women. Although PPCM is driven in part by
the 16-kDa N-terminal prolactin fragment (16K PRL), the underlying molecular
mechanisms are poorly understood. We found that 16K PRL induced microRNA-146a
(miR-146a) expression in ECs, which attenuated angiogenesis through
downregulation of NRAS . 16K PRL stimulated the release of
miR-146a–loaded exosomes from ECs. The exosomes were absorbed by
cardiomyocytes, increasing miR-146a levels, which resulted in a subsequent
decrease in metabolic activity and decreased expression of Erbb4 , Notch1 , and Irak1 .
Mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted Stat3 knockout (CKO mice)
exhibited a PPCM-like phenotype and displayed increased cardiac miR-146a
expression with coincident downregulation of Erbb4 , Nras , Notch1 , and Irak1 .
Blocking miR-146a with locked nucleic acids or antago-miRs attenuated PPCM in
CKO mice without interrupting full-length prolactin signaling, as indicated by
normal nursing activities. Finally, miR-146a was elevated in the plasma and
hearts of PPCM patients, but not in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. These
results demonstrate that miR-146a is a downstream-mediator of 16K PRL that could
potentially serve as a biomarker and therapeutic target for PPCM.

Introduction

Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a life-threatening heart disease of unknown
etiology characterized by a sudden onset of heart failure in the last month of
pregnancy and/or in the first months postpartum ( 1 ). Recently, the antiangiogenic 16-kDa N-terminal prolactin fragment
(16K PRL), produced by cleavage of the full-length nursing hormone prolactin (PRL)
by cathepsin D, has been discovered as a potential factor initiating and driving
PPCM ( 2 ). We previously showed that female
mice with cardiomyocyte-specific Stat3 knockout (referred to herein
as CKO mice) develop PPCM. In these mice, increased oxidative stress activates
cardiac cathepsin D, which promotes generation of 16K PRL in the peripartum heart,
leading to decreased cardiac capillary density and reduced cardiac function, a
feature that could be prevented by treating mice with the PRL blocker bromocriptine
( 2 ). Moreover, oxidative stress, cathepsin
D, and 16K PRL are elevated in plasma probes of PPCM patients ( 2 ). Treatment with bromocriptine yielded promising results in
preventing PPCM in at-risk patients and in promoting recovery in PPCM patients
( 3 , 4 ). The antiangiogenic properties of 16K PRL are widely documented, as
it reduces abnormal retinal neovascularization in a model of oxygen-induced
retinopathy ( 5 ) and tumor growth in xenograft
mouse models ( 6 , 7 ). 16K PRL acts specifically on ECs and inhibits migration
( 8 ), blocks cell cycle progression ( 9 , 10 ),
and induces apoptosis ( 11 ). Activation of the
transcription factor NF-κB by 16K PRL in ECs appears central to these
antiangiogenic properties ( 11 ). However, the
precise mechanisms by which 16K PRL exerts its angiostatic effect have not been
elucidated, nor has the precise way by which 16K PRL induces PPCM and impairs
cardiac function.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short (19–24 nt), noncoding small RNAs that repress
gene expression posttranscriptionally by targeting the 3′-untranslated
regions (3′UTRs) of specific mRNAs ( 12 ). miRNAs that stimulate or repress angiogenesis have opened up novel
therapeutic options in pathophysiologies associated with deregulated angiogenesis
( 13 ) and vascular and cardiovascular
diseases ( 14 – 16 ). Recently, miRNA detection in the blood, protected from
endogenous RNase activity by exosomes, has emerged as a promising diagnostic tool
( 17 , 18 ). Various cell types, including ECs, release exosomes loaded with
miRNAs into the surrounding environment and blood, where they may work as systemic
and intercellular communicators ( 19 ). Here,
we discovered that 16K PRL mediated a large part of its effects via induction of
microRNA-146a (miR-146a) in ECs. miR-146a promoted endothelial injury and, in a
paracrine manner via miR-146a–loaded endothelial exosomes, reduced
cardiomyocyte metabolic activities. This 16K PRL–miR-146a circuit appears
to play a major role in the development of PPCM, since blocking miR-146a in CKO mice
by the use of locked nucleic acid–modified (LNA-modified) antisense
oligonucleotides or antago-miRs largely prevented the development of the PPCM
phenotype. In contrast to complete PRL blockade with bromocriptine, neutralizing
miR-146a left full-length PRL signaling intact, allowing CKO mice to nurse their
offspring. miR-146a was elevated in plasma of PPCM patients, but not in
pregnancy-matched healthy controls, bromocriptine-treated PPCM patients, or dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients with a similar degree of heart failure. These data
suggest that miR-146a may serve as a specific biomarker for the diagnosis of PPCM in
patients and that miR-146a may represent a novel therapeutic target to treat PPCM.

Discussion

Our experimental findings and these first clinical data suggest that 16K PRL
generated by the coincidence of unbalanced oxidative stress, subsequent activation
of PRL cleaving enzymes (cathepsin D), and high PRL levels (pituitary and cardiac)
appear to be causative for PPCM. This hypothesis was supported by the prior
observations that the PRL blocker bromocriptine showed beneficial effects in first
clinical trials in PPCM patients ( 3 , 4 ), completely prevented PPCM in CKO mice ( 2 ), and attenuated PPCM in mice with a
cardiomyocyte-restricted deficiency of PPARγ coactivator 1α
(PGC1α-KO mice) ( 29 ). To date, a
specific receptor for 16K PRL has not been identified, but its downstream signaling
cascade involving NF-κB in ECs is well documented ( 11 ). Our screen for NF-κB–activated miRNAs
identified miR-146a as being specifically induced by 16K PRL. Furthermore, in vitro
studies showed that miR-146a mediated a large part of the known antiangiogenic
effects of 16K PRL in ECs. Moreover, after EC-exosomal transfer in cardiomyocytes,
miR-146a impaired their metabolic activity. In fact, the 16K PRL–miR-146a
cascade appeared to be responsible for a large portion of 16K PRL–induced
pathological changes in PPCM, since targeting miR-146a in CKO mice by 2 different
pharmacological approaches, LNA-miR-146a and antago-miR-146a, largely prevented PPCM
symptoms. The finding that LNA-miR-146a– and
antago-miR-146a–treated CKO mice were able to nurse their offspring
confirmed that these strategies only affected 16K PRL–mediated effects,
leaving the normal full-length PRL signaling system intact. Indeed, beside its role
in nursing, full-length PRL has multiple beneficial effects, including promotion of
angiogenesis and bonding between mother and child ( 30 ).

Although miR-146a appears to be a major downstream mediator of 16K PRL, we did not
obtain full rescue of the PPCM phenotype with LNA-miR-146a or antago-miR-146a
treatment, which was different from the complete rescue observed with the PRL
blocker bromocriptine ( 2 ). One reason for the
incomplete rescue of the PPCM phenotype after LNA treatment could be that blocking
miR-146a had no effect on the pathomechanisms upstream of 16K PRL, including reduced
manganese superoxide dismutase expression and enhanced oxidative stress ( 2 ). Another reason could be the presence of
additional miR-146a–independent 16K PRL–mediated
pathophysiological mechanisms.

Our previous studies in CKO and in PGC1α-KO mice suggest a major role for a
systemically damaged vasculature in PPCM onset, in which 16K PRL plays a key role
( 2 , 29 ). We discovered that 16K PRL exerted part of its negative effects in
ECs by upregulating miR-146a, which in turn impaired EC proliferation and survival.
To date, miR-146a has been mainly described for its implication in innate immunity,
since, by targeting TRAF6 and IRAK1 , it prevents
constitutive activation of NF-κB during the inflammatory response ( 21 ). Our present findings highlight a new role
of miR-146a in angiogenesis: reducing EC proliferation and viability. A suggested
mechanism in these processes involves the downregulation of NRAS ,
previously described as a key gene in cell survival and proliferation ( 31 ), which we identified as a novel target of
miR-146a that strongly attenuated EC proliferation and survival in vitro and in
vivo. The observation that miR-146a was upregulated and Nras downregulated in hearts from CKO mice with PPCM suggests that miR-146a is at least
in part responsible for angiogenic impairment in PPCM. This idea is further
supported by the observations that a systemically injected adenovirus expressing 16K
PRL led to higher miR-146a levels in hearts of WT mice, that pharmacological
blockade of miR-146a normalized cardiac Nras expression and
capillary density in postpartum CKO mice, and that blocking PRL in CKO mice by
bromocriptine treatment prevented miR-146a upregulation and capillary loss ( 2 ). Taken together, the induction of miR-146a by
16K PRL and the subsequent reduction of Nras seems to be one
mechanism by which 16K PRL impairs endothelial homeostasis in the postpartum
maternal heart. Sylamer analyses suggested that, besides Nras ,
additional miR-146a targets may also be involved in this process, a feature that
will be explored in future projects.

Besides its direct miR-146a–mediated effects on ECs, 16K PRL promoted
shedding of exosomes from ECs containing elevated levels of miR-146a. Exosomes
appear to protect miRNAs from degradation ( 32 ) and to act as vehicles to transport and transfer miRNAs to recipient
cells ( 19 ). In vitro analyses showed that 16K
PRL was not inducing miR-146a expression in NRCMs, but that NRCMs efficiently took
up miR-146a–loaded endothelial exosomes, which led to increased
intracellular levels of the mature form — but not the pre-form
— of miR-146a. This transfer also seems to occur in vivo, as injected
endothelial exosomes were detected in cardiomyocytes in the mouse heart. Moreover,
in situ hybridization in postpartum CKO hearts mainly detected pre-mRNA and mature
miR-146a in ECs and other nonmyocyte cardiac cells, such as cardiac fibroblasts,
which suggests that in addition to ECs, fibroblasts may also be a source for
miR-146a in hearts exposed to 16K PRL. These observations illustrate how 16K PRL can
increase miR-146a levels in cells that do not directly respond to 16K PRL
stimulation.

Methods

Further information can be found in Supplemental Methods.
