---
pmid: '26887390'
title: 'Hexosamine biosynthesis in keratinocytes: roles of GFAT and GNPDA enzymes
  in the maintenance of UDP-GlcNAc content and hyaluronan synthesis.'
authors:
- Oikari S
- Makkonen K
- Deen AJ
- Tyni I
- Kärnä R
- Tammi RH
- Tammi MI
journal: Glycobiology
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/glycob/cww019
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Hexosamine biosynthesis in keratinocytes: roles of GFAT and GNPDA enzymes in the maintenance of UDP-GlcNAc content and hyaluronan synthesis.
**Authors:** Oikari S, Makkonen K, Deen AJ, Tyni I, Kärnä R, Tammi RH, Tammi MI
**Journal:** Glycobiology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/glycob/cww019](https://doi.org/10.1093/glycob/cww019)

## Abstract

1. Glycobiology. 2016 Jul;26(7):710-22. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cww019. Epub 2016 Feb
 16.

Hexosamine biosynthesis in keratinocytes: roles of GFAT and GNPDA enzymes in the 
maintenance of UDP-GlcNAc content and hyaluronan synthesis.

Oikari S(1), Makkonen K(2), Deen AJ(3), Tyni I(3), Kärnä R(3), Tammi RH(3), 
Tammi MI(3).

Author information:
(1)Institutes of Biomedicine Department of Dentistry, University of Eastern 
Finland, Yliopistonranta 1E, PO Box 1627, Kuopio 70211, Finland 
sanna.oikari@uef.fi.
(2)Institutes of Biomedicine Department of Dentistry, University of Eastern 
Finland, Yliopistonranta 1E, PO Box 1627, Kuopio 70211, Finland.
(3)Institutes of Biomedicine.

UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) is a glucose metabolite with pivotal 
functions as a key substrate for the synthesis of glycoconjugates like 
hyaluronan, and as a metabolic sensor that controls cell functions through 
O-GlcNAc modification of intracellular proteins. However, little is known about 
the regulation of hexosamine biosynthesis that controls UDP-GlcNAc content. Four 
enzymes can catalyze the crucial starting point of the pathway, conversion of 
fructose-6-phosphate (Fru6P) to glucosamine-6-phosphate (GlcN6P): 
glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferases (GFAT1 and 2) and 
glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminases (GNPDA1 and 2). Using siRNA silencing, we 
studied the contributions of these enzymes to UDP-GlcNAc content and hyaluronan 
synthesis in human keratinocytes. Depletion of GFAT1 reduced the cellular pool 
of UDP-GlcNAc and hyaluronan synthesis, while simultaneous blocking of both 
GNPDA1 and GDPDA2 exerted opposite effects, indicating that in standard culture 
conditions keratinocyte GNPDAs mainly catalyzed the reaction from GlcN6P back to 
Fru6P. However, when hexosamine biosynthesis was blocked by GFAT1 siRNA, the 
effect by GNPDAs was reversed, now catalyzing Fru6P towards GlcN6P, likely in an 
attempt to maintain UDP-GlcNAc content. Silencing of these enzymes also changed 
the gene expression of related enzymes: GNPDA1 siRNA induced GFAT2 which was 
hardly measurable in these cells under standard culture conditions, GNPDA2 siRNA 
increased GFAT1, and GFAT1 siRNA increased the expression of hyaluronan synthase 
2 (HAS2). Silencing of GFAT1 stimulated GNPDA1 and GDPDA2, and inhibited cell 
migration. The multiple delicate adjustments of these reactions demonstrate the 
importance of hexosamine biosynthesis in cellular homeostasis, known to be 
deranged in diseases like diabetes and cancer.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cww019
PMID: 26887390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
