---
pmid: '19828437'
title: Transient structural distortion of metal-free Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase triggers
  aberrant oligomerization.
authors:
- Teilum K
- Smith MH
- Schulz E
- Christensen LC
- Solomentsev G
- Oliveberg M
- Akke M
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2775296
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907387106
---

# Transient structural distortion of metal-free Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase triggers aberrant oligomerization.
**Authors:** Teilum K, Smith MH, Schulz E, Christensen LC, Solomentsev G, Oliveberg M, Akke M
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907387106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907387106)
**PMC:** [PMC2775296](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2775296/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18273-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907387106. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

Transient structural distortion of metal-free Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase 
triggers aberrant oligomerization.

Teilum K(1), Smith MH, Schulz E, Christensen LC, Solomentsev G, Oliveberg M, 
Akke M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Protein Science, Biophysical Chemistry, Lund University, 
SE-22100 Lund, Sweden.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disease linked to the 
misfolding of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1). ALS-related defects in SOD1 
result in a gain of toxic function that coincides with aberrant oligomerization. 
The structural events triggering oligomerization have remained enigmatic, 
however, as is the case in other protein-misfolding diseases. Here, we target 
the critical conformational change that defines the earliest step toward 
aggregation. Using nuclear spin relaxation dispersion experiments, we identified 
a short-lived (0.4 ms) and weakly populated (0.7%) conformation of 
metal-depleted SOD1 that triggers aberrant oligomerization. This excited state 
emanates from the folded ground state and is suppressed by metal binding, but is 
present in both the disulfide-oxidized and disulfide-reduced forms of the 
protein. Our results pinpoint a perturbed region of the excited-state structure 
that forms intermolecular contacts in the earliest nonnative dimer/oligomer. The 
conformational transition that triggers oligomerization is a common feature of 
WT SOD1 and ALS-associated mutants that have widely different physicochemical 
properties. But compared with WT SOD1, the mutants have enhanced structural 
distortions in their excited states, and in some cases slightly higher 
excited-state populations and lower kinetic barriers, implying increased 
susceptibility to oligomerization. Our results provide a unified picture that 
highlights both (i) a common denominator among different SOD1 variants that may 
explain why diverse mutations cause the same disease, and (ii) a structural 
basis that may aid in understanding how different mutations affect disease 
propensity and progression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907387106
PMCID: PMC2775296
PMID: 19828437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
