---
pmid: '14680974'
title: Cholesterol biosynthesis is not defective in peroxisome biogenesis defective
  fibroblasts.
authors:
- Hogenboom S
- Wanders RJ
- Waterham HR
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/S1096-7192(03)00143-4
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cholesterol biosynthesis is not defective in peroxisome biogenesis defective fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Hogenboom S, Wanders RJ, Waterham HR
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1096-7192(03)00143-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1096-7192(03)00143-4)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Nov;80(3):290-5. doi: 10.1016/S1096-7192(03)00143-4.

Cholesterol biosynthesis is not defective in peroxisome biogenesis defective 
fibroblasts.

Hogenboom S(1), Wanders RJ, Waterham HR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Emma 
Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

To evaluate the presumed peroxisomal involvement in cholesterol/isoprenoid 
biosynthesis, we determined the protein levels and activities of five different 
enzymes of the presqualene segment of the cholesterol/isoprenoid biosynthetic 
pathway in primary skin fibroblasts of selected patients with a peroxisomal 
biogenesis disorder (PBD). These five enzymes all have been reported to be 
partly or exclusively peroxisomal and include HMG-CoA reductase, mevalonate 
kinase, phosphomevalonate kinase, mevalonate pyrophosphate decarboxylase, and 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate isomerase. To exclude that genetic differences, 
resulting in different defects in peroxisomal biogenesis, have differential 
effects on the activity of the cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes and on de novo 
cholesterol biosynthesis, we chose fibroblasts of patients with defined defects 
in one of four different PEX genes leading to Zellweger syndrome (PEX1, PEX5, 
PEX16 or PEX19). We found that all enzymes measured are at least as active in 
the peroxisome-deficient cells cultured in cholesterol-depleted medium as in 
identically cultured control cells. This indicates that if these presumed 
peroxisomal proteins are mislocalized to the cytosol they do not loose their 
activity, nor get degraded unlike most other authentic peroxisomal proteins. We 
also measured de novo cholesterol synthesis from radio-labeled acetate in all 
cell lines and found similar or even elevated rates for the PBD cells when 
compared to controls. Our results imply that functional peroxisomes are not a 
prerequisite for the functioning of enzymes involved in cholesterol/isoprenoid 
biosynthesis and as such raise doubts about the true involvement of peroxisomes 
therein.

DOI: 10.1016/S1096-7192(03)00143-4
PMID: 14680974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
