---
pmid: '27402171'
title: Altered expression of the bZIP transcription factor DRINK ME affects growth
  and reproductive development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
authors:
- Lozano-Sotomayor P
- Chávez Montes RA
- Silvestre-Vañó M
- Herrera-Ubaldo H
- Greco R
- Pablo-Villa J
- Galliani BM
- Diaz-Ramirez D
- Weemen M
- Boutilier K
- Pereira A
- Colombo L
- Madueño F
- Marsch-Martínez N
- de Folter S
journal: Plant J
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tpj.13264
---

# Altered expression of the bZIP transcription factor DRINK ME affects growth and reproductive development in Arabidopsis thaliana.
**Authors:** Lozano-Sotomayor P, Chávez Montes RA, Silvestre-Vañó M, Herrera-Ubaldo H, Greco R, Pablo-Villa J, Galliani BM, Diaz-Ramirez D, Weemen M, Boutilier K, Pereira A, Colombo L, Madueño F, Marsch-Martínez N, de Folter S
**Journal:** Plant J (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tpj.13264](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13264)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2016 Nov;88(3):437-451. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13264. Epub 2016 Sep 27.

Altered expression of the bZIP transcription factor DRINK ME affects growth and 
reproductive development in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Lozano-Sotomayor P(1), Chávez Montes RA(1), Silvestre-Vañó M(2), Herrera-Ubaldo 
H(1), Greco R(3), Pablo-Villa J(1), Galliani BM(4), Diaz-Ramirez D(5), Weemen 
M(6), Boutilier K(6), Pereira A(7), Colombo L(4), Madueño F(2), Marsch-Martínez 
N(5), de Folter S(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Genómica Avanzada (LANGEBIO), Centro de Investigación y de Estudios 
Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional (CINVESTAV-IPN), Irapuato, Gto., 
México.
(2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (UPV-CSIC), Campus de la 
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, 46022, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Rice Genomics Group, Parco Tecnologico Padano, Lodi, Italy.
(4)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(5)Departamento de Biotecnología y Bioquímica, CINVESTAV-IPN, Irapuato, Gto., 
México.
(6)Wageningen University and Research Centre, Bioscience, P.O. Box 619, 6700 AP, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Crop, Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Arkansas, 115 Plant 
Science Building, Fayetteville, AR, 72701, USA.

Here we describe an uncharacterized gene that negatively influences Arabidopsis 
growth and reproductive development. DRINK ME (DKM; bZIP30) is a member of the 
bZIP transcription factor family, and is expressed in meristematic tissues such 
as the inflorescence meristem (IM), floral meristem (FM), and carpel margin 
meristem (CMM). Altered DKM expression affects meristematic tissues and 
reproductive organ development, including the gynoecium, which is the female 
reproductive structure and is determinant for fertility and sexual reproduction. 
A microarray analysis indicates that DKM overexpression affects the expression 
of cell cycle, cell wall, organ initiation, cell elongation, hormone 
homeostasis, and meristem activity genes. Furthermore, DKM can interact in yeast 
and in planta with proteins involved in shoot apical meristem maintenance such 
as WUSCHEL, KNAT1/BP, KNAT2 and JAIBA, and with proteins involved in medial 
tissue development in the gynoecium such as HECATE, BELL1 and NGATHA1. Taken 
together, our results highlight the relevance of DKM as a negative modulator of 
Arabidopsis growth and reproductive development.

© 2016 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.13264
PMID: 27402171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
