---
pmid: '29899443'
title: Structural basis for regulation of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase.
authors:
- Hunkeler M
- Hagmann A
- Stuttfeld E
- Chami M
- Guri Y
- Stahlberg H
- Maier T
journal: Nature
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0201-4
---

# Structural basis for regulation of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase.
**Authors:** Hunkeler M, Hagmann A, Stuttfeld E, Chami M, Guri Y, Stahlberg H, Maier T
**Journal:** Nature (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-018-0201-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0201-4)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2018 Jun;558(7710):470-474. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0201-4. Epub 2018 
Jun 13.

Structural basis for regulation of human acetyl-CoA carboxylase.

Hunkeler M(1)(2), Hagmann A(3), Stuttfeld E(3), Chami M(3)(4), Guri Y(3), 
Stahlberg H(3)(5), Maier T(6).

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 
moritz_hunkeler@dfci.harvard.edu.
(2)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 
moritz_hunkeler@dfci.harvard.edu.
(3)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)BioEM Lab, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Center for Cellular Imaging and NanoAnalytics, Biozentrum, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. timm.maier@unibas.ch.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylase catalyses the ATP-dependent carboxylation of acetyl-CoA, 
a rate-limiting step in fatty acid biosynthesis1,2. Eukaryotic acetyl-CoA 
carboxylases are large, homodimeric multienzymes. Human acetyl-CoA carboxylase 
occurs in two isoforms: the metabolic, cytosolic ACC1, and ACC2, which is 
anchored to the outer mitochondrial membrane and controls fatty acid 
β-oxidation1,3. ACC1 is regulated by a complex interplay of phosphorylation, 
binding of allosteric regulators and protein-protein interactions, which is 
further linked to filament formation1,4-8. These filaments were discovered in 
vitro and in vivo 50 years ago7,9,10, but the structural basis of ACC1 
polymerization and regulation remains unknown. Here, we identify distinct 
activated and inhibited ACC1 filament forms. We obtained cryo-electron 
microscopy structures of an activated filament that is allosterically induced by 
citrate (ACC-citrate), and an inactivated filament form that results from 
binding of the BRCT domains of the breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein 
(BRCA1). While non-polymeric ACC1 is highly dynamic, filament formation locks 
ACC1 into different catalytically competent or incompetent conformational 
states. This unique mechanism of enzyme regulation via large-scale 
conformational changes observed in ACC1 has potential uses in engineering of 
switchable biosynthetic systems. Dissecting the regulation of acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase opens new paths towards counteracting upregulation of fatty acid 
biosynthesis in disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0201-4
PMID: 29899443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
