---
pmid: '15946124'
title: Zn2+-induced reversible dissociation of subunit Rpn10/p54 of the Drosophila
  26 S proteasome.
authors:
- Kiss P
- Szabó A
- Hunyadi-Gulyás E
- Medzihradszky KF
- Lipinszki Z
- Pál M
- Udvardy A
journal: Biochem J
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1276928
doi: 10.1042/BJ20050523
---

# Zn2+-induced reversible dissociation of subunit Rpn10/p54 of the Drosophila 26 S proteasome.
**Authors:** Kiss P, Szabó A, Hunyadi-Gulyás E, Medzihradszky KF, Lipinszki Z, Pál M, Udvardy A
**Journal:** Biochem J (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20050523](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20050523)
**PMC:** [PMC1276928](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1276928/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2005 Oct 15;391(Pt 2):301-10. doi: 10.1042/BJ20050523.

Zn2+-induced reversible dissociation of subunit Rpn10/p54 of the Drosophila 26 S 
proteasome.

Kiss P(1), Szabó A, Hunyadi-Gulyás E, Medzihradszky KF, Lipinszki Z, Pál M, 
Udvardy A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Center of the Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, H-6701 Szeged, P.O. Box 521, Hungary.

In the presence of Zn2+, the Drosophila 26 S proteasome disassembles into RP 
(regulatory particle) and CP (catalytic particle), this process being 
accompanied by the dissociation of subunit Rpn10/p54, the ubiquitin receptor 
subunit of the proteasome. The dissociation of Rpn10/p54 induces extensive 
rearrangements within the lid subcomplex of the RP, while the structure of the 
ATPase ring of the base subcomplex seems to be maintained. As a consequence of 
the dissociation of the RP, the peptidase activity of the 26 S proteasome is 
lost. The Zn2+-induced structural and functional changes are fully reversible; 
removal of Zn2+ is followed by reassociation of subunit Rpn10/p54 to the RP, 
reassembly of the 26 S proteasome and resumption of the peptidase activity. 
After the Zn2+-induced dissociation, Rpn10/p54 interacts with a set of 
non-proteasomal proteins. Hsp82 (heat-shock protein 82) has been identified by 
MS as the main Rpn10/p54-interacting protein, suggesting its role in the 
reassembly of the 26 S proteasome after Zn2+ removal. The physiological 
relevance of another Rpn10/p54-interacting protein, the Smt3 SUMO (small 
ubiquitin-related modifier-1)-activating enzyme, detected by chemical 
cross-linking, has been confirmed by yeast two-hybrid analysis. Besides the Smt3 
SUMO-activating enzyme, the Ubc9 SUMO-conjugating enzyme also exhibited in vivo 
interaction with the 5'-half of Rpn10/p54 in yeast cells. The mechanism of 26 S 
proteasome disassembly after ATP depletion is clearly different from that 
induced by Zn2+. Rpn10/p54 is permanently RP-bound during the ATP-dependent 
assembly-disassembly cycle, but during the Zn2+ cycle it reversibly shuttles 
between the RP-bound and free states.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20050523
PMCID: PMC1276928
PMID: 15946124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
