---
pmid: '11348595'
title: The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis
  of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin.
authors:
- Huber AH
- Weis WI
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00330-0
---

# The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin.
**Authors:** Huber AH, Weis WI
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00330-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00330-0)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2001 May 4;105(3):391-402. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00330-0.

The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis of 
diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin.

Huber AH(1), Weis WI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Molecular and Cellular Physiology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

As a component of adherens junctions and the Wnt signaling pathway, beta-catenin 
binds cadherins, Tcf family transcription factors, and the tumor suppressor APC. 
We have determined the crystal structures of both unphosphorylated and 
phosphorylated E-cadherin cytoplasmic domain complexed with the arm repeat 
region of beta-catenin. The interaction spans all 12 arm repeats, and features 
quasi-independent binding regions that include helices which interact with both 
ends of the arm repeat domain and an extended stretch of 14 residues which 
closely resembles a portion of XTcf-3. Phosphorylation of E-cadherin results in 
interactions with a hydrophobic patch of beta-catenin that mimics the binding of 
an amphipathic XTcf-3 helix. APC contains sequences homologous to the 
phosphorylated region of cadherin, and is likely to bind similarly.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00330-0
PMID: 11348595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
