---
pmid: '8702995'
title: Akt, a pleckstrin homology domain containing kinase, is activated primarily
  by phosphorylation.
authors:
- Kohn AD
- Takeuchi F
- Roth RA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.36.21920
---

# Akt, a pleckstrin homology domain containing kinase, is activated primarily by phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Kohn AD, Takeuchi F, Roth RA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.36.21920](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.36.21920)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21920-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.36.21920.

Akt, a pleckstrin homology domain containing kinase, is activated primarily by 
phosphorylation.

Kohn AD(1), Takeuchi F, Roth RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Akt is a serine/threonine kinase that is stimulated by receptor tyrosine kinases 
and contains a pleckstrin homology domain. One model proposed to explain this 
activation suggests that receptor tyrosine kinases stimulate a 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase whose lipid products directly activate Akt kinase 
by interacting with its pleckstrin homology domain. In the present study, we 
show, in three cell types, that Akt does not require its pleckstrin homology 
domain to respond to either insulin or platelet-derived growth factor. Moreover, 
attachment of the src myristoylation signal to target Akt, without its 
pleckstrin homology domain, to the membrane constitutively activates Akt by 
causing an increase in its basal level of phosphorylation. This constitutively 
active form of Akt can also activate p70(S6K), indicating that the pleckstrin 
homology domain is not necessary for downstream interactions. Fusion of the 
inter src homology 2 domain from the p85 regulatory subunit of the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to Akt also constitutively activated Akt and 
induced an association with the lipid kinase. Phosphorylation of this fusion 
protein still critically contributes toward its increased activity. The sum of 
these results indicates that the primary mechanism of Akt activation is via 
protein phosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.36.21920
PMID: 8702995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
