---
pmid: '24334550'
title: Sirt2 functions in spindle organization and chromosome alignment in mouse oocyte
  meiosis.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Hou X
- Ma R
- Moley K
- Schedl T
- Wang Q
journal: FASEB J
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3929683
doi: 10.1096/fj.13-244111
---

# Sirt2 functions in spindle organization and chromosome alignment in mouse oocyte meiosis.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Hou X, Ma R, Moley K, Schedl T, Wang Q
**Journal:** FASEB J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.13-244111](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.13-244111)
**PMC:** [PMC3929683](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3929683/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2014 Mar;28(3):1435-45. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-244111. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Sirt2 functions in spindle organization and chromosome alignment in mouse oocyte 
meiosis.

Zhang L(1), Hou X, Ma R, Moley K, Schedl T, Wang Q.

Author information:
(1)2State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, 
140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210029 China, qwang2012@njmu.edu.cn.

Sirtuins have been widely reported to be involved in multiple biological 
processes; however, their function in oocyte meiosis has not been. Here, by 
confocal scanning and quantitative analysis, we show that specific depletion of 
Sirt2 in mouse oocytes results in spindle defects and chromosome disorganization 
(35.5±8.7 vs. 9.6±3.8% control; P<0.05), with impaired microtubule-kinetochore 
interaction. Moreover, knockdown and overexpression experiments reveal that 
Sirt2 modulates the acetylation status of histone H4K16 and α-tubulin in 
oocytes, which may in part mediate the defective phenotypes described above by 
influencing microtubule dynamics and kinetochore function. Finally, we find 
lower Sirt2 protein level in oocytes from aged mice by immunoblotting and that 
maternal age-associated meiotic defects can be ameliorated through 
overexpression of Sirt2 (33.2±5.1% old vs.12.7±5.2% old+Sirt2; P<0.05), 
providing support for the hypothesis that decreased Sirt2 is one of a number of 
factors contributing to oocyte age-dependent deficits. In summary, our data 
indicate a role for Sirt2 during oocyte meiosis and uncover a striking 
beneficial effect of increased Sirt2 expression on aged oocytes.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.13-244111
PMCID: PMC3929683
PMID: 24334550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
