---
pmid: '19383768'
title: The C-terminal domains of human TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and TNRC6C silence bound transcripts
  independently of Argonaute proteins.
authors:
- Lazzaretti D
- Tournier I
- Izaurralde E
journal: RNA
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2685519
doi: 10.1261/rna.1606309
---

# The C-terminal domains of human TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and TNRC6C silence bound transcripts independently of Argonaute proteins.
**Authors:** Lazzaretti D, Tournier I, Izaurralde E
**Journal:** RNA (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1261/rna.1606309](https://doi.org/10.1261/rna.1606309)
**PMC:** [PMC2685519](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2685519/)

## Abstract

1. RNA. 2009 Jun;15(6):1059-66. doi: 10.1261/rna.1606309. Epub 2009 Apr 21.

The C-terminal domains of human TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and TNRC6C silence bound 
transcripts independently of Argonaute proteins.

Lazzaretti D(1), Tournier I, Izaurralde E.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Proteins of the GW182 family are essential components of the miRNA pathway in 
animal cells. Vertebrate genomes encode three GW182 paralogs (TNRC6A, TNRC6B, 
and TNRC6C), which may be functionally redundant. Here, we show that the 
N-terminal GW-repeat-containing regions of all three TNRC6s interact with the 
four human Argonaute proteins (AGO1-AGO4). We also show that TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and 
TNRC6C silence the expression of bound mRNAs. This activity is mediated by their 
C-terminal silencing domains, and thus, is independent of the interaction with 
AGO1-AGO4. Silencing by TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and TNRC6C is effected by changes in 
protein expression and mRNA stability that can, in part, be attributed to 
deadenylation. Our findings indicate that TNRC6A, TNRC6B, and TNRC6C are 
recruited to miRNA targets through an interaction between their N-terminal 
domain and an Argonaute protein; the TNRC6s then promote translational 
repression and/or degradation of miRNA targets through a C-terminal silencing 
domain.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.1606309
PMCID: PMC2685519
PMID: 19383768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
