---
pmid: '21177415'
title: Identification and mechanism of action of the acylguanidine MRT-83, a novel
  potent Smoothened antagonist.
authors:
- Roudaut H
- Traiffort E
- Gorojankina T
- Vincent L
- Faure H
- Schoenfelder A
- Mann A
- Manetti F
- Solinas A
- Taddei M
- Ruat M
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1124/mol.110.069708
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification and mechanism of action of the acylguanidine MRT-83, a novel potent Smoothened antagonist.
**Authors:** Roudaut H, Traiffort E, Gorojankina T, Vincent L, Faure H, Schoenfelder A, Mann A, Manetti F, Solinas A, Taddei M, Ruat M
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1124/mol.110.069708](https://doi.org/10.1124/mol.110.069708)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Mar;79(3):453-60. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.069708. Epub 2010
Dec  21.

Identification and mechanism of action of the acylguanidine MRT-83, a novel 
potent Smoothened antagonist.

Roudaut H(1), Traiffort E, Gorojankina T, Vincent L, Faure H, Schoenfelder A, 
Mann A, Manetti F, Solinas A, Taddei M, Ruat M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement, Institut de Neurobiologie 
Alfred Fessard IFR2118, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UPR-3294, 
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

There is a clear need to develop novel pharmacological tools to improve our 
understanding of Smoothened (Smo) function in normal and pathological states. 
Here, we report the discovery, the mechanism of action, and the in vivo activity 
of 
N-(2-methyl-5-(3-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyl)guanidino)phenyl)biphenyl-4-carboxamide 
(MRT-83), a novel potent antagonist of Smo that belongs to the acylguanidine 
family of molecules. MRT-83 fits to a proposed pharmacophoric model for Smo 
antagonists with three hydrogen bond acceptor groups and three hydrophobic 
regions. MRT-83 blocks Hedgehog (Hh) signaling in various assays with an IC50 in 
the nanomolar range, showing greater potency than the reference Smo antagonist 
cyclopamine. MRT-83 inhibits Bodipy-cyclopamine binding to human and mouse Smo 
but does not modify Wnt signaling in human embryonic kidney 293 transiently 
transfected with a Tcf/Lef-dependent Firefly luciferase reporter together with a 
Renilla reniformis luciferase control reporter. MRT-83 abrogates the 
agonist-induced trafficking of endogenous mouse or human Smo to the primary 
cilium of C3H10T1/2 or NT2 cells that derive from a pluripotent testicular 
carcinoma. Stereotaxic injection into the lateral ventricle of adult mice of 
MRT-83 but not of a structurally related compound inactive at Smo abolished 
up-regulation of Patched transcription induced by Sonic Hedgehog in the 
neighboring subventricular zone. These data demonstrate that MRT-83 efficiently 
antagonizes Hh signaling in vivo. All together, these molecular, functional and 
biochemical studies provide evidence that MRT-83 interacts with Smo. Thus, this 
novel Smo antagonist will be useful for manipulating Hh signaling and may help 
develop new therapies against Hh-pathway related diseases.

DOI: 10.1124/mol.110.069708
PMID: 21177415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
