---
pmid: '1304173'
title: High frequencies in African and non-African populations of independent mutations
  in the mannose binding protein gene.
authors:
- Lipscombe RJ
- Sumiya M
- Hill AV
- Lau YL
- Levinsky RJ
- Summerfield JA
- Turner MW
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/1.9.709
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# High frequencies in African and non-African populations of independent mutations in the mannose binding protein gene.
**Authors:** Lipscombe RJ, Sumiya M, Hill AV, Lau YL, Levinsky RJ, Summerfield JA, Turner MW
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/1.9.709](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/1.9.709)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1992 Dec;1(9):709-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/1.9.709.

High frequencies in African and non-African populations of independent mutations 
in the mannose binding protein gene.

Lipscombe RJ(1), Sumiya M, Hill AV, Lau YL, Levinsky RJ, Summerfield JA, Turner 
MW.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet 1993 Mar;2(3):342.

We have previously identified, in three British families having an index child 
with frequent infections, a point mutation (GGC-->GAC) in codon 54 of exon 1 of 
the gene for the human lectin mannose binding protein (MBP). This was associated 
with low serum levels of this complement activating protein and would be 
anticipated to impair opsonization of mannose rich microorganisms. We now report 
a second point mutation (GGA-->GAA) in Gambians from West Africa, involving 
codon 57 of exon 1. By substituting carboxylic acids for axial glycines in the 
translated proteins both mutations would be expected to disrupt the secondary 
structure of the collagenous triple helix of the 96 kDa MBP subunits. In the 
Gambians the codon 57 mutation was studied by PCR, sequence analysis and 
restriction analysis and found to be remarkably common (frequency of the mutant 
gene 0.29 in adults and 0.23 in newborns) whereas the codon 54 mutation was very 
rare (frequency 0.003). However, the codon 54 mutation was frequent in both a 
British Caucasian and a Hong Kong Chinese population (frequency of the mutant 
gene 0.17 and 0.11 respectively). It was predicted that both homozygous and 
heterozygous individuals would have profoundly reduced serum levels of the 
protein and this was confirmed by immunoassay as was the reduced capacity of 
such sera to activate complement through the MBP initiated classical pathway. 
Our data indicate that the two mutations have arisen independently since the 
divergence of African and non African populations and both have attained high 
frequencies.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/1.9.709
PMID: 1304173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
