---
pmid: '15166224'
title: The modular adaptor protein ARH is required for low density lipoprotein (LDL)
  binding and internalization but not for LDL receptor clustering in coated pits.
authors:
- Michaely P
- Li WP
- Anderson RG
- Cohen JC
- Hobbs HH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405242200
---

# The modular adaptor protein ARH is required for low density lipoprotein (LDL) binding and internalization but not for LDL receptor clustering in coated pits.
**Authors:** Michaely P, Li WP, Anderson RG, Cohen JC, Hobbs HH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M405242200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M405242200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):34023-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405242200. Epub
2004  May 27.

The modular adaptor protein ARH is required for low density lipoprotein (LDL) 
binding and internalization but not for LDL receptor clustering in coated pits.

Michaely P(1), Li WP, Anderson RG, Cohen JC, Hobbs HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

ARH is an adaptor protein required for efficient endocytosis of low density 
lipoprotein (LDL) receptors (LDLRs) in selected tissues. Individuals lacking ARH 
(ARH-/-) have severe hypercholesterolemia due to impaired hepatic clearance of 
LDL. Immortalized lymphocytes, but not fibroblasts, from ARH-deficient subjects 
fail to internalize LDL. To further define the role of ARH in LDLR function, we 
compared the subcellular distribution of the LDLR in lymphocytes from normal and 
ARH-/- subjects. In normal lymphocytes LDLRs were predominantly located in 
intracellular compartments, whereas in ARH-/- cells the receptors were almost 
exclusively on the plasma membrane. Biochemical assays and quantification of 
LDLR by electron microscopy indicated that ARH-/- lymphocytes had >20-fold more 
LDLR on the cell surface and a approximately 27-fold excess of LDLR outside of 
coated pits. The accumulation of LDLR on the cell surface was not due to failure 
of receptors to localize in coated pits since the number of LDLRs in coated pits 
was similar in ARH-/- and normal cells. Despite the dramatic increase in cell 
surface receptors, LDL binding was only 2-fold higher in the ARH-/- lymphocytes. 
These findings indicate that ARH is required not only for internalization of the 
LDL.LDLR complex but also for efficient binding of LDL to the receptor and 
suggest that ARH stabilizes the associations of the receptor with LDL and with 
the invaginating portion of the budding pit, thereby increasing the efficiency 
of LDL internalization.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405242200
PMID: 15166224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
