---
pmid: '7929273'
title: Roles for both the RAP30 and RAP74 subunits of transcription factor IIF in
  transcription initiation and elongation by RNA polymerase II.
authors:
- Tan S
- Aso T
- Conaway RC
- Conaway JW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# Roles for both the RAP30 and RAP74 subunits of transcription factor IIF in transcription initiation and elongation by RNA polymerase II.
**Authors:** Tan S, Aso T, Conaway RC, Conaway JW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 14;269(41):25684-91.

Roles for both the RAP30 and RAP74 subunits of transcription factor IIF in 
transcription initiation and elongation by RNA polymerase II.

Tan S(1), Aso T, Conaway RC, Conaway JW.

Author information:
(1)Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 
Oklahoma City 73104.

Mammalian transcription factor IIF (TFIIF) is a heterodimer composed of 
approximately 30-kDa (RAP30) and approximately 70-kDa (RAP74) subunits. TFIIF 
has been shown to bind RNA polymerase II and control the activity of the enzyme 
in both the initiation and elongation stages of transcription. Although previous 
studies have established a role for RAP30 in assembly of the preinitiation 
complex and in transcription initiation, information on the function of RAP74 in 
these processes has been lacking. Using a highly purified transcription system 
and assays that permit sensitive measurement of the contributions of both RAP30 
and RAP74 to TFIIF function, we have investigated the roles of these TFIIF 
subunits in transcription initiation and elongation. Results of template 
competition experiments indicate that both RAP30 and RAP74 contribute to the 
formation of stable preinitiation intermediates containing RNA polymerase II. 
Investigation of the role of TFIIF in transcription initiation indicates that 
both RAP30 and RAP74 function in synthesis of the first few phosphodiester bonds 
of nascent transcripts and in formation of Sarkosyl-resistant pre-initiation 
intermediates. Finally, kinetic experiments indicate that both RAP30 and RAP74 
function in TFIIF-mediated stimulation of the rate of RNA chain elongation by 
RNA polymerase II.

PMID: 7929273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
