---
pmid: '11046133'
title: Sok2 regulates yeast pseudohyphal differentiation via a transcription factor
  cascade that regulates cell-cell adhesion.
authors:
- Pan X
- Heitman J
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC102143
doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.22.8364-8372.2000
---

# Sok2 regulates yeast pseudohyphal differentiation via a transcription factor cascade that regulates cell-cell adhesion.
**Authors:** Pan X, Heitman J
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.20.22.8364-8372.2000](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.20.22.8364-8372.2000)
**PMC:** [PMC102143](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC102143/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(22):8364-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.20.22.8364-8372.2000.

Sok2 regulates yeast pseudohyphal differentiation via a transcription factor 
cascade that regulates cell-cell adhesion.

Pan X(1), Heitman J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Genetics, Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Microbiology, and 
Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

In response to nitrogen limitation, Saccharomyces cerevisiae undergoes a 
dimorphic transition to filamentous pseudohyphal growth. In previous studies, 
the transcription factor Sok2 was found to negatively regulate pseudohyphal 
differentiation. By genome array and Northern analysis, we found that genes 
encoding the transcription factors Phd1, Ash1, and Swi5 were all induced in 
sok2/sok2 hyperfilamentous mutants. In accord with previous studies of others, 
Swi5 was required for ASH1 expression. Phd1 and Ash1 regulated expression of the 
cell surface protein Flo11, which is required for filamentous growth, and were 
largely required for filamentation of sok2/sok2 mutant strains. These findings 
reveal that a complex transcription factor cascade regulates filamentation. 
These findings also reveal a novel dual role for the transcription factor Swi5 
in regulating filamentous growth. Finally, these studies illustrate how 
mother-daughter cell adhesion can be accomplished by two distinct mechanisms: 
one involving Flo11 and the other involving regulation of the endochitinase Cts1 
and the endoglucanase Egt2 by Swi5.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.20.22.8364-8372.2000
PMCID: PMC102143
PMID: 11046133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
