---
pmid: '16030014'
title: Molecular characterization of the gallate dioxygenase from Pseudomonas putida
  KT2440. The prototype of a new subgroup of extradiol dioxygenases.
authors:
- Nogales J
- Canales A
- Jiménez-Barbero J
- García JL
- Díaz E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502585200
---

# Molecular characterization of the gallate dioxygenase from Pseudomonas putida KT2440. The prototype of a new subgroup of extradiol dioxygenases.
**Authors:** Nogales J, Canales A, Jiménez-Barbero J, García JL, Díaz E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M502585200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M502585200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 21;280(42):35382-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502585200. Epub 
2005 Jul 18.

Molecular characterization of the gallate dioxygenase from Pseudomonas putida 
KT2440. The prototype of a new subgroup of extradiol dioxygenases.

Nogales J(1), Canales A, Jiménez-Barbero J, García JL, Díaz E.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Centro de Investigaciones 
Biológicas-CSIC, Ramiro de Maeztu 9, Madrid 28040, Spain.

In this work we have characterized the galA gene product from Pseudomonas putida 
KT2440, a ring-cleavage dioxygenase that acts specifically on gallate to produce 
4-oxalomesaconate. The protein is a trimer composed by three identical subunits 
of 47.6 kDa (419 amino acids) that uses Fe2+ as the main cofactor. The gallate 
dioxygenase showed maximum activity at pH 7.0, and the Km and Vmax values for 
gallate were 144 microM and 53.2 micromol/min/mg of protein, respectively. A 
phylogenetic study suggests that the gallate dioxygenase from P. putida KT2440 
is the prototype of a new subgroup of type II extradiol dioxygenases that share 
a common ancestor with protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenases and whose two-domain 
architecture might have evolved from the fusion of the large and small subunits 
of the latter. A three-dimensional model for the N-terminal domain (residues 
1-281) and C-terminal domain (residues 294-420) of the gallate dioxygenase from 
P. putida KT2440 was generated by comparison with the crystal structures of the 
large (LigB) and small (LigA) subunits of the protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase 
from Sphingomonas paucimobilis SYK-6. The expression of the galA gene was 
specifically induced when P. putida KT2440 cells grew in the presence of 
gallate. A P. putida KT2440 galA mutant strain was unable to use gallate as the 
sole carbon source and it did not show gallate dioxygenase activity, suggesting 
that the GalA protein is the only dioxygenase involved in gallate cleavage in 
this bacterium. This work points to the existence of a new pathway that is 
devoted to the catabolism of gallic acid and that remained unknown in the 
paradigmatic P. putida KT2440 strain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M502585200
PMID: 16030014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
