---
pmid: '24381169'
title: α6 integrin transactivates insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF-1R) to
  regulate caspase-3-mediated lens epithelial cell differentiation initiation.
authors:
- Basu S
- Rajakaruna S
- De Arcangelis A
- Zhang L
- Georges-Labouesse E
- Menko AS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3924254
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.515254
---

# α6 integrin transactivates insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF-1R) to regulate caspase-3-mediated lens epithelial cell differentiation initiation.
**Authors:** Basu S, Rajakaruna S, De Arcangelis A, Zhang L, Georges-Labouesse E, Menko AS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.515254](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.515254)
**PMC:** [PMC3924254](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3924254/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 14;289(7):3842-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.515254. Epub
2013  Dec 31.

α6 integrin transactivates insulin-like growth factor receptor-1 (IGF-1R) to 
regulate caspase-3-mediated lens epithelial cell differentiation initiation.

Basu S(1), Rajakaruna S, De Arcangelis A, Zhang L, Georges-Labouesse E, Menko 
AS.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107 and.

The canonical mitochondrial death pathway was first discovered for its role in 
signaling apoptosis. It has since been found to have a requisite function in 
differentiation initiation in many cell types including the lens through low 
level activation of the caspase-3 protease. The ability of this pathway to 
function as a molecular switch in lens differentiation depends on the concurrent 
induction of survival molecules in the Bcl-2 and IAP families, induced 
downstream of an IGF-1R/NFκB coordinate survival signal, to regulate caspase-3 
activity. Here we investigated whether α6 integrin signals upstream to this 
IGF-1R-mediated survival-linked differentiation signal. Our findings show that 
IGF-1R is recruited to and activated specifically in α6 integrin receptor 
signaling complexes in the lens equatorial region, where lens epithelial cells 
initiate their differentiation program. In studies with both α6 integrin 
knock-out mice lenses and primary lens cell cultures following α6 integrin siRNA 
knockdown, we show that IGF-1R activation is dependent on α6 integrin and that 
this transactivation requires Src kinase activity. In addition, without α6 
integrin, activation and expression of NFκB was diminished, and expression of 
Bcl-2 and IAP family members were down-regulated, resulting in high levels of 
caspase-3 activation. As a result, a number of hallmarks of lens differentiation 
failed to be induced; including nuclear translocation of Prox1 in the 
differentiation initiation zone and apoptosis was promoted. We conclude that α6 
integrin is an essential upstream regulator of the IGF-1R survival pathway that 
regulates the activity level of caspase-3 for it to signal differentiation 
initiation of lens epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.515254
PMCID: PMC3924254
PMID: 24381169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
