---
pmid: '16377624'
title: Protein kinase C delta regulates Ser46 phosphorylation of p53 tumor suppressor
  in the apoptotic response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Yoshida K
- Liu H
- Miki Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512074200
---

# Protein kinase C delta regulates Ser46 phosphorylation of p53 tumor suppressor in the apoptotic response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Yoshida K, Liu H, Miki Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M512074200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M512074200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 3;281(9):5734-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512074200. Epub 2005
 Dec 23.

Protein kinase C delta regulates Ser46 phosphorylation of p53 tumor suppressor 
in the apoptotic response to DNA damage.

Yoshida K(1), Liu H, Miki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. 
yos.mgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp

The p53 tumor suppressor is activated in the cellular response to genotoxic 
stress. Transactivation of p53 target genes dictates cell cycle arrest and DNA 
repair or induction of apoptosis; however, a molecular mechanism responsible for 
these distinct functions remains unclear. Recent studies revealed that 
phosphorylation of p53 on Ser(46) was associated with induction of p53AIP1 
expression, resulting in the commitment of the cell fate into apoptotic cell 
death. Moreover, upon exposure to genotoxic stress, p53DINP1 was expressed and 
recruited a kinase(s) to p53 that specifically phosphorylated Ser(46). Here, we 
show that the pro-apoptotic kinase, protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta), is 
involved in phosphorylation of p53 on Ser(46). PKCdelta-mediated phosphorylation 
is required for the interaction of PKCdelta with p53. The results also 
demonstrate that p53DINP1 associates with PKCdelta upon exposure to genotoxic 
agents. Consistent with these results, PKCdelta potentiates p53-dependent 
apoptosis by Ser(46) phosphorylation in response to genotoxic stress. These 
findings indicate that PKCdelta regulates p53 to induce apoptotic cell death in 
the cellular response to DNA damage.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512074200
PMID: 16377624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
