---
pmid: '36692450'
title: Squid Skin Cell-Inspired Refractive Index Mapping of Cells, Vesicles, and Nanostructures.
authors:
- Chatterjee A
- Pratakshya P
- Kwansa AL
- Kaimal N
- Cannon AH
- Sartori B
- Marmiroli B
- Orins H
- Feng Z
- Drake S
- Couvrette J
- Le L
- Bernstorff S
- Yingling YG
- Gorodetsky AA
journal: ACS Biomater Sci Eng
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c00088
---

# Squid Skin Cell-Inspired Refractive Index Mapping of Cells, Vesicles, and Nanostructures.
**Authors:** Chatterjee A, Pratakshya P, Kwansa AL, Kaimal N, Cannon AH, Sartori B, Marmiroli B, Orins H, Feng Z, Drake S, Couvrette J, Le L, Bernstorff S, Yingling YG, Gorodetsky AA
**Journal:** ACS Biomater Sci Eng (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c00088](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c00088)

## Abstract

1. ACS Biomater Sci Eng. 2023 Feb 13;9(2):978-990. doi: 
10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c00088. Epub 2023 Jan 24.

Squid Skin Cell-Inspired Refractive Index Mapping of Cells, Vesicles, and 
Nanostructures.

Chatterjee A(1), Pratakshya P(2), Kwansa AL(3), Kaimal N(1), Cannon AH(3), 
Sartori B(4), Marmiroli B(4), Orins H(1), Feng Z(1), Drake S(5), Couvrette J(5), 
Le L(1), Bernstorff S(6), Yingling YG(3), Gorodetsky AA(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, California 92697, United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California 
92697, United States.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, United States.
(4)Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Graz University of Technology, Graz 8010, 
Austria.
(5)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, California 92697, United States.
(6)Elettra-Sincrotrone Trieste, Trieste 34149, Italy.

The fascination with the optical properties of naturally occurring systems has 
been driven in part by nature's ability to produce a diverse palette of vibrant 
colors from a relatively small number of common structural motifs. Within this 
context, some cephalopod species have evolved skin cells called iridophores and 
leucophores whose constituent ultrastructures reflect light in different ways 
but are composed of the same high refractive index material─a protein called 
reflectin. Although such natural optical systems have attracted much research 
interest, measuring the refractive indices of biomaterial-based structures 
across multiple different environments and establishing theoretical frameworks 
for accurately describing the obtained refractive index values has proven 
challenging. Herein, we employ a synergistic combination of experimental and 
computational methodologies to systematically map the three-dimensional 
refractive index distributions of model self-assembled reflectin-based 
structures both in vivo and in vitro. When considered together, our findings may 
improve understanding of squid skin cell functionality, augment existing methods 
for characterizing protein-based optical materials, and expand the utility of 
emerging holotomographic microscopy techniques.

DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c00088
PMID: 36692450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
