---
pmid: '24268782'
title: A peroxiredoxin promotes H2O2 signaling and oxidative stress resistance by
  oxidizing a thioredoxin family protein.
authors:
- Brown JD
- Day AM
- Taylor SR
- Tomalin LE
- Morgan BA
- Veal EA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3898613
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.036
---

# A peroxiredoxin promotes H2O2 signaling and oxidative stress resistance by oxidizing a thioredoxin family protein.
**Authors:** Brown JD, Day AM, Taylor SR, Tomalin LE, Morgan BA, Veal EA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.036)
**PMC:** [PMC3898613](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3898613/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Rep. 2013 Dec 12;5(5):1425-35. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.036. Epub
2013  Nov 21.

A peroxiredoxin promotes H2O2 signaling and oxidative stress resistance by 
oxidizing a thioredoxin family protein.

Brown JD(1), Day AM(1), Taylor SR(1), Tomalin LE(1), Morgan BA(2), Veal EA(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle NE2 4HH, Tyne and Wear, UK.
(2)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle NE2 4HH, Tyne and Wear, UK. Electronic address: 
b.a.morgan@ncl.ac.uk.
(3)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle NE2 4HH, Tyne and Wear, UK. Electronic address: 
e.a.veal@ncl.ac.uk.

H2O2 can cause oxidative damage associated with age-related diseases such as 
diabetes and cancer but is also used to initiate diverse responses, including 
increased antioxidant gene expression. Despite significant interest, 
H2O2-signaling mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we present a mechanism 
for the propagation of an H2O2 signal that is vital for the adaptation of the 
model yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, to oxidative stress. Peroxiredoxins are 
abundant peroxidases with conserved antiaging and anticancer activities. 
Remarkably, we find that the only essential function for the thioredoxin 
peroxidase activity of the Prx Tpx1(hPrx1/2) in resistance to H2O2 is to inhibit 
a conserved thioredoxin family protein Txl1(hTxnl1/TRP32). Thioredoxins regulate 
many enzymes and signaling proteins. Thus, our discovery that a Prx amplifies an 
H2O2 signal by driving the oxidation of a thioredoxin-like protein has important 
implications, both for Prx function in oxidative stress resistance and for 
responses to H2O2.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.10.036
PMCID: PMC3898613
PMID: 24268782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
