---
pmid: '10747033'
title: A Sm-like protein complex that participates in mRNA degradation.
authors:
- Bouveret E
- Rigaut G
- Shevchenko A
- Wilm M
- Séraphin B
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC310234
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.7.1661
---

# A Sm-like protein complex that participates in mRNA degradation.
**Authors:** Bouveret E, Rigaut G, Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Séraphin B
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.7.1661](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.7.1661)
**PMC:** [PMC310234](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC310234/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Apr 3;19(7):1661-71. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.7.1661.

A Sm-like protein complex that participates in mRNA degradation.

Bouveret E(1), Rigaut G, Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Séraphin B.

Author information:
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse-1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

In eukaryotes, seven Sm proteins bind to the U1, U2, U4 and U5 spliceosomal 
snRNAs while seven Smlike proteins (Lsm2p-Lsm8p) are associated with U6 snRNA. 
Another yeast Sm-like protein, Lsm1p, does not interact with U6 snRNA. 
Surprisingly, using the tandem affinity purification (TAP) method, we identified 
Lsm1p among the subunits associated with Lsm3p. Coprecipitation experiments 
demonstrated that Lsm1p, together with Lsm2p-Lsm7p, forms a new seven-subunit 
complex. We purified the two related Sm-like protein complexes and identified 
the proteins recovered in the purified preparations by mass spectrometry. This 
confirmed the association of the Lsm2p-Lsm8p complex with U6 snRNA. In contrast, 
the Lsm1p-Lsm7p complex is associated with Pat1p and Xrn1p exoribonuclease, 
suggesting a role in mRNA degradation. Deletions of LSM1, 6, 7 and PAT1 genes 
increased the half-life of reporter mRNAs. Interestingly, accumulating mRNAs 
were capped, suggesting a block in mRNA decay at the decapping step. These 
results indicate the involvement of a new conserved Sm-like protein complex and 
a new factor, Pat1p, in mRNA degradation and suggest a physical connection 
between decapping and exonuclease trimming.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.7.1661
PMCID: PMC310234
PMID: 10747033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
