---
pmid: '7493035'
title: Cloning of the sulphamidase gene and identification of mutations in Sanfilippo
  A syndrome.
authors:
- Scott HS
- Blanch L
- Guo XH
- Freeman C
- Orsborn A
- Baker E
- Sutherland GR
- Morris CP
- Hopwood JJ
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1295-465
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning of the sulphamidase gene and identification of mutations in Sanfilippo A syndrome.
**Authors:** Scott HS, Blanch L, Guo XH, Freeman C, Orsborn A, Baker E, Sutherland GR, Morris CP, Hopwood JJ
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1295-465](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1295-465)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Dec;11(4):465-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1295-465.

Cloning of the sulphamidase gene and identification of mutations in Sanfilippo A 
syndrome.

Scott HS(1), Blanch L, Guo XH, Freeman C, Orsborn A, Baker E, Sutherland GR, 
Morris CP, Hopwood JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Women's and Children's Hospital, North 
Adelaide, Australia.

Sanfilippo A syndrome is one of four recognised Sanfilippo sub-types (A, B, C 
and D) that result from deficiencies of different enzymes involved in the 
lysosomal degradation of heparan sulphate; patients suffer from severe 
neurological disorders. The Sanfilippo syndrome sub-types are also known as 
mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) type III (MPS-IIIA, B, C and D), and are part of the 
large group of lysosomal storage disorders. Each of the MPS-III types is 
inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder with considerable variation in 
severity of clinical phenotype. The incidence of Sanfilippo syndrome has been 
estimated at 1:24,000 in The Netherlands with MPS IIIA (MIM #252900) the most 
common. MPS-IIIA is the predominant MPS-III in the United Kingdom, and has a 
similar high incidence to that found in The Netherlands (E. Wraith, personal 
communication). There is a particularly high incidence of a clinically severe 
form of MPS-IIIA in the Cayman Islands with a carrier frequency of 0.1 (ref. 4). 
Due to the mild somatic disease compared to other MPS disorders there is 
difficulty in diagnosing mild cases of MPS-III, hence Sanfilippo syndrome may be 
underdiagnosed, especially in patients with mild mental retardation. Here, we 
report the isolation, sequence and expression of cDNA clones encoding the enzyme 
sulphamidase (EC 3.10.1.1). In addition, we report the chromosomal localisation 
of the sulphamidase gene as being 17q25.3. An 11-bp deletion, present in 
sulphamidase cDNA from two unrelated Sanfilippo A patients, is described.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1295-465
PMID: 7493035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
