---
pmid: '8621573'
title: STAT activation by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and amphiregulin. Requirement
  for the EGF receptor kinase but not for tyrosine phosphorylation sites or JAK1.
authors:
- David M
- Wong L
- Flavell R
- Thompson SA
- Wells A
- Larner AC
- Johnson GR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9185
---

# STAT activation by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and amphiregulin. Requirement for the EGF receptor kinase but not for tyrosine phosphorylation sites or JAK1.
**Authors:** David M, Wong L, Flavell R, Thompson SA, Wells A, Larner AC, Johnson GR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.16.9185](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.16.9185)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 19;271(16):9185-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9185.

STAT activation by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and amphiregulin. Requirement 
for the EGF receptor kinase but not for tyrosine phosphorylation sites or JAK1.

David M(1), Wong L, Flavell R, Thompson SA, Wells A, Larner AC, Johnson GR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor activates several signaling cascades 
in response to the ligands EGF and amphiregulin (AR). One of these signaling 
events involves the tyrosine phosphorylation of STATs (signal transducers and 
activators of transcription), a process believed to require the activation of a 
tyrosine kinase of the JAK family. In this report we demonstrate that EGF- and 
AR-induced STAT activation requires the intrinsic kinase activity of the 
receptor but not the presence of Jak1. We show that both wild type (WT) and 
truncated EGF receptors lacking all autophosphorylation sites activate STAT 1, 
3, and 5 in response to either EGF or AR. Furthermore, relative to cells 
expressing WT receptor, ligand-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the STATs was 
enhanced in cells expressing only the truncated receptor. These results provide 
the first evidence that (i) EGF receptor-mediated STAT activation occurs in a 
Jak1-independent manner, (ii) the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity of the 
receptor is essential for STAT activation, and (iii) tyrosine phosphorylation 
sites within the EGF receptor are not required for STAT activation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.16.9185
PMID: 8621573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
