---
pmid: '37788672'
title: Cryo-EM structure of the KLHL22 E3 ligase bound to an oligomeric metabolic
  enzyme.
authors:
- Teng F
- Wang Y
- Liu M
- Tian S
- Stjepanovic G
- Su MY
journal: Structure
year: '2023'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2023.09.002
---

# Cryo-EM structure of the KLHL22 E3 ligase bound to an oligomeric metabolic enzyme.
**Authors:** Teng F, Wang Y, Liu M, Tian S, Stjepanovic G, Su MY
**Journal:** Structure (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2023.09.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2023.09.002)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2023 Nov 2;31(11):1431-1440.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2023.09.002.
Epub  2023 Oct 2.

Cryo-EM structure of the KLHL22 E3 ligase bound to an oligomeric metabolic 
enzyme.

Teng F(1), Wang Y(2), Liu M(2), Tian S(3), Stjepanovic G(4), Su MY(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China; Kobilka Institute of Innovative 
Drug Discovery, School of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518172, China.
(2)Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School of Medicine, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518172, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(4)Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School of Medicine, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518172, China. Electronic 
address: goranstjepanovic@cuhk.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China; Key University Laboratory of 
Metabolism and Health of Guangdong, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China; Institute for Biological Electron 
Microscopy, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, 
China. Electronic address: sumy@sustech.edu.cn.

CULLIN-RING ligases constitute the largest group of E3 ubiquitin ligases. While 
some CULLIN family members recruit adapters before engaging further with 
different substrate receptors, homo-dimeric BTB-Kelch family proteins combine 
adapter and substrate receptor into a single polypeptide for the CULLIN3 family. 
However, the entire structural assembly and molecular details have not been 
elucidated to date. Here, we present a cryo-EM structure of the CULLIN3RBX1 in 
complex with Kelch-like protein 22 (KLHL22) and a mitochondrial glutamate 
dehydrogenase complex I (GDH1) at 3.06 Å resolution. The structure adopts a 
W-shaped architecture formed by E3 ligase dimers. Three CULLIN3KLHL22-RBX1 
dimers were found to be dynamically associated with a single GDH1 hexamer. 
CULLIN3KLHL22-RBX1 ligase mediated the polyubiquitination of GDH1 in vitro. 
Together, these results enabled the establishment of a structural model for 
understanding the complete assembly of BTB-Kelch proteins with CULLIN3 and how 
together they recognize oligomeric substrates and target them for 
ubiquitination.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2023.09.002
PMID: 37788672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.
