---
pmid: '9588209'
title: A cytoplasmic AAA family peroxin, Pex1p, interacts with Pex6p.
authors:
- Tamura S
- Shimozawa N
- Suzuki Y
- Tsukamoto T
- Osumi T
- Fujiki Y
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8522
---

# A cytoplasmic AAA family peroxin, Pex1p, interacts with Pex6p.
**Authors:** Tamura S, Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Tsukamoto T, Osumi T, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1998.8522](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1998.8522)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 28;245(3):883-6. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1998.8522.

A cytoplasmic AAA family peroxin, Pex1p, interacts with Pex6p.

Tamura S(1), Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Tsukamoto T, Osumi T, Fujiki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Human PEX1 (HsPEX1) is the causative gene for peroxisome-deficiency disorders 
such as Zellweger syndrome of complementation group I, encoding the peroxin, 
Pex1p, a member of AAA family. Pex1p tagged with an epitope flag was expressed 
in wild-type Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell, CHO-K1. Pex1p was localized in 
the cytoplasm, as assessed by immunofluorescent microscopy. Cell-lysate of 
HsPEX1-transfected CHO-K1 was incubated with in vitro synthesized 35S-labelled 
Pex6p, an AAA family peroxin. Immunoprecipitation of Pex1p using anti-Pex1p 
antibody resulted in concomitant recovery of 35S-Pex6p. Conversely, 35S-Pex1p 
was obtained in immunoprecipitate from CHO-K1 expressing human Pex6p, using 
anti-Pex6p antibody. These results strongly suggest that Pex1p and Pex6p 
interact with each other.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1998.8522
PMID: 9588209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
