---
pmid: '18377662'
title: Src homology 2 (SH2) domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1)
  dephosphorylates VEGF Receptor-2 and attenuates endothelial DNA synthesis, but not
  migration*.
authors:
- Bhattacharya R
- Kwon J
- Wang E
- Mukherjee P
- Mukhopadhyay D
journal: J Mol Signal
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2292718
doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-3-8
---

# Src homology 2 (SH2) domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) dephosphorylates VEGF Receptor-2 and attenuates endothelial DNA synthesis, but not migration*.
**Authors:** Bhattacharya R, Kwon J, Wang E, Mukherjee P, Mukhopadhyay D
**Journal:** J Mol Signal (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-2187-3-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-2187-3-8)
**PMC:** [PMC2292718](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2292718/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Signal. 2008 Mar 31;3:8. doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-3-8.

Src homology 2 (SH2) domain containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) 
dephosphorylates VEGF Receptor-2 and attenuates endothelial DNA synthesis, but 
not migration*.

Bhattacharya R(1), Kwon J, Wang E, Mukherjee P, Mukhopadhyay D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Mayo Clinic Cancer 
Center, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
mukhopadhyay.debabrata@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2, KDR), a 
receptor tyrosine kinase, regulates mitogenic, chemotactic, hyperpermeability, 
and survival signals in vascular endothelial cells in response to its ligand 
vascular permeability factor/ vascular endothelial growth factor (VPF/VEGF). 
SHP-1 is a protein tyrosine phosphatase known to negatively regulate signaling 
from receptors such as EGF receptor, IL3 receptor, erythropoietin receptor and 
also KDR. However, the mechanism by which SHP-1 executes KDR dephosphorylation, 
the targeted tyrosine residue(s) of KDR and also overall downstream signaling or 
phenotypic change(s) caused, is not defined.
RESULTS: Here, we have demonstrated that KDR and SHP-1 are constitutively 
associated and upon VEGF treatment, the phosphatase activity of SHP-1 is 
stimulated in a c-Src kinase dependent manner. Knockdown of SHP-1 by siRNA or 
inhibition of c-Src by an inhibitor, results in augmented DNA synthesis perhaps 
due to increased phosphorylation of at least three tyrosine residues of KDR 996, 
1059 and 1175. On the other hand, neither tyrosine residue 951 of KDR nor 
VEGF-mediated migration is affected by modulation of SHP-1 function.
CONCLUSION: Taken together our results define the tyrosine residues of KDR that 
are regulated by SHP-1 and also elucidates a novel feed back loop where SHP-1 is 
activated upon VEGF treatment through c-Src and controls KDR induced DNA 
synthesis, eventually leading to controlled angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-2187-3-8
PMCID: PMC2292718
PMID: 18377662
