---
pmid: '10415069'
title: 'Chemokine receptor expression and signaling in macaque and human fetal neurons
  and astrocytes: implications for the neuropathogenesis of AIDS.'
authors:
- Klein RS
- Williams KC
- Alvarez-Hernandez X
- Westmoreland S
- Force T
- Lackner AA
- Luster AD
journal: J Immunol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
---

# Chemokine receptor expression and signaling in macaque and human fetal neurons and astrocytes: implications for the neuropathogenesis of AIDS.
**Authors:** Klein RS, Williams KC, Alvarez-Hernandez X, Westmoreland S, Force T, Lackner AA, Luster AD
**Journal:** J Immunol (1999)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1636-46.

Chemokine receptor expression and signaling in macaque and human fetal neurons 
and astrocytes: implications for the neuropathogenesis of AIDS.

Klein RS(1), Williams KC, Alvarez-Hernandez X, Westmoreland S, Force T, Lackner 
AA, Luster AD.

Author information:
(1)AIDS Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Charlestown 02129, USA. klein.robyn@mgh.harvard.edu

Chemokines are believed to play a role in the neuropathogenesis of AIDS through 
their recruitment of neurotoxin-secreting, virally infected leukocytes into the 
CNS. Levels of chemokines are elevated in brains of patients and macaques with 
HIV/SIV-induced encephalitis. The chemokine receptors CCR3, CCR5, and CXCR4 are 
found on subpopulations of neurons in the cortex of human and macaque brain. We 
have developed an in vitro system using both macaque and human fetal neurons and 
astrocytes to further investigate the roles of these receptors in neuronal 
response to inflammation. Here we report the presence of functional HIV/SIV 
coreceptors CCR3, CCR5, and CXCR4 on fetal human and macaque neurons and CCR5 
and CXCR4 on astrocytes immediately ex vivo and after several weeks in culture. 
Confocal imaging of immunostained neurons demonstrated different patterns of 
distribution for these receptors, which may have functional implications. 
Chemokine receptors were shown to respond to their appropriate chemokine ligands 
with increases in intracellular calcium that, in the case of neurons, required 
predepolarization with KCl. These responses were blocked by neutralizing 
chemokine receptor in mAbs. Pretreatment of neural cells with pertussis toxin 
abolished responses to stromal-derived factor-1alpha, macrophage inflammatory 
protein-1beta, and RANTES, indicating coupling of CCR5 and CXCR4 to a Gialpha 
protein, as in leukocytes. Cultured macaque neurons demonstrated calcium flux 
response to treatment with recombinant SIVmac239 envelope protein, suggesting a 
mechanism by which viral envelope could affect neuronal function in SIV 
infection. The presence of functional chemokine receptors on neurons and 
astrocytes suggests that chemokines could serve to link inflammatory and 
neuronal responses.

PMID: 10415069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
