---
pmid: '20473329'
title: SIRPalpha1 receptors interfere with the EGFRvIII signalosome to inhibit glioblastoma
  cell transformation and migration.
authors:
- Kapoor GS
- O'Rourke DM
journal: Oncogene
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.164
---

# SIRPalpha1 receptors interfere with the EGFRvIII signalosome to inhibit glioblastoma cell transformation and migration.
**Authors:** Kapoor GS, O'Rourke DM
**Journal:** Oncogene (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2010.164](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2010.164)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2010 Jul 22;29(29):4130-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.164. Epub 2010 May
 17.

SIRPalpha1 receptors interfere with the EGFRvIII signalosome to inhibit 
glioblastoma cell transformation and migration.

Kapoor GS(1), O'Rourke DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Expression of concern in
    Oncogene. 2023 Jun;42(26):2154. doi: 10.1038/s41388-023-02740-4.

EGFRvIII, a frequent genetic alteration of the epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR), has been shown to increase the migratory potential of tumor cells and 
normal fibroblasts. Previously, we showed that signal regulatory protein alpha1 
(SIRPalpha1) receptors interact with SHP-2 to inhibit wild-type (wt) 
EGFR-mediated tumor migration, survival and cell transformation. However, the 
effects of SIRPalpha1 inhibitory receptors on EGFRvIII-mediated phenotypes are 
unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of SIRPalpha1 
receptor on the EGFRvIII signalosome and phenotypes. Overexpression of 
SIRPalpha1 in U87MG.EGFRvIII cells inhibited transformation and migration in a 
MAPK-dependent manner, and is independent of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3-K)/Akt pathway. We observed reduced EGFRvIII/SHP-2/Gab1/Grb2/Sos-1 
interaction and enhanced SIRP/SHP-2 association in U87MG.EGFRvIII/SIRPalpha1 
cells when compared with empty vector control cells. Interestingly, SIRPalpha1 
overexpression differentially modulated SHP-2 phosphorylation at tyrosyl 542 and 
580 residues, which may regulate Erk1/2 activity and the EGFRvIII phenotype. In 
addition, SIRPalpha1-expressing cells exhibited reduced focal adhesion kinase 
(FAK) phosphorylation and its recruitment to the EGFRvIII/Grb2/Sos-1/Gab1/SHP-2 
complex. Collectively, our data indicate that SIRPalpha1 specifically affects 
the SHP-2/FAK/Grb2/Sos-1/MAPK activation loop to downmodulate EGFRvIII-mediated 
migration and transformation. Further understanding of the molecular 
interactions between the SIRPalpha1 inhibitory receptor and the EGFRvIII 
signalosome may facilitate the identification of novel targets to inhibit the 
EGFRvIII glioblastoma phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2010.164
PMID: 20473329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
