---
pmid: '11689424'
title: Crystal structure of human uroporphyrinogen III synthase.
authors:
- Mathews MA
- Schubert HL
- Whitby FG
- Alexander KJ
- Schadick K
- Bergonia HA
- Phillips JD
- Hill CP
journal: EMBO J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC125291
doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5832
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Crystal structure of human uroporphyrinogen III synthase.
**Authors:** Mathews MA, Schubert HL, Whitby FG, Alexander KJ, Schadick K, Bergonia HA, Phillips JD, Hill CP
**Journal:** EMBO J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/20.21.5832](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/20.21.5832)
**PMC:** [PMC125291](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC125291/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2001 Nov 1;20(21):5832-9. doi: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5832.

Crystal structure of human uroporphyrinogen III synthase.

Mathews MA(1), Schubert HL, Whitby FG, Alexander KJ, Schadick K, Bergonia HA, 
Phillips JD, Hill CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, 50 N. 
Medical Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Uroporphyrinogen III synthase, U3S, the fourth enzyme in the porphyrin 
biosynthetic pathway, catalyzes cyclization of the linear tetrapyrrole, 
hydroxymethylbilane, to the macrocyclic uroporphyrino gen III, which is used in 
several different pathways to form heme, siroheme, chlorophyll, F(430) and 
vitamin B(12). U3S activity is essential in all organisms, and decreased 
activity in humans leads to the autosomal recessive disorder congenital 
erythropoetic porphyria. We have determined the crystal structure of recombinant 
human U3S at 1.85 A resolution. The protein folds into two alpha/beta domains 
connected by a beta-ladder. The active site appears to be located between the 
domains, and variations in relative domain positions observed between 
crystallographically independent molecules indicates the presence of flexibility 
that may be important in the catalytic cycle. Possible mechanisms of catalysis 
were probed by mutating each of the four invariant residues in the protein that 
have titratable side chains. Additionally, six other highly conserved and 
titratable side chains were also mutated. In no case, however, did one of these 
mutations abolish enzyme activity, suggesting that the mechanism does not 
require acid/base catalysis.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/20.21.5832
PMCID: PMC125291
PMID: 11689424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Uroporphyrinogen III synthase, U3S, the fourth enzyme in the porphyrin biosynthetic pathway, catalyzes cyclization of the linear tetrapyrrole, hydroxymethylbilane, to the macrocyclic uroporphyrino gen III, which is used in several different pathways to form heme, siroheme, chlorophyll, F 430 and vitamin B 12 . U3S activity is essential in all organisms, and decreased activity in humans leads to the autosomal recessive disorder congenital erythropoetic porphyria. We have determined the crystal structure of recombinant human U3S at 1.85 Å resolution. The protein folds into two α/β domains connected by a β-ladder. The active site appears to be located between the domains, and variations in relative domain positions observed between crystallographically independent molecules indicates the presence of flexibility that may be important in the catalytic cycle. Possible mechanisms of catalysis were probed by mutating each of the four invariant residues in the protein that have titratable side chains. Additionally, six other highly conserved and titratable side chains were also mutated. In no case, however, did one of these mutations abolish enzyme activity, suggesting that the mechanism does not require acid/base catalysis.

Introduction

Porphyrins are essential components of a wide range of chemical reactions that are required for life. These macrocyclic tetrapyrroles act as cofactors for a multitude of enzymes that perform a variety of processes within the cell such as methionine synthesis (vitamin B 12 ), oxygen transport (heme), methane synthesis (F 430 ) and photosynthesis (chlorophyll). The biosynthesis of all porphyrins proceeds from the five-carbon precursor δ-aminolevulinic acid, through three enzymatic steps, to the first cyclic precursor uroporphyrinogen III (uro’gen III) ( Battersby and Leeper, 1990 ; Scott, 1993 ). Uroporphyrinogen III synthase [U3S; EC 4.2.1.75, hydroxymethylbilane hydrolase (cyclizing)] is the enzyme that catalyzes formation of uro’gen III, the branch point for the various sub-pathways leading to the wide diversity of porphyrins. U3S exists as a monomer ( Tsai et al ., 1987 ) and catalyzes ring closure of the linear tetrapyrrole hydroxymethylbilane (HMB), with concurrent flipping of the D ring, to form uro’gen III ( Battersby, 1978a , b ; Pichon et al ., 1994b ) (see Figure 1 ). Asymmetry of the D ring is therefore a hallmark of all biologically relevant porphyrins.

A catalytic mechanism has been proposed for U3S in which rearrangement of the A ring results in the loss of the C20 hydroxyl group to create a carbo-cation at C20 that performs an electrophilic attack on C16 to form a spirocyclic pyrrolenine intermediate (Figure 1 ). This intermediate resolves in the opposite direction to generate an azafulvene that cyclizes to uro’gen III ( Mathewson and Corwin, 1961 ; Leeper, 1994 ; Pichon et al., 1994a ). This proposed scheme is consistent with carbon radiolabeling experiments that showed that the D ring is flipped ( Battersby, 1978b ; Battersby et al., 1978 ), and with the observation that a synthetic spirolactam, differing from the proposed spirocyclic intermediate only by having an amide in place of an imine, is stable and functions as a potent inhibitor of the enzyme with a K i of 1–2 µM ( Stark et al., 1986 ; Cassidy et al., 1991 ).

Congenital erythropoetic porphyria (CEP) is transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait in which the activity of U3S is severely reduced. Biochemically the disease is characterized by the accumulation in plasma, tissues and red cells, of excess type I uroporphyrin and coproporphyrin, which are then eliminated by excretion in the urine and feces. Clinically CEP is characterized by a severe photosensitivity with skin fragility, bullous lesions, hypertrichosis and scarring on light-exposed areas. The accumulation of porphyrins in erythrocytes often leads to hemolytic anemia and splenomegaly. Individuals with CEP can be either homozygous for the same mutation or heterozygous for two different mutations and the severity of the disease is inversely related to the remaining enzymatic activity of U3S ( Kappas et al ., 1995 ; Desnick et al ., 1998 ).

In an effort to further understand this enzyme, we have determined the crystal structure of recombinant human U3S. The protein folds into a two-domain structure, with each domain consisting of a parallel β-sheet surrounded by α-helices. The two domains are connected by a two-strand anti-parallel β-ladder. We propose that the active site lies between the domains, where many of the surface-exposed conserved residues cluster. An alignment of the two molecules in the asymmetric unit reveals shifts in bridge residues that propagate into larger domain motions. This inherent flexibility may be an essential feature of substrate binding and product release.

Materials and methods

All chemicals were purchased from Sigma unless otherwise indicated.
