---
reference_id: PMID:16593119
title: K/Na-triggered bioluminescence in the oceanic squid Symplectoteuthis oualaniensis.
authors:
- Tsuji FI
- Leisman GB
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1981'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.78.11.6719
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# K/Na-triggered bioluminescence in the oceanic squid Symplectoteuthis oualaniensis.
**Authors:** Tsuji FI, Leisman GB
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1981)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.78.11.6719](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.78.11.6719)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Nov;78(11):6719-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.78.11.6719.

K/Na-triggered bioluminescence in the oceanic squid Symplectoteuthis
oualaniensis.

Tsuji FI(1), Leisman GB.

Author information:
(1)Marine Biology Research Division A002, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093.

A distinctive type of luminescent system present in the large dorsal luminous
organ of the oceanic squid Symplectoteuthis oualaniensis is described. The organ
produces an intense blue flash of light followed by a rapid decay in light
intensity. Luminescence originates from numerous oval granules present in the
luminous organ. The essential light-emitting components are membrane bound.
Intact granules or washed homogenates of the granules are triggered to emit
light by monovalent cations such as, in decreasing order of effectiveness,
potassium, rubidium, sodium, cesium, ammonium, and lithium. Calcium, magnesium,
and strontium ions do not trigger light emission. Analysis of the kinetics of
the decay of light intensity suggests that two light-emitting components are
involved, one decaying faster than the other. The light-emitting reaction has an
absolute requirement for molecular oxygen. The optimum KCl or NaCl concentration
is approximately 0.6 M and the optimum pH is approximately 7.8. A free
sulfhydryl group is essential for activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.78.11.6719
PMCID: PMC349121
PMID: 16593119