---
pmid: '34065512'
title: CRL4-DCAF12 Ubiquitin Ligase Controls MOV10 RNA Helicase during Spermatogenesis
  and T Cell Activation.
authors:
- Lidak T
- Baloghova N
- Korinek V
- Sedlacek R
- Balounova J
- Kasparek P
- Cermak L
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8161014
doi: 10.3390/ijms22105394
---

# CRL4-DCAF12 Ubiquitin Ligase Controls MOV10 RNA Helicase during Spermatogenesis and T Cell Activation.
**Authors:** Lidak T, Baloghova N, Korinek V, Sedlacek R, Balounova J, Kasparek P, Cermak L
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms22105394](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22105394)
**PMC:** [PMC8161014](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8161014/)

## Abstract

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 May 20;22(10):5394. doi: 10.3390/ijms22105394.

CRL4-DCAF12 Ubiquitin Ligase Controls MOV10 RNA Helicase during Spermatogenesis 
and T Cell Activation.

Lidak T(1)(2), Baloghova N(1), Korinek V(1)(3), Sedlacek R(4), Balounova J(4), 
Kasparek P(4), Cermak L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, 252 42 Vestec, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, Charles University, 128 00 Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 252 42 Vestec, Czech Republic.
(4)Czech Centre for Phenogenomics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic.

Multisubunit cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase 4 (CRL4)-DCAF12 recognizes the 
C-terminal degron containing acidic amino acid residues. However, its 
physiological roles and substrates are largely unknown. Purification of 
CRL4-DCAF12 complexes revealed a wide range of potential substrates, including 
MOV10, an "ancient" RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) complex RNA helicase. 
We show that DCAF12 controls the MOV10 protein level via its C-terminal motif in 
a proteasome- and CRL-dependent manner. Next, we generated Dcaf12 knockout mice 
and demonstrated that the DCAF12-mediated degradation of MOV10 is conserved in 
mice and humans. Detailed analysis of Dcaf12-deficient mice revealed that their 
testes produce fewer mature sperms, phenotype accompanied by elevated MOV10 and 
imbalance in meiotic markers SCP3 and γ-H2AX. Additionally, the percentages of 
splenic CD4+ T and natural killer T (NKT) cell populations were significantly 
altered. In vitro, activated Dcaf12-deficient T cells displayed inappropriately 
stabilized MOV10 and increased levels of activated caspases. In summary, we 
identified MOV10 as a novel substrate of CRL4-DCAF12 and demonstrated the 
biological relevance of the DCAF12-MOV10 pathway in spermatogenesis and T cell 
activation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms22105394
PMCID: PMC8161014
PMID: 34065512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
