---
pmid: '12660785'
title: The role of presenilin cofactors in the gamma-secretase complex.
authors:
- Takasugi N
- Tomita T
- Hayashi I
- Tsuruoka M
- Niimura M
- Takahashi Y
- Thinakaran G
- Iwatsubo T
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature01506
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The role of presenilin cofactors in the gamma-secretase complex.
**Authors:** Takasugi N, Tomita T, Hayashi I, Tsuruoka M, Niimura M, Takahashi Y, Thinakaran G, Iwatsubo T
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01506](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01506)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Mar 27;422(6930):438-41. doi: 10.1038/nature01506. Epub 2003 Mar 
16.

The role of presenilin cofactors in the gamma-secretase complex.

Takasugi N(1), Tomita T, Hayashi I, Tsuruoka M, Niimura M, Takahashi Y, 
Thinakaran G, Iwatsubo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology and Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 
113-0033, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Mar 27;422(6930):385, 387. doi: 10.1038/422385a.

Mutations in presenilin genes account for the majority of the cases of the 
familial form of Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Presenilin is essential for 
gamma-secretase activity, a proteolytic activity involved in intramembrane 
cleavage of Notch and beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP). Cleavage of 
betaAPP by FAD mutant presenilin results in the overproduction of highly 
amyloidogenic amyloid beta42 peptides. gamma-Secretase activity requires the 
formation of a stable, high-molecular-mass protein complex that, in addition to 
the endoproteolysed fragmented form of presenilin, contains essential cofactors 
including nicastrin, APH-1 (refs 15-18) and PEN-2 (refs 16, 19). However, the 
role of each protein in complex formation and the generation of enzymatic 
activity is unclear. Here we show that Drosophila APH-1 (Aph-1) increases the 
stability of Drosophila presenilin (Psn) holoprotein in the complex. Depletion 
of PEN-2 by RNA interference prevents endoproteolysis of presenilin and promotes 
stabilization of the holoprotein in both Drosophila and mammalian cells, 
including primary neurons. Co-expression of Drosophila Pen-2 with Aph-1 and 
nicastrin increases the formation of Psn fragments as well as gamma-secretase 
activity. Thus, APH-1 stabilizes the presenilin holoprotein in the complex, 
whereas PEN-2 is required for endoproteolytic processing of presenilin and 
conferring gamma-secretase activity to the complex.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01506
PMID: 12660785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
