---
pmid: '15574880'
title: Constitutively active G protein-coupled receptor mutants block dictyostelium
  development.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Goswami M
- Hereld D
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC545893
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-06-0456
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Constitutively active G protein-coupled receptor mutants block dictyostelium development.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Goswami M, Hereld D
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e04-06-0456](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e04-06-0456)
**PMC:** [PMC545893](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC545893/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Feb;16(2):562-72. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e04-06-0456. Epub 2004 
Dec 1.

Constitutively active G protein-coupled receptor mutants block dictyostelium 
development.

Zhang M(1), Goswami M, Hereld D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas 
Medical School at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

cAR1, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for cAMP, is required for the 
multicellular development of Dictyostelium. The activation of multiple pathways 
by cAR1 is transient because of poorly defined adaptation mechanisms. To 
investigate this, we used a genetic screen for impaired development to isolate 
four dominant-negative cAR1 mutants, designated DN1-4. The mutant receptors 
inhibit multiple cAR1-mediated responses known to undergo adaptation. Reduced in 
vitro adenylyl cyclase activation by GTPgammaS suggests that they cause 
constitutive adaptation of this and perhaps other pathways. In addition, the DN 
mutants are constitutively phosphorylated, which normally requires cAMP binding 
and possess cAMP affinities that are approximately 100-fold higher than that of 
wild-type cAR1. Two independent activating mutations, L100H and I104N, were 
identified. These residues occupy adjacent positions near the cytoplasmic end of 
the receptor's third transmembrane helix and correspond to the (E/D)RY motif of 
numerous mammalian GPCRs, which is believed to regulate their activation. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that the DN mutants are constitutively 
activated and block development by turning on natural adaptation mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e04-06-0456
PMCID: PMC545893
PMID: 15574880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

cAR1, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for cAMP, is required for the multicellular development of Dictyostelium . The activation of multiple pathways by cAR1 is transient because of poorly defined adaptation mechanisms. To investigate this, we used a genetic screen for impaired development to isolate four dominant-negative cAR1 mutants, designated DN1-4. The mutant receptors inhibit multiple cAR1-mediated responses known to undergo adaptation. Reduced in vitro adenylyl cyclase activation by GTPγS suggests that they cause constitutive adaptation of this and perhaps other pathways. In addition, the DN mutants are constitutively phosphorylated, which normally requires cAMP binding and possess cAMP affinities that are ∼100-fold higher than that of wild-type cAR1. Two independent activating mutations, L100H and I104N, were identified. These residues occupy adjacent positions near the cytoplasmic end of the receptor's third transmembrane helix and correspond to the (E/D)RY motif of numerous mammalian GPCRs, which is believed to regulate their activation. Taken together, these findings suggest that the DN mutants are constitutively activated and block development by turning on natural adaptation mechanisms.

INTRODUCTION

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) number in the thousands in humans and are responsible for physiological responses to diverse extracellular signals including light, odorants, hormones, chemoattractants, and neurotransmitters. On activation by their ligands (or photons in the case of rhodopsin), these seven transmembrane domain-containing receptors typically activate heterotrimeric G proteins that, in turn, regulate the activities of a variety of downstream effectors. Ligand binding also triggers various desensitization mechanisms which diminish the cell's responsiveness to subsequent stimulation ( Strader et al. , 1995 ; Bourne, 1997 ; Ferguson and Caron, 1998 ).

These systems are highly conserved and found in all eukaryotes including the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum , which uses extracellular cAMP signaling and cAMP-specific GPCRs to orchestrate its multicellular development. When deprived of nutrients, this free-living soil amoeba ceases growth and embarks on a 24-h program in which some 10 5 cells aggregate and differentiate to yield a sporeladen fruiting body. The first of four highly homologous cAMP receptors (cARs) expressed during development, cAR1, is essential for aggregation and subsequent development for three principal reasons. First, by transiently activating an adenylyl cyclase (ACA), cAR1 mediates “cAMP relay,” the amplification and propagation of cAMP waves, which arise spontaneously every 6 min at aggregation centers. Second, cAR1 plays a direct role in aggregation as it mediates chemotaxis of cells up the cAMP gradient inherent in each oncoming wave. Lastly, cAR1 is responsible for the induction of various aggregation-stage genes including those encoding cAR1 itself, ACA, and Gα2, the G protein α-subunit through which cAR1 signals ( Parent and Devreotes, 1996 ).

cAR1 governs these diverse cellular responses by activating multiple G protein-dependent and G protein-independent pathways, resulting in the uptake of Ca 2+ , polymerization of actin and myosin, and activation of a host of downstream effectors including adenylyl and guanylyl cyclases, a phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C (PI-PLC), PI 3-kinase (PI3K), and protein kinases PKA, Akt/PKB, and ERK2 ( Brzostowski and Kimmel, 2001 ). Interestingly, all of these responses are terminated within seconds to minutes of persistent cAMP stimulation by poorly understood adaptation mechanisms. Cells adapted to a subsaturating concentration of cAMP retain the ability to mount a response to a higher dose, which is proportional to the change in receptor occupancy ( Dinauer et al. , 1980a ; Nebl and Fisher, 1997 ). These observations suggest that ligand-occupied cAR1 sends out both an excitatory signal that activates effectors such as ACA as well as a delayed inhibitory signal that terminates the response ( Dinauer et al. , 1980a ). Removal of cAMP initiates a process of deadaptation whereby cells become resensitized to cAMP challenge with a half-time of 3-4 min ( Dinauer et al. , 1980b ).

Sequential ACA activation, adaptation, clearance of secreted cAMP by a cell surface phosphodiesterase (PDE), and deadaptation result in the oscillation of cells between cAMP-responsive and adapted states ( Parent and Devreotes, 1996 ). Thus, adaptation both accounts for the oscillatory nature of the cAMP signal during aggregation and necessitates such a signal to achieve continued activation of adapting responses. For instance, a number of so-called “pulse-induced” genes, including those encoding cAR1 and Gα2, are induced by periodic but not constant cAMP stimulation, indicating that they are regulated by an adaptation mechanism ( Kimmel, 1987 ; Mann and Firtel, 1987 ). This adaptation permits these genes to be expressed during aggregation when they are required and represses them after aggregation when cAMP is persistently elevated. In chemotaxis, adaptation prevents cells from chasing after passing cAMP waves and is thought to facilitate the perception of shallow chemoattractant gradients and restrict pseudopod extension and uropod retraction to the poles of cells undergoing chemotaxis ( Chung and Firtel, 2002 ; Iijima et al. , 2002 ).

Because of the multiplicity of adapting responses mediated by cAR1, slowly hydrolyzed cAMP analogs or high concentrations of cAMP block aggregation and subsequent development ( Wallraff et al. , 1984 ). We hypothesized that constitutively active cAR1 mutants would similarly promote adaptation and thus interfere with wild-type cAR1 function and development. Such mutant receptors could be useful for delineating adaptation and other regulatory mechanisms extrinsic to cAR1 as well as mechanisms intrinsic to cAR1 that regulate its activation. Therefore, we undertook a largescale genetic screen for dominant-negative point mutants of cAR1 capable of blocking the development of wild-type cells. In this report, we describe four such mutants that exhibit properties expected of constitutively active receptor mutants and point to a common mechanism of regulating the activation of highly divergent GPCRs.

Dominance of DN Receptors Does Not Result from Their Constitutive Phosphorylation

To examine the possibility that DN receptor phosphorylation somehow causes the dominant effects on development, a version of DN4 lacking all 18 C-terminal-domain serines (designated DN4ΔP) was generated and expressed in wild-type cells. Elimination of these serines in an otherwise wild-type receptor was previously shown to abolish receptor phosphorylation but have little impact on the receptor's ability to support aggregation ( Kim et al. , 1997b ). However, DN4ΔP was found to be similar to DN4 in its ability to impair aggregation ( Figure 3A ). Thus, the constitutive phosphorylation of DN4 (and presumably also DN1-3) is not required for its dominant-negative effect on development but instead is merely indicative of the mutant receptor's constitutively activated conformation. Therefore, a separate phosphorylation-independent activity of the mutant receptor must account for the observed developmental phenotype.

DISCUSSION

We describe here the isolation and characterization of four dominant-negative cAR1 mutants, designated DN1-4, which impair the aggregation and subsequent development of Dictyostelium . Dominant-negative GPCRs acting by several distinct mechanisms have been described in other systems. Dominant-negative rhodopsin mutants have been described that cause autosomal-dominant retinitis pigmentosa by interfering with the transport of wild-type rhodopsin to the cell surface ( Saliba et al. , 2002 ). In another example, Overton and Blumer ( 2000 ) attributed the dominance of a yeast pheromone receptor mutant (Ste2-M250I) to its ability to oligomerize with wild-type Ste2 and directly inhibit its function. Our DN mutants appear not to act by either of these mechanisms because they are expressed efficiently on the cell surface and DN4ΔP did not alter either the surface localization or cAMP-induced phosphorylation of coexpressed wild-type cAR1. In addition, G protein-sequestering mutants of Ste2 and mammalian α 1B -adrenergic receptor have been described ( Dosil et al. , 1998 ; Chen et al. , 2000 ). Although we have not formally ruled out this mechanism for our DN mutants, it seems unlikely as it does not readily account for their constitutive phosphorylation. In light of the fact that the phosphorylation of wild-type cAR1 is G protein-independent ( Milne et al. , 1995 ), a tightly associated G protein is probably more likely to interfere with phosphorylation by impeding the kinase's access to the receptor.

The properties of the DN cAR1 mutants strongly suggest that they are constitutively activated. Although wild-type cAR1 exhibits an electrophoretic mobility shift because of phosphorylation only upon cAMP binding, the DN mutant proteins are constitutively phosphorylated to varying extents in the absence of cAMP. The severity of developmental impairment caused by the DN mutants is correlated with the extent to which they are constitutively phosphorylated, suggesting that they impair development by the same mechanism and that this mechanism is related in some way to their phosphorylation. However, analysis of DN4ΔP, a nonphosphorylatable version of DN4, showed that the dominant activity and phosphorylation are independent consequences of the acquired mutation. These findings suggest that the mutant receptors, in the absence of cAMP, can assume an active conformation resembling that of cAMP-bound cAR1, which triggers phosphorylation as well as a separate activity responsible for their dominance. The dramatically elevated affinities of the DN receptors and the localization of the causative mutations to a region of TM3 implicated in regulating the activation of other GPCRs (discussed below) provide additional independent evidence that the DN receptors are constitutively active. This conclusion raises the possibility that the DN receptor exert their dominant-negative influence on development by persistently activating the natural adaptation mechanisms that normally regulate cAR1 signaling.

An early and critical function of cAR1 is the feed-forward induction of the cAMP signaling apparatus required for aggregation. cAR1 and Gα2, initially expressed at low levels, maximally induce their own expression and that of other pulse-induced genes by triggering the elevation of intracellular cAMP and activation of PKA ( Iranfar et al. , 2003 ). cAR1 controls intracellular cAMP levels through the simultaneous activation of ACA and ERK2-mediated inhibition of the cAMP-specific PDE RegA ( Maeda et al. , 2004 ), which are both subject to adaptation.

ACA activation by cAR1 is mediated by the PH-domaincontaining protein CRAC (cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase; Insall et al. , 1994 ). Gβγ dimers, derived from activation of the Gα2βγ heterotrimer, together with a Ras-like GTPase stimulate PI3K to transiently produce PI-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP 3 ), which prompts CRAC translocation to the plasma membrane where it can initiate ACA activation ( Parent et al. , 1998 ; Meili et al. , 1999 ; Funamoto et al. , 2002 ; Huang et al. , 2003 ). The PIP 3 increase also causes the membrane translocation of other PH-domain-containing proteins, PKB and PhdA, which have important roles in chemotaxis ( Meili et al. , 1999 ). Although the role of PI3K in ACA activation remains to be verified, its role in chemotaxis is well established ( Funamoto et al. , 2002 ). Thus, the cAR1-PI3K pathway and its adaptation are likely to underlie the regulation of pulse-induced gene expression, cAMP relay, and chemotaxis.

We model the adaptation of the cAR1-PI3K pathway as the consequence of a Gα2-independent inhibitory signal that emanates from cAR1 and acts at a site in the excitatory pathway below the G protein and at or above PI3K ( Figure 9A , right). This model is consistent with the persistent dissociation and presumed activation of Gα2βγ in adapted cells ( Janetopoulos et al. , 2001 ), the diminished ability of GTPγSto stimulate ACA activity in lysates of adapted wild-type and gα2 - lysates but not those of car1 - cells ( Theibert and Devreotes, 1986 ; Pupillo et al. , 1992 ), and the transient activation of PI3K ( Huang et al. , 2003 ).

Our findings suggest that the dominant-negative effects of the DN mutants result either directly or indirectly from their ability to cause constitutive adaptation of the cAR1-ACA pathway ( Figure 9B ). This adaptation is supported by the relatively weak activation of ACA by GTPγS in lysates of cells expressing DN mutants and can explain the impairment of pulse-induced gene expression. The reduced ability of cAMP to activate ERK2 in these cells, possibly due to adaptation of the cAR1-ERK2 pathway, may also contribute to defective pulse-induced gene expression. The failure to induce pulse-induced genes, particularly that of Gα2, to high levels in DN cells is likely an important reason for the profound impairment of other Gα2-dependent responses (i.e., chemotaxis, cAMP and cGMP accumulation) and consequently aggregation, which depends on these responses. However, the possibility that persistent adaptation contributes to the impairment of these responses cannot be dismissed.

Much of what is known about GPCR structure and activation comes from studies of rhodopsin. The only available GPCR structure is that of rhodopsin's inactive state ( Palczewski et al. , 2000 ), which shows that the seven transmembrane helices are organized in a bundle roughly perpendicular to membrane. Site-directed spin labeling, intramolecular cross-linking, and residue accessibility studies indicate that activation entails an opening of the helical bundle at its cytoplasmic end due to outward rigid-body movements of primarily TM6 and to a lesser extent TM3, exposing residues critical for activating the G protein ( Meng and Bourne, 2001 ). Consistent findings with β 2 -adrenergic receptors suggest that separation of the cytoplasmic ends of TM3 and TM6 is a general mechanism of GPCR activation ( Gether et al. , 1997 ).

Mutations could conceivably act locally to activate a GPCR by introducing kinks into helices or by some other means exposing residues that interact with and activate the G protein. However, constitutively active mutants frequently exhibit elevated affinities for agonists, suggesting a more global impact of these mutations on receptor conformation. Such mutations are thought to affect residues that normally constrain the unoccupied receptor in its inactive state and, consequently, perturb the equilibrium between inactive (R) and active (R * ) states in favor of R * to which agonists preferentially bind ( Samama et al. , 1993 ). Constitutively active mutants have been observed for many GPCRs and have resulted from mutations in any of the transmembrane domains and less often in the interconnecting loops, suggesting that a network of interhelical interactions constrains the inactive state ( Parnot et al. , 2002 ). A large proportion of these mutations are in TM3 and TM6, consistent with their central role in activation.

The elevated affinities of the DN mutants suggest that the responsible mutations altered the R↔ R * equilibrium in favor of the active R * conformation of cAR1. All four of the dominant cAR1 mutants had substitutions at the cytoplasmic end of TM3. Substitution of L100 or I104 of cAR1 accounts for the dominant activities of DN1, DN3, and DN4. Based on the alignment of Klein et al. ( 1988 ), these cAR1 residues correspond to residues L131 and R135 of rhodopsin ( Figure 8C ), which protrude from the base of TM3 into the pocket formed by the bundle of the seven transmembrane helices ( Figure 8D ). R135 of rhodopsin is involved in a hydrogen bonded network bridging TM3 and TM6 and is in the (D/E)RY motif of many mammalian GPCRs, which is believed to play a key role in their activation ( Palczewski et al. , 2000 ; Scheer et al. , 2000 ). Lu and Hulme ( 1999 ) also identified a patch of hydrophobic TM3 residues adjacent to the DRY sequence of the M1 muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor, whose mutation increased receptor affinity and constitutive activity. Similarly, Parrish et al. ( 2002 ) provided genetic evidence for a hydrogen bond between Q149 at the cytoplasmic end of TM3 and N84 of TM2 in Ste2 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae that promotes this receptor's inactivation. Therefore, it seems likely that L100 and I104 of cAR1 constitute a patch of residues involved directly or indirectly in interhelical interactions that constrain cAR1 in an inactive conformation. Alternatively, rather than participating in interactions that stabilize the R state, L100 and I104 might destabilize R * because of the energetic cost of exposing these hydrophobic residues to the aqueous cytoplasm, a cost that is normally offset by the energy of ligand binding. If so, their mutation to the hydrophilic residues His and Asn, respectively, may have mitigated this energetic cost and hence the requirement for ligand.

Our findings suggest that the role of the cytoplasmic end of TM3 in regulating GPCR activation has been conserved in evolutionarily distant species. Thus, deliberate mutagenesis of the corresponding region of poorly characterized GPCRs such as orphan receptors revealed by genome sequencing might be a fruitful approach for elucidating their functions and regulation. To our knowledge, the constitutively active GPCR mutants described in this report are the first to be identified based on their activation of innate adaptation mechanisms. These mutants should be useful for elucidating intrinsic mechanisms of GPCR regulation as well as the mechanisms of adaptation that govern the chemotaxis of Dictyostelium and are likely shared by human immune cells capable of GPCR-mediated chemotaxis.
