---
pmid: '19826008'
title: An integrated approach for experimental target identification of hypoxia-induced
  miR-210.
authors:
- Fasanaro P
- Greco S
- Lorenzi M
- Pescatori M
- Brioschi M
- Kulshreshtha R
- Banfi C
- Stubbs A
- Calin GA
- Ivan M
- Capogrossi MC
- Martelli F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2787374
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052779
---

# An integrated approach for experimental target identification of hypoxia-induced miR-210.
**Authors:** Fasanaro P, Greco S, Lorenzi M, Pescatori M, Brioschi M, Kulshreshtha R, Banfi C, Stubbs A, Calin GA, Ivan M, Capogrossi MC, Martelli F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.052779](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.052779)
**PMC:** [PMC2787374](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2787374/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):35134-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052779. Epub 
2009 Oct 13.

An integrated approach for experimental target identification of hypoxia-induced 
miR-210.

Fasanaro P(1), Greco S, Lorenzi M, Pescatori M, Brioschi M, Kulshreshtha R, 
Banfi C, Stubbs A, Calin GA, Ivan M, Capogrossi MC, Martelli F.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS-Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, 20097 Milan, Italy.

miR-210 is a key player of cell response to hypoxia, modulating cell survival, 
VEGF-driven endothelial cell migration, and the ability of endothelial cells to 
form capillary-like structures. A crucial step in understanding microRNA (miRNA) 
function is the identification of their targets. However, only few miR-210 
targets have been identified to date. Here, we describe an integrated strategy 
for large-scale identification of new miR-210 targets by combining 
transcriptomics and proteomics with bioinformatic approaches. To experimentally 
validate candidate targets, the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) loaded with 
miR-210 was purified by immunoprecipitation along with its mRNA targets. The 
complex was significantly enriched in mRNAs of 31 candidate targets, such as 
BDNF, GPD1L, ISCU, NCAM, and the non-coding RNA Xist. A subset of the newly 
identified targets was further confirmed by 3'-untranslated region (UTR) 
reporter assays, and hypoxia induced down-modulation of their expression was 
rescued blocking miR-210, providing support for the approach validity. In the 
case of 9 targets, such as PTPN1 and P4HB, miR-210 seed-pairing sequences 
localized in the coding sequence or in the 5'-UTR, in line with recent data 
extending miRNA targeting beyond the "classic" 3'-UTR recognition. Finally, Gene 
Ontology analysis of the targets highlights known miR-210 impact on cell cycle 
regulation and differentiation, and predicts a new role of this miRNA in RNA 
processing, DNA binding, development, membrane trafficking, and amino acid 
catabolism. Given the complexity of miRNA actions, we view such a multiprong 
approach as useful to adequately describe the multiple pathways regulated by 
miR-210 during physiopathological processes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052779
PMCID: PMC2787374
PMID: 19826008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
