---
pmid: '2972794'
title: Identification of distinct C3b and C4b recognition sites in the human C3b/C4b
  receptor (CR1, CD35) by deletion mutagenesis.
authors:
- Klickstein LB
- Bartow TJ
- Miletic V
- Rabson LD
- Smith JA
- Fearon DT
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2189104
doi: 10.1084/jem.168.5.1699
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of distinct C3b and C4b recognition sites in the human C3b/C4b receptor (CR1, CD35) by deletion mutagenesis.
**Authors:** Klickstein LB, Bartow TJ, Miletic V, Rabson LD, Smith JA, Fearon DT
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.168.5.1699](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.168.5.1699)
**PMC:** [PMC2189104](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2189104/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1988 Nov 1;168(5):1699-717. doi: 10.1084/jem.168.5.1699.

Identification of distinct C3b and C4b recognition sites in the human C3b/C4b 
receptor (CR1, CD35) by deletion mutagenesis.

Klickstein LB(1), Bartow TJ, Miletic V, Rabson LD, Smith JA, Fearon DT.

Author information:
(1)Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115.

Complementary DNA clones encoding the NH2-terminal region of human CR1 have been 
isolated and sequenced. The deduced complete amino acid sequence of the F 
allotype of human CR1 contains 2,039 residues, including a 41-residue signal 
peptide, an extracellular domain of 1,930 residues, a 25-amino acid 
transmembrane domain, and a 43-amino acid cytoplasmic region. The extracellular 
domain is composed exclusively of 30 short consensus repeats (SCRs), 
characteristic of the family of C3/C4-binding proteins. The 28 NH2-terminal SCRs 
are organized as four long homologous repeats (LHRs) of seven SCRs each. The 
newly sequenced LHR, LHR-A, is 61% identical to LHR-B in the NH2-terminal two 
SCRs and greater than 99% identical in the COOH-terminal five SCRs. Eight cDNA 
clones were spliced to form a single construct, piABCD, that contained the 
entire CR1 coding sequence downstream of a cytomegalovirus promoter. COS cells 
transfected with piABCD transiently expressed recombinant CR1 that comigrated 
with the F allotype of erythrocyte CR1 on SDS-PAGE and that mediated rosette 
formation with sheep erythrocytes bearing C4b and C3b. Recombinant CR1 also had 
factor I-cofactor activity for cleavage of C3(ma). Analyses of six deletion 
mutants expressed in COS cells indicated that the NH2-terminal two SCRs of LHR-A 
contained a site determining C4 specificity and the NH2-terminal two SCRs of 
LHR-B and -C each had a site determining C3 specificity. The presence of these 
three distinct sites in CR1 may enable the receptor to interact multivalently 
with C4b/C3b and C3b/C3b complexes generated during activation of the classical 
and alternative pathways.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.168.5.1699
PMCID: PMC2189104
PMID: 2972794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Complementary DNA clones encoding the NH2-terminal region of human CR1 have been isolated and sequenced. The deduced complete amino acid sequence of the F allotype of human CR1 contains 2,039 residues, including a 41-residue signal peptide, an extracellular domain of 1,930 residues, a 25-amino acid transmembrane domain, and a 43-amino acid cytoplasmic region. The extracellular domain is composed exclusively of 30 short consensus repeats (SCRs), characteristic of the family of C3/C4-binding proteins. The 28 NH2-terminal SCRs are organized as four long homologous repeats (LHRs) of seven SCRs each. The newly sequenced LHR, LHR-A, is 61% identical to LHR-B in the NH2-terminal two SCRs and greater than 99% identical in the COOH-terminal five SCRs. Eight cDNA clones were spliced to form a single construct, piABCD, that contained the entire CR1 coding sequence downstream of a cytomegalovirus promoter. COS cells transfected with piABCD transiently expressed recombinant CR1 that comigrated with the F allotype of erythrocyte CR1 on SDS-PAGE and that mediated rosette formation with sheep erythrocytes bearing C4b and C3b. Recombinant CR1 also had factor I-cofactor activity for cleavage of C3(ma). Analyses of six deletion mutants expressed in COS cells indicated that the NH2-terminal two SCRs of LHR- A contained a site determining C4 specificity and the NH2-terminal two SCRs of LHR-B and -C each had a site determining C3 specificity. The presence of these three distinct sites in CR1 may enable the receptor to interact multivalently with C4b/C3b and C3b/C3b complexes generated during activation of the classical and alternative pathways.
