---
pmid: '23692431'
title: Transcriptional activation of the CrcZ and CrcY regulatory RNAs by the CbrB
  response regulator in Pseudomonas putida.
authors:
- García-Mauriño SM
- Pérez-Martínez I
- Amador CI
- Canosa I
- Santero E
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/mmi.12270
---

# Transcriptional activation of the CrcZ and CrcY regulatory RNAs by the CbrB response regulator in Pseudomonas putida.
**Authors:** García-Mauriño SM, Pérez-Martínez I, Amador CI, Canosa I, Santero E
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/mmi.12270](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12270)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 Jul;89(1):189-205. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12270. Epub 2013 Jun
11.

Transcriptional activation of the CrcZ and CrcY regulatory RNAs by the CbrB 
response regulator in Pseudomonas putida.

García-Mauriño SM(1), Pérez-Martínez I, Amador CI, Canosa I, Santero E.

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide, Carretera de Utrera, Km. 1, 41013, Seville, Spain.

The CbrAB two-component system has been described as a high-ranked element in 
the regulatory hierarchy of Pseudomonas putida that controls a variety of 
metabolic and behavioural traits required for adaptation to changing 
environmental conditions. We show that the response regulatory protein CbrB, an 
activator of σ(N) -dependent promoters, directly controls the expression of the 
small RNAs CrcZ and CrcY in P. putida. These two RNAs sequester the protein Crc, 
which is a translational repressor of multiple pathways linked to carbon 
catabolite repression. We characterized the in vivo and in vitro activation by 
CbrB at both crcZ and crcY promoters, and identified new DNA sequences where the 
protein binds. IHF, a co-activator at many σ(N) -dependent promoters, also binds 
to the promoter regions and contributes to the activation of the sRNAs. CbrB 
phosphorylation is necessary at physiological activation conditions, but a 
higher dose of the protein allows in vitro transcriptional activation in its 
non-phosphorylated form. We also show there is some production of CrcY coming 
from an upstream promoter independent of CbrB. Thus, CbrAB constitute a global 
signal transduction pathway integrated in a higher regulatory network that also 
controls catabolite repression through the expression of the two regulatory RNAs 
CrcZ and CrcY.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12270
PMID: 23692431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
