---
pmid: '31903486'
title: Taurine treatment of retinal degeneration and cardiomyopathy in a consanguineous
  family with SLC6A6 taurine transporter deficiency.
authors:
- Ansar M
- Ranza E
- Shetty M
- Paracha SA
- Azam M
- Kern I
- Iwaszkiewicz J
- Farooq O
- Pournaras CJ
- Malcles A
- Kecik M
- Rivolta C
- Muzaffar W
- Qurban A
- Ali L
- Aggoun Y
- Santoni FA
- Makrythanasis P
- Ahmed J
- Qamar R
- Sarwar MT
- Henry LK
- Antonarakis SE
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: pdf_partial
pmcid: PMC7068170
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz303
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Taurine treatment of retinal degeneration and cardiomyopathy in a consanguineous family with SLC6A6 taurine transporter deficiency.
**Authors:** Ansar M, Ranza E, Shetty M, Paracha SA, Azam M, Kern I, Iwaszkiewicz J, Farooq O, Pournaras CJ, Malcles A, Kecik M, Rivolta C, Muzaffar W, Qurban A, Ali L, Aggoun Y, Santoni FA, Makrythanasis P, Ahmed J, Qamar R, Sarwar MT, Henry LK, Antonarakis SE
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz303](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz303)
**PMC:** [PMC7068170](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7068170/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Mar 13;29(4):618-623. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz303.

Taurine treatment of retinal degeneration and cardiomyopathy in a consanguineous 
family with SLC6A6 taurine transporter deficiency.

Ansar M(1), Ranza E(1)(2), Shetty M(3), Paracha SA(4), Azam M(5), Kern I(6), 
Iwaszkiewicz J(7), Farooq O(8), Pournaras CJ(9), Malcles A(10), Kecik M(10), 
Rivolta C(11)(12)(13), Muzaffar W(14), Qurban A(14), Ali L(5), Aggoun Y(15), 
Santoni FA(1), Makrythanasis P(1), Ahmed J(4), Qamar R(5), Sarwar MT(4), Henry 
LK(3), Antonarakis SE(1)(2)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, USA.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, 
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biosciences, Faculty of Science, COMSATS University, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.
(6)Pediatric Nephrology and Metabolism Unit, Pediatric Subspecialties Service, 
Children's Hospital, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(7)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Molecular Modeling Group, University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(8)Bahria University Medical and Dental College, Karachi, Pakistan.
(9)Hirslanden Clinique La Colline, Geneva, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(11)Clinical Research Center, Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology 
Basel (IOB), Basel, Switzerland.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.
(13)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.
(14)Armed Forces Institute of Ophthalmology, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
(15)Pediatric Cardiology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
(16)iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2020 Nov;28(11):1479-1480. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-0671-3.

In a consanguineous Pakistani family with two affected individuals, a homozygous 
variant Gly399Val in the eighth transmembrane domain of the taurine transporter 
SLC6A6 was identified resulting in a hypomorph transporting capacity of ~15% 
compared with normal. Three-dimensional modeling of this variant has indicated 
that it likely causes displacement of the Tyr138 (TM3) side chain, important for 
transport of taurine. The affected individuals presented with rapidly 
progressive childhood retinal degeneration, cardiomyopathy and almost 
undetectable plasma taurine levels. Oral taurine supplementation of 
100 mg/kg/day resulted in maintenance of normal blood taurine levels. Following 
approval by the ethics committee, a long-term supplementation treatment was 
introduced. Remarkably, after 24-months, the cardiomyopathy was corrected in 
both affected siblings, and in the 6-years-old, the retinal degeneration was 
arrested, and the vision was clinically improved. Similar therapeutic approaches 
could be employed in Mendelian phenotypes caused by the dysfunction of the 
hundreds of other molecular transporters.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz303
PMCID: PMC7068170
PMID: 31903486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Preparing to download ... HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
