---
pmid: '11018023'
title: CLIF, a novel cycle-like factor, regulates the circadian oscillation of plasminogen
  activator inhibitor-1 gene expression.
authors:
- Maemura K
- de la Monte SM
- Chin MT
- Layne MD
- Hsieh CM
- Yet SF
- Perrella MA
- Lee ME
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000629200
---

# CLIF, a novel cycle-like factor, regulates the circadian oscillation of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 gene expression.
**Authors:** Maemura K, de la Monte SM, Chin MT, Layne MD, Hsieh CM, Yet SF, Perrella MA, Lee ME
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000629200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000629200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):36847-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000629200.

CLIF, a novel cycle-like factor, regulates the circadian oscillation of
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 gene expression.

Maemura K(1), de la Monte SM, Chin MT, Layne MD, Hsieh CM, Yet SF, Perrella MA,
Lee ME.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular and the Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
kmae-tky@umin.ac.jp

The onset of myocardial infarction occurs frequently in the early morning, and
it may partly result from circadian variation of fibrinolytic activity.
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 activity shows a circadian oscillation and may
account for the morning onset of myocardial infarction. However, the molecular
mechanisms regulating this circadian oscillation remain unknown. Recent evidence
indicates that basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/PAS domain transcription factors
play a crucial role in controlling the biological clock that controls circadian
rhythm. We isolated a novel bHLH/PAS protein, cycle-like factor (CLIF) from
human umbilical vein endothelial cells. CLIF shares high homology with
Drosophila CYCLE, one of the essential transcriptional regulators of circadian
rhythm. CLIF is expressed in endothelial cells and neurons in the brain,
including the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the center of the circadian clock. In
endothelial cells, CLIF forms a heterodimer with CLOCK and up-regulates the
PAI-1 gene through E-box sites. Furthermore, Period2 and Cryptochrome1, whose
expression show a circadian oscillation in peripheral tissues, inhibit the PAI-1
promoter activation by the CLOCK:CLIF heterodimer. These results suggest that
CLIF regulates the circadian oscillation of PAI-1 gene expression in endothelial
cells. In addition, the results potentially provide a molecular basis for the
morning onset of myocardial infarction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000629200
PMID: 11018023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
