---
pmid: '19895784'
title: Reduced expression of DRAM2/TMEM77 in tumor cells interferes with cell death.
authors:
- Park SM
- Kim K
- Lee EJ
- Kim BK
- Lee TJ
- Seo T
- Jang IS
- Lee SH
- Kim S
- Lee JH
- Park J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.149
---

# Reduced expression of DRAM2/TMEM77 in tumor cells interferes with cell death.
**Authors:** Park SM, Kim K, Lee EJ, Kim BK, Lee TJ, Seo T, Jang IS, Lee SH, Kim S, Lee JH, Park J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.149](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.149)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1340-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.149. Epub 2009 Nov 4.

Reduced expression of DRAM2/TMEM77 in tumor cells interferes with cell death.

Park SM(1), Kim K, Lee EJ, Kim BK, Lee TJ, Seo T, Jang IS, Lee SH, Kim S, Lee 
JH, Park J.

Author information:
(1)Yonsei University, Division of Biological Science and Technology, Wonju 
220-100, Republic of Korea.

Although the role of autophagy in tumorigenesis remains controversial, recent 
reports support the notion that inhibition of autophagy promotes tumor 
formation. Damage-regulated autophagy regulator (DRAM) has been identified as an 
effector molecule that is critical for p53-mediated apoptosis, and we 
investigated whether there might be other DRAM-like molecules linking autophagy 
and apoptosis. In this study, we cloned a novel DRAM-homologous protein, DRAM2, 
and showed that the expression of DRAM2 is down-regulated in ovarian tumors. 
DRAM2 is mainly localized in the lysosome, and co-localizes with DRAM. While 
expression of DRAM or DRAM2 individually did not induce cell death, 
co-expression of DRAM2 with DRAM significantly induced cell death, while the 
silencing of endogenous DRAM2 attenuated cell death, suggesting that DRAM2 is 
involved in cell death. Thus, we propose that reduced expression of DRAM2 may 
contribute to enhanced cell survival in tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.149
PMID: 19895784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
