---
pmid: '22699936'
title: Tankyrase 1 regulates centrosome function by controlling CPAP stability.
authors:
- Kim MK
- Dudognon C
- Smith S
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3410387
doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.86
---

# Tankyrase 1 regulates centrosome function by controlling CPAP stability.
**Authors:** Kim MK, Dudognon C, Smith S
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2012.86](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2012.86)
**PMC:** [PMC3410387](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3410387/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2012 Aug;13(8):724-32. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.86. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Tankyrase 1 regulates centrosome function by controlling CPAP stability.

Kim MK(1), Dudognon C, Smith S.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pathology, Kimmel Center for 
Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

CPAP--a gene mutated in primary microcephaly--is required for procentriole 
formation. Here we show that CPAP degradation and function is controlled by the 
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase tankyrase 1. CPAP is PARsylated by tankyrase 1 in 
vitro and in vivo. Overexpression of tankyrase 1 leads to CPAP proteasomal 
degradation, preventing centriole duplication, whereas depletion of tankyrase 1 
stabilizes CPAP in G1, generating elongated procentrioles and multipolarity. 
Tankyrase 1 localizes to centrosomes exclusively in G1, coinciding with CPAP 
degradation. Hence, tankyrase 1-mediated PARsylation regulates CPAP levels 
during the cell cycle to limit centriole elongation and ensure normal centrosome 
function.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2012.86
PMCID: PMC3410387
PMID: 22699936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
