---
pmid: '10903846'
title: Bin2, a functionally nonredundant member of the BAR adaptor gene family.
authors:
- Ge K
- Prendergast GC
journal: Genomics
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6216
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Bin2, a functionally nonredundant member of the BAR adaptor gene family.
**Authors:** Ge K, Prendergast GC
**Journal:** Genomics (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.2000.6216](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2000.6216)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2000 Jul 15;67(2):210-20. doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6216.

Bin2, a functionally nonredundant member of the BAR adaptor gene family.

Ge K(1), Prendergast GC.

Author information:
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

BAR family proteins are a unique class of adaptor proteins characterized by a 
common N-terminal fold of undetermined function termed the BAR domain. This set 
of adaptors, which includes the mammalian proteins amphiphysin and Bin1 and the 
yeast proteins Rvs167p and Rvs161p, has been implicated in diverse cellular 
processes, including synaptic vesicle endocytosis, actin regulation, 
differentiation, cell survival, and tumorigenesis. Here we report the 
identification and characterization of Bin2, a novel protein that contains a BAR 
domain but that is otherwise structurally dissimilar to other members of the BAR 
adaptor family. The Bin2 gene is located at chromosome 4q22.1 and is expressed 
predominantly in hematopoietic cells. Bin2 is upregulated during differentiation 
of granulocytes, suggesting that it functions in that lineage. Bin2 formed a 
stable complex in cells with Bin1, but not with amphiphysin, in a BAR 
domain-dependent manner. This finding indicates that BAR domains have specific 
preferences for interaction. However, Bin2 did not influence endocytosis in the 
same manner as brain-specific splice isoforms of Bin1, nor did it exhibit the 
tumor suppressor properties inherent to ubiquitous splice isoforms of Bin1. 
Thus, Bin2 appears to encode a nonredundant function in the BAR adaptor gene 
family.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2000.6216
PMID: 10903846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
