---
pmid: '14640697'
title: Broad substrate specificity of human cytochrome P450 46A1 which initiates cholesterol
  degradation in the brain.
authors:
- Mast N
- Norcross R
- Andersson U
- Shou M
- Nakayama K
- Bjorkhem I
- Pikuleva IA
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi035512f
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Broad substrate specificity of human cytochrome P450 46A1 which initiates cholesterol degradation in the brain.
**Authors:** Mast N, Norcross R, Andersson U, Shou M, Nakayama K, Bjorkhem I, Pikuleva IA
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi035512f](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi035512f)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2003 Dec 9;42(48):14284-92. doi: 10.1021/bi035512f.

Broad substrate specificity of human cytochrome P450 46A1 which initiates 
cholesterol degradation in the brain.

Mast N(1), Norcross R, Andersson U, Shou M, Nakayama K, Bjorkhem I, Pikuleva IA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1031, USA.

The known activity of cytochrome P450 46A1 (P450 46A1) is 24(S)-hydroxylation of 
cholesterol. This reaction produces biologically active oxysterol, 
24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, and is also the first step in enzymatic degradation of 
cholesterol in the brain. We report here that P450 46A1 can further metabolize 
24(S)-hydroxycholesterol, giving 24,25- and 24,27-dihydroxycholesterols in both 
the cell cultures transfected with P450 46A1 cDNA and the in vitro reconstituted 
system with recombinant enzyme. In addition, P450 46A1 was able to carry out 
side chain hydroxylations of two endogenous C27-steroids with and without a 
double bond between C5-C6 (7alpha-hydroxycholesterol and cholestanol, 
respectively) and introduce a hydroxyl group on the steroid nucleus of the 
C21-steroid hormones with the C4-C5 double bond (progesterone and testosterone). 
Also, P450 46A1 was found to metabolize xenobiotics carrying out 
dextromethorphan O- and N-demethylations, diclofenac 4'-hydroxylation, and 
phenacetin O-deethylation. Thus, substrate specificities of P450 46A1 are not 
limited to cholesterol and include a number of structurally diverse compounds. 
Activities of P450 46A1 suggest that, in addition to the involvement in 
cholesterol homeostasis in the brain, this enzyme may participate in metabolism 
of neurosteroids and drugs that can cross the blood-brain barrier and are 
targeted to the central nervous system.

DOI: 10.1021/bi035512f
PMID: 14640697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
