---
reference_id: PMID:18076027
title: Huntingtin interacting protein HYPK is intrinsically unstructured.
authors:
- Raychaudhuri S
- Majumder P
- Sarkar S
- Giri K
- Mukhopadhyay D
- Bhattacharyya NP
journal: Proteins
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/prot.21856
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Huntingtin interacting protein HYPK is intrinsically unstructured.
**Authors:** Raychaudhuri S, Majumder P, Sarkar S, Giri K, Mukhopadhyay D, Bhattacharyya NP
**Journal:** Proteins (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.21856](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.21856)

## Content

1. Proteins. 2008 Jun;71(4):1686-98. doi: 10.1002/prot.21856.

Huntingtin interacting protein HYPK is intrinsically unstructured.

Raychaudhuri S(1), Majumder P, Sarkar S, Giri K, Mukhopadhyay D, Bhattacharyya
NP.

Author information:
(1)Crystallography and Molecular Biology Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, 1/AF Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700 064, India.

To characterize HYPK, originally identified as a novel huntingtin (Htt)
interacting partner by yeast two hybrid assay, we used various biophysical and
biochemical techniques. The molecular weight of the protein, determined by gel
electrophoresis, was found to be about 1.3-folds ( approximately 22 kDa) higher
than that obtained from mass spectrometric analysis (16.9 kDa). In size
exclusion chromatography experiment, HYPK was eluted in three fractions, the
hydrodynamic radii for which were calculated to be approximately 1.5-folds
(23.06 A) higher than that expected for globular proteins of equivalent mass
(17.3 A). The protein exhibited predominantly (63%) random coil characteristics
in circular dichroism spectroscopy and was highly sensitive to limited
proteolysis by trypsin and papain, indicating absence of any specific domain.
Experimental evidences with theoretical analyses of amino acids composition of
HYPK and comparison with available published data predicts that HYPK is an
intrinsically unstructured protein (IUP) with premolten globule like
conformation. In presence of increasing concentration of Ca(2+), HYPK showed
conformational alterations as well as concomitant reduction of hydrodynamic
radius. Even though any link between the natively unfolded nature of HYPK, its
conformational sensitivity towards Ca(2+) and interaction with Htt is yet to be
established, its possible involvement in Huntington's disease pathogenesis is
discussed.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21856
PMID: 18076027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]