---
pmid: '15362974'
title: A novel UBA and UBX domain protein that binds polyubiquitin and VCP and is
  a substrate for SAPKs.
authors:
- McNeill H
- Knebel A
- Arthur JS
- Cuenda A
- Cohen P
journal: Biochem J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1134123
doi: 10.1042/BJ20041498
---

# A novel UBA and UBX domain protein that binds polyubiquitin and VCP and is a substrate for SAPKs.
**Authors:** McNeill H, Knebel A, Arthur JS, Cuenda A, Cohen P
**Journal:** Biochem J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20041498](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20041498)
**PMC:** [PMC1134123](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1134123/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2004 Dec 1;384(Pt 2):391-400. doi: 10.1042/BJ20041498.

A novel UBA and UBX domain protein that binds polyubiquitin and VCP and is a 
substrate for SAPKs.

McNeill H(1), Knebel A, Arthur JS, Cuenda A, Cohen P.

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, MSI/WTB complex, 
University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.

A widely expressed protein containing UBA (ubiquitin-associated) and UBX 
(ubiquitin-like) domains was identified as a substrate of SAPKs 
(stress-activated protein kinases). Termed SAKS1 (SAPK substrate-1), it was 
phosphorylated efficiently at Ser200 in vitro by SAPK3/p38gamma, SAPK4/p38delta 
and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), but weakly by SAPK2a/p38alpha, 
SAPK2b/p38beta2 or ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) 2. Ser200, 
situated immediately N-terminal to the UBX domain, became phosphorylated in 
HEK-293 (human embryonic kidney) cells in response to stressors. Phosphorylation 
was not prevented by SB 203580 (an inhibitor of SAPK2a/p38alpha and 
SAPK2b/p38beta2) and/or PD 184352 (which inhibits the activation of ERK1 and 
ERK2), and was similar in fibroblasts lacking both SAPK3/p38gamma and 
SAPK4/p38delta or JNK1 and JNK2. SAKS1 bound ubiquitin tetramers and VCP 
(valosin-containing protein) in vitro via the UBA and UBX domains respectively. 
The amount of VCP in cell extracts that bound to immobilized GST (glutathione 
S-transferase)-SAKS1 was enhanced by elevating the level of polyubiquitinated 
proteins, while SAKS1 and VCP in extracts were coimmunoprecipitated with an 
antibody raised against S5a, a component of the 19 S proteasomal subunit that 
binds polyubiquitinated proteins. PNGase (peptide N-glycanase) formed a 1:1 
complex with VCP and, for this reason, also bound to immobilized GST-SAKS1. We 
suggest that SAKS1 may be an adaptor that directs VCP to polyubiquitinated 
proteins, and PNGase to misfolded glycoproteins, facilitating their destruction 
by the proteasome.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20041498
PMCID: PMC1134123
PMID: 15362974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A widely expressed protein containing UBA (ubiquitin-associated) and UBX (ubiquitin-like) domains was identified as a substrate of SAPKs (stress-activated protein kinases). Termed SAKS1 (SAPK substrate-1), it was phosphorylated efficiently at Ser 200 in vitro by SAPK3/p38γ, SAPK4/p38δ and JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), but weakly by SAPK2a/p38α, SAPK2b/p38β2 or ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) 2. Ser 200 , situated immediately N-terminal to the UBX domain, became phosphorylated in HEK-293 (human embryonic kidney) cells in response to stressors. Phosphorylation was not prevented by SB 203580 (an inhibitor of SAPK2a/p38α and SAPK2b/p38β2) and/or PD 184352 (which inhibits the activation of ERK1 and ERK2), and was similar in fibroblasts lacking both SAPK3/p38γ and SAPK4/p38δ or JNK1 and JNK2. SAKS1 bound ubiquitin tetramers and VCP (valosin-containing protein) in vitro via the UBA and UBX domains respectively. The amount of VCP in cell extracts that bound to immobilized GST (glutathione S-transferase)–SAKS1 was enhanced by elevating the level of polyubiquitinated proteins, while SAKS1 and VCP in extracts were coimmunoprecipitated with an antibody raised against S5a, a component of the 19 S proteasomal subunit that binds polyubiquitinated proteins. PNGase (peptide N-glycanase) formed a 1:1 complex with VCP and, for this reason, also bound to immobilized GST–SAKS1. We suggest that SAKS1 may be an adaptor that directs VCP to polyubiquitinated proteins, and PNGase to misfolded glycoproteins, facilitating their destruction by the proteasome.

INTRODUCTION

The human genome encodes approx. 30000 proteins and 500 protein kinases. Since approx. 30% of mammalian proteins are thought to contain covalently bound phosphate, this implies that, on ‘average’, a protein kinase would be expected to phosphorylate approx. 20 substrates in vivo . In fact, the average number of substrates is likely to be far greater, since many proteins are phosphorylated at multiple sites by several protein kinases. However, in only a few cases have a significant number of the physiological substrates of a protein kinase been identified, because really powerful methodologies to tackle this problem are still lacking. Approaches that have been used with some success include the screening of expression libraries for protein kinase substrates [ 1 ], yeast two-hybrid analysis [ 2 , 3 ], the screening of protein sequence databases with known consensus sequences for particular protein kinases [ 4 , 5 ] and the use of ATP derivatives that can only be used as substrates by mutated protein kinases [ 6 , 7 ].

We have developed a simple approach to identify putative substrates of protein kinases that we have termed KESTREL for k inas e s ubstrate tr acking and el ucidation [ 8 ]. In this method, cell extracts that have been fractionated by a single step of ion-exchange chromatography are phosphorylated for a few minutes in the absence or presence of the protein kinase of interest and [γ 32 P]ATP of very high specific radioactivity. In order to enhance the probability of detecting physiologically relevant substrates, closely related protein kinases are studied in parallel to identify substrates that are phosphorylated relatively selectively. Wherever possible, MnATP is used instead of MgATP to reduce ‘background’ phosphorylation. Substrates that are phosphorylated rapidly, stoichiometrically and at similar rates to authentic physiological substrates are purified and identified by tryptic mass fingerprinting. The phosphorylation site(s) is identified and phospho-specific antibodies are raised that are sufficiently sensitive to investigate whether the endogenous protein is phosphorylated at that site(s) in vivo , in response to signals that activate the protein kinase [ 8 ]. Relatively specific inhibitors of the protein kinase and/or cells that do not express the protein kinase are then used to examine whether the protein is a physiological substrate for a particular protein kinase. Using this method, we identified EF2 (elongation factor 2) kinase as a likely substrate of SAPK (stress-activated protein kinase) 4 (also called p38δ), and showed that it was inactivated in response to cellular stresses and pro-inflammatory cytokines as a result of the phosphorylation of Ser 359 , the residue that was targeted specifically by SAPK4/p38δ in vitro [ 8 ].

SAPK4/p38δ is one member of a subfamily of MAP kinases (mitogen-activated protein kinases) that become activated when cells are exposed to a cell-damaging agent, such as osmotic shock, chemical insult or UV radiation, or stimulated by pro-inflammatory cytokines. They include the isoforms of SAPK1/JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), SAPK2a/p38α and SAPK2b/p38β2 (collectively referred to as SAPK2/p38), SAPK3/p38γ and SAPK4/p38δ [ 9 ]. The SAPK2/p38 isoforms are potently inhibited by the anti-inflammatory drug SB 203580 [ 10 ], but the other SAPKs are inhibited far less strongly or not at all [ 11 ].

In the present paper, we have used KESTREL to identify a new physiological substrate for SAPKs, termed SAKS1 (SAPK substrate-1). This protein contains a UBA (ubiquitin-associated) domain that binds to polyubiquitin in vitro (and presumably to polyubiquitinated proteins in vivo ) and a UBX (ubiquitin-like) domain that binds to VCP (valosin-containing protein), a member of the AAA family of ATPases. We also show that VCP interacts with PNGase (peptide N-glycanase) in cell extracts, an enzyme that removes high-mannose-containing oligosaccharides from MGPs (misfolded glycoproteins). Since proteins that are covalently linked to Lys 48 of ubquitin are targeted to the proteasome for degradation, we suggest that SAKS1 is a scaffolding protein that targets VCP (and hence PNGase) to polyubiquitinated proteins. This may promote the VCP-dependent unfolding of such proteins and (in the case of MGPs) their deglycosylation by PNGase, thereby facilitating their proteolytic destruction.

DISCUSSION

The present study provides further evidence that KESTREL is a useful method for identifying physiologically relevant phosphorylation sites in proteins. Using this procedure, we identified SAKS1 as a protein that is phosphorylated efficiently at Ser 200 by several SAPKs in vitro , but is phosphorylated only poorly by several others. SAKS1 became phosphorylated at Ser 200 when cells were exposed to several stresses, and the time course of phosphorylation of Ser 200 paralleled the activation of SAPKs ( Figure 2 A). These experiments establish that SAKS1 is a physiological substrate for one or more proline-directed SAPKs, but the identity of the relevant protein kinase(s) is still unclear. SAPK2a/p38 and SAPK2b/p38β2 are not required, because the phosphorylation of SAKS1 was resistant to SB 203580, a relatively specific inhibitor of these enzymes, while ERK1 and ERK2 could be excluded because the phosphorylation of SAKS1 was unaffected by PD 184352 ( Figures 2 B and 2 C). However, none of the other SAPKs known to be resistant to SB 203580 and PD 184352 (SAPK3/p38γ, SAPK4/p38δ, JNK1 and JNK2) appear to be required either, based on experiments with fibroblasts that do not express pairs of these enzymes ( Figure 3 ). The MAP kinase family member ERK5 becomes activated in response to some cellular stresses [ 31 ], but EGF, a much stronger activator of ERK5, failed to elicit any phosphorylation of SAKS1. In summary, our experiments point to the possible involvement of a novel SAPK, although it cannot be excluded that, in the fibroblasts deficient in both JNK1 and JNK2, there is compensation by SAPK3/p38γ and/or SAPK4/p38δ and vice versa.

Although we identified SAKS1 as a substrate for SAPKs in vitro and in cells, we have thus far been unable to identify the role of this modification. The phosphorylation of SAKS1 at Ser 200 in vitro does not appear to impair its ability to bind to ubiquitin tetramers, and only decreases to a small extent the binding of VCP to SAKS1 in vitro under the conditions we have studied so far, nor does it appear to affect the ATPase activity of VCP (H. McNeill, unpublished work). It will clearly be critical to understand how the SAKS1-containing complexes really operate in cells before a role for its phosphorylation can be understood.

SAKS1 was only known previously as an ORF encoded within the human genome and, to our knowledge, the protein as such has never been studied before. A clue to its function came from the presence of an N-terminal UBA domain and a C-terminal UBX domain, which together account for 40% of the amino acid sequence ( Figure 1 B). We have shown that SAKS1 binds to ubiquitin tetramers via the UBA domain ( Figure 4 A), and much more efficiently than to ubiquitin monomers (results not shown) and appears to bind to VCP via the UBX domain ( Figure 4 D). VCP is an abundant and widely expressed protein, and is a member of the AAA family of ATPases. It is the homologue of CDC48 in yeast and disruption of this gene [ 32 ] or that encoding the Drosophila homologue TER94 [ 33 ] is lethal, indicating that it plays one or more roles essential for cell growth and survival.

VCP does not itself bind to polyubiquitinated proteins [ 23 ], but has been reported to co-sediment with polyubiquitinated proteins, such as phosphorylated IκB (inhibitory κB) [ 29 ]. Since SAKS1 interacts with VCP and polyubiquitin, it is tempting to speculate that SAKS1 functions as an adaptor to couple VCP to polyubiquitinated proteins and the proteasome ( Figure 7 A). Polyubiquitinated proteins are themselves known to interact with the S5a subunit of the 19 S component of the proteasome [ 28 ], and, consistent with the role for SAKS1 proposed above, VCP and SAKS1 were co-immunoprecipitated from cell extracts with anti-S5a antibodies ( Figure 5 ). The role of VCP itself may be to promote the ATP-dependent unfolding of polyubiquitinated proteins, thereby stimulating their destruction by the proteasome, the ATPase activity of VCP providing the energy required for this process [ 34 ].

We found that the isolated UBX 2 domain of SAKS1, like the full-length protein, was able to bind to VCP in vitro ( Figure 4 D). However, the binding of endogenous VCP in cell extracts to exogenously added GST-fusion proteins could only be observed with full-length GST–SAKS1 ( Figure 4 G). This could be explained by a lower affinity of VCP for the isolated UBX 2 domain compared with the full-length protein, because the concentration of VCP in the cell extracts is far lower than those used to study the binding of VCP in vitro . However, an intriguing alternative idea is that the binding of polyubiquitinated proteins to the UBA domain of SAKS1 may enhance the binding of VCP to the UBX domain. Consistent with this possibility, treating cells with proteasome inhibitors to elevate the level of polyubiquitinated proteins greatly enhanced the amount of VCP in cell extracts that bound to added full-length SAKS1 ( Figure 4 F).

SAKS1 was identified by others as a protein that interacted with PNGase in yeast two-hybrid analysis [ 30 ], but in the present paper, we give evidence that this interaction is likely to be indirect, and is explained by the ability of VCP to interact with both SAKS1 and PNGase ( Figures 4 B and 6 A). PNGase removes high-mannose-containing oligosaccharides from MGPs [ 30 ], and our results suggest this may be facilitated by the formation of a complex between PNGase, VCP, SAKS1 and ubiquitinated MGPs, as illustrated schematically in Figure 7 (B). PNGase has been reported to bind to the S4 component of the proteasome [ 30 ], so that the deglycosylation of MGPs by PNGase, followed by VCP-catalysed unfolding, may facilitate their destruction by the proteasome. In summary, our working hypothesis is that SAKS1 acts as scaffolding protein to enhance the unfolding and proteolytic destruction of a subset of proteins. While the present paper was undergoing revision, a similar conclusion was reached for UBX3, a UBX-domain-containing protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (the homologue of mammalian p47) that binds to cdc48 (cell-division control), the homologue of VCP in budding yeast [ 35 ].
