---
pmid: '7559631'
title: Transactivation ability of p53 transcriptional activation domain is directly
  related to the binding affinity to TATA-binding protein.
authors:
- Chang J
- Kim DH
- Lee SW
- Choi KY
- Sung YC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.42.25014
---

# Transactivation ability of p53 transcriptional activation domain is directly related to the binding affinity to TATA-binding protein.
**Authors:** Chang J, Kim DH, Lee SW, Choi KY, Sung YC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.270.42.25014](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.270.42.25014)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):25014-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.42.25014.

Transactivation ability of p53 transcriptional activation domain is directly 
related to the binding affinity to TATA-binding protein.

Chang J(1), Kim DH, Lee SW, Choi KY, Sung YC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology, 
Republic of Korea.

Tumor suppressor protein p53 is a potent transcriptional activator and regulates 
cell growth negatively. To characterize the transcriptional activation domain 
(TAD) of p53, various point mutants were constructed in the context of Gal4 DNA 
binding domain and tested for their transactivation ability. Our results 
demonstrated that the positionally conserved hydrophobic residues shared with 
herpes simplex virus VP16 and other transactivators are essential for 
transactivation. Also, the negatively charged residues and proline residues are 
necessary for full activity, but not essential for the activity of p53 TAD. 
Deletion analyses showed that p53 TAD can be divided into two subdomains, amino 
acids 1-40 and 43-73. An in vitro glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay 
establishes a linear correlation between p53 TAD-mediated transactivation in 
vivo and the binding activity of p53 TAD to TATA-binding protein (TBP) in vitro. 
Mutations that diminish the transactivation ability of Gal4-p53 TAD also impair 
the binding activity to TBP severely. Our results suggest that at least TBP is a 
direct target for p53 TAD and that the binding strength of TAD to TBP (TFIID) is 
an important parameter controlling activity of p53 TAD. In addition, circular 
dichroism spectroscopy has shown that p53 TAD peptide lacks any regular 
secondary structure in solution and that there is no significant difference 
between the spectra of the wild type TAD and that of the transactivation 
deficient mutant type.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.42.25014
PMID: 7559631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
