---
pmid: '19574230'
title: FACT and the proteasome promote promoter chromatin disassembly and transcriptional
  initiation.
authors:
- Ransom M
- Williams SK
- Dechassa ML
- Das C
- Linger J
- Adkins M
- Liu C
- Bartholomew B
- Tyler JK
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2749120
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019562
---

# FACT and the proteasome promote promoter chromatin disassembly and transcriptional initiation.
**Authors:** Ransom M, Williams SK, Dechassa ML, Das C, Linger J, Adkins M, Liu C, Bartholomew B, Tyler JK
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.019562](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.019562)
**PMC:** [PMC2749120](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2749120/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 28;284(35):23461-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019562. Epub 
2009 Jul 1.

FACT and the proteasome promote promoter chromatin disassembly and 
transcriptional initiation.

Ransom M(1), Williams SK, Dechassa ML, Das C, Linger J, Adkins M, Liu C, 
Bartholomew B, Tyler JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

The packaging of the eukaryotic genome into chromatin represses gene expression 
by blocking access of the general transcription machinery to the underlying DNA 
sequences. Accordingly, eukaryotes have developed a variety of mechanisms to 
disrupt, alter, or disassemble nucleosomes from promoter regions and open 
reading frames to allow transcription to occur. Although we know that chromatin 
disassembly from the yeast PHO5 promoter is triggered by the Pho4 activator, the 
mechanism is far from clear. Here we show that the Pho4 activator can occupy its 
nucleosome-bound DNA binding site within the PHO5 promoter. In contrast to the 
role of Saccharomyces cerevisiae FACT (facilitates chromatin transcription) 
complex in assembling chromatin within open reading frames, we find that FACT is 
involved in the disassembly of histones H2A/H2B from the PHO5 promoter during 
transcriptional induction. We have also discovered that the proteasome is 
required for efficient chromatin disassembly and transcriptional induction from 
the PHO5 promoter. Mutants of the degradation function of the proteasome have a 
defect in recruitment of the Pho4 activator, whereas mutants of the ATPase cap 
of the proteasome do recruit Pho4 but are still delayed for chromatin assembly. 
Finally, we rule out the possibility that the proteasome or ATPase cap is 
driving chromatin disassembly via a potential ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling 
activity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019562
PMCID: PMC2749120
PMID: 19574230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
