---
pmid: '20859254'
title: Molecular organization and dynamics of the melatonin MT₁ receptor/RGS20/G(i)
  protein complex reveal asymmetry of receptor dimers for RGS and G(i) coupling.
authors:
- Maurice P
- Daulat AM
- Turecek R
- Ivankova-Susankova K
- Zamponi F
- Kamal M
- Clement N
- Guillaume JL
- Bettler B
- Galès C
- Delagrange P
- Jockers R
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2982759
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.236
---

# Molecular organization and dynamics of the melatonin MT₁ receptor/RGS20/G(i) protein complex reveal asymmetry of receptor dimers for RGS and G(i) coupling.
**Authors:** Maurice P, Daulat AM, Turecek R, Ivankova-Susankova K, Zamponi F, Kamal M, Clement N, Guillaume JL, Bettler B, Galès C, Delagrange P, Jockers R
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.236](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.236)
**PMC:** [PMC2982759](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2982759/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Nov 3;29(21):3646-59. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.236. Epub 2010 Sep 
21.

Molecular organization and dynamics of the melatonin MT₁ receptor/RGS20/G(i) 
protein complex reveal asymmetry of receptor dimers for RGS and G(i) coupling.

Maurice P(1), Daulat AM, Turecek R, Ivankova-Susankova K, Zamponi F, Kamal M, 
Clement N, Guillaume JL, Bettler B, Galès C, Delagrange P, Jockers R.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Functional asymmetry of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) dimers has been 
reported for an increasing number of cases, but the molecular architecture of 
signalling units associated to these dimers remains unclear. Here, we 
characterized the molecular complex of the melatonin MT₁ receptor, which 
directly and constitutively couples to G(i) proteins and the regulator of 
G-protein signalling (RGS) 20. The molecular organization of the ternary 
MT₁/G(i)/RGS20 complex was monitored in its basal and activated state by 
bioluminescence resonance energy transfer between probes inserted at multiple 
sites of the complex. On the basis of the reported crystal structures of G(i) 
and the RGS domain, we propose a model wherein one G(i) and one RGS20 protein 
bind to separate protomers of MT₁ dimers in a pre-associated complex that 
rearranges upon agonist activation. This model was further validated with 
MT₁/MT₂ heterodimers. Collectively, our data extend the concept of asymmetry 
within GPCR dimers, reinforce the notion of receptor specificity for RGS 
proteins and highlight the advantage of GPCRs organized as dimers in which each 
protomer fulfils its specific task by binding to different GPCR-interacting 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.236
PMCID: PMC2982759
PMID: 20859254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
