---
pmid: '31387940'
title: BIK ubiquitination by the E3 ligase Cul5-ASB11 determines cell fate during
  cellular stress.
authors:
- Chen FY
- Huang MY
- Lin YM
- Ho CH
- Lin SY
- Chen HY
- Hung MC
- Chen RH
journal: J Cell Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6719446
doi: 10.1083/jcb.201901156
---

# BIK ubiquitination by the E3 ligase Cul5-ASB11 determines cell fate during cellular stress.
**Authors:** Chen FY, Huang MY, Lin YM, Ho CH, Lin SY, Chen HY, Hung MC, Chen RH
**Journal:** J Cell Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1083/jcb.201901156](https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201901156)
**PMC:** [PMC6719446](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6719446/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Biol. 2019 Sep 2;218(9):3002-3018. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201901156. Epub
2019  Aug 6.

BIK ubiquitination by the E3 ligase Cul5-ASB11 determines cell fate during 
cellular stress.

Chen FY(1)(2), Huang MY(1)(2), Lin YM(1)(2), Ho CH(1)(2), Lin SY(1), Chen HY(3), 
Hung MC(4)(5)(6), Chen RH(7)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biochemical Sciences, College of Life Science, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Cancer Molecular Biology and Drug Discovery, College of 
Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Center for Molecular Medicine and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China 
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 
rhchen@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

The BH3-only pro-apoptotic protein BIK is regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system. However, the mechanism of this regulation and its physiological 
functions remain elusive. Here, we identify Cul5-ASB11 as the E3 ligase 
targeting BIK for ubiquitination and degradation. ER stress leads to the 
activation of ASB11 by XBP1s during the adaptive phase of the unfolded protein 
response, which stimulates BIK ubiquitination, interaction with p97/VCP, and 
proteolysis. This mechanism of BIK degradation contributes to ER stress 
adaptation by promoting cell survival. Conversely, genotoxic agents 
down-regulate this IRE1α-XBP1s-ASB11 axis and stabilize BIK, which contributes 
in part to the apoptotic response to DNA damage. We show that blockade of this 
BIK degradation pathway by an IRE1α inhibitor can stabilize a BIK active mutant 
and increase its anti-tumor activity. Our study reveals that different cellular 
stresses regulate BIK ubiquitination by ASB11 in opposing directions, which 
determines whether or not cells survive, and that blocking BIK degradation has 
the potential to be used as an anti-cancer strategy.

© 2019 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201901156
PMCID: PMC6719446
PMID: 31387940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
