---
pmid: '12620389'
title: Novel raf kinase protein-protein interactions found by an exhaustive yeast
  two-hybrid analysis.
authors:
- Yuryev A
- Wennogle LP
journal: Genomics
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0888-7543(02)00008-3
---

# Novel raf kinase protein-protein interactions found by an exhaustive yeast two-hybrid analysis.
**Authors:** Yuryev A, Wennogle LP
**Journal:** Genomics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0888-7543(02)00008-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0888-7543(02)00008-3)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2003 Feb;81(2):112-25. doi: 10.1016/s0888-7543(02)00008-3.

Novel raf kinase protein-protein interactions found by an exhaustive yeast 
two-hybrid analysis.

Yuryev A(1), Wennogle LP.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research, Summit, NJ 07901, USA.

We have performed an exhaustive unbiased yeast two-hybrid analysis to identify 
interaction partners of two human Raf kinase isoforms, A-Raf and C-Raf, using 
their N-terminal regulatory domain as "bait." A total of 20 different human 
proteins were found to interact with Raf isoforms. Several of these interactions 
were novel and an extensive bioinformatics evaluation was performed for each. 
The novel putative interactions include a signalosome component, TOPK/PBK 
kinase, and two new putative protein phosphatases. The cysteine-rich 
zinc-binding domain (CRD) of Raf was found to interact with all 20 proteins and 
to achieve isoform-specific interactions. Since similar putative CRDs are 
present in a variety of protein serine-threonine kinases, the data suggest that 
the CRD may function as a major protein-protein interaction domain of these 
kinases. We propose possible functional consequences of these novel Raf 
interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/s0888-7543(02)00008-3
PMID: 12620389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
