---
pmid: '7679494'
title: Actin is a binding protein for angiogenin.
authors:
- Hu GF
- Strydom DJ
- Fett JW
- Riordan JF
- Vallee BL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC45843
doi: 10.1073/pnas.90.4.1217
---

# Actin is a binding protein for angiogenin.
**Authors:** Hu GF, Strydom DJ, Fett JW, Riordan JF, Vallee BL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.90.4.1217](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.90.4.1217)
**PMC:** [PMC45843](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC45843/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Feb 15;90(4):1217-21. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.90.4.1217.

Actin is a binding protein for angiogenin.

Hu GF(1), Strydom DJ, Fett JW, Riordan JF, Vallee BL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Biochemical and Biophysical Science and Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115.

The 42-kDa angiogenin binding protein isolated previously has been purified to 
electrophoretic homogeneity. It has been identified as a member of the actin 
family by peptide mapping and partial amino acid sequencing. The interaction of 
bovine muscle actin with angiogenin is similar to that of the angiogenin binding 
protein. Angiogenin induces the polymerization of actin below the critical 
concentration for spontaneous polymerization. The interaction occurs both in 
solution and on a poly(vinylidene difluoride) membrane. It is inhibited by 
excess unlabeled angiogenin and also by platelet factor 4 and protamine, which 
are known inhibitors of angiogenesis. Two other angiogenic molecules, basic 
fibroblast growth factor and tumor necrosis factor alpha, bind to 125I-labeled 
actin and can be crosslinked by a water-soluble carbodiimide. Both actin and an 
anti-actin antibody inhibit the angiogenic activity of angiogenin in the chicken 
embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay. The results indicate that the angiogenin 
binding protein is a cell surface actin and suggest that the reaction between 
angiogenin and this actin is an essential step in the angiogenesis process 
induced by angiogenin.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.90.4.1217
PMCID: PMC45843
PMID: 7679494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
