---
pmid: '18082603'
title: Purification of human telomerase complexes identifies factors involved in telomerase
  biogenesis and telomere length regulation.
authors:
- Fu D
- Collins K
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2917595
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.09.023
---

# Purification of human telomerase complexes identifies factors involved in telomerase biogenesis and telomere length regulation.
**Authors:** Fu D, Collins K
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.09.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.09.023)
**PMC:** [PMC2917595](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2917595/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2007 Dec 14;28(5):773-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.09.023.

Purification of human telomerase complexes identifies factors involved in 
telomerase biogenesis and telomere length regulation.

Fu D(1), Collins K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

The identities and roles of proteins associated with human telomerase remain 
poorly defined. To gain insight, we undertook an affinity purification of 
endogenously assembled human telomerase complexes. We show that specific subsets 
of H/ACA, Sm, and hnRNP proteins associate with active and inactive telomerase 
RNPs, while two NTPase proteins associate preferentially with active enzyme. All 
three core H/ACA-motif binding proteins are telomerase holoenzyme components 
essential for RNP accumulation. On the other hand, telomerase RNPs lacking 
interaction with Sm proteins or hnRNP C remain fully functional for telomere 
elongation. Curiously, overexpression of either associated hnRNP protein (hnRNP 
C and hnRNP U) or either NTPase protein (NAT10 and GNL3L) induced telomere 
shortening. Our findings suggest that endogenous human telomerase complexes are 
more heterogeneous than those of single-celled eukaryotes, have predominantly 
shared rather than telomerase-specific proteins, and make numerous regulatory 
interactions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.09.023
PMCID: PMC2917595
PMID: 18082603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
