---
pmid: '9705338'
title: Characterization of the CP complex, an abundant dimer of Cdc68 and Pob3 proteins
  that regulates yeast transcriptional activation and chromatin repression.
authors:
- Brewster NK
- Johnston GC
- Singer RA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.34.21972
---

# Characterization of the CP complex, an abundant dimer of Cdc68 and Pob3 proteins that regulates yeast transcriptional activation and chromatin repression.
**Authors:** Brewster NK, Johnston GC, Singer RA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.34.21972](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.34.21972)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 21;273(34):21972-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.34.21972.

Characterization of the CP complex, an abundant dimer of Cdc68 and Pob3 proteins 
that regulates yeast transcriptional activation and chromatin repression.

Brewster NK(1), Johnston GC, Singer RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 
4H7, Canada.

The Cdc68 protein of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an essential nuclear 
protein that has been shown to be necessary for the trans-activation of many 
genes as well as for the maintenance of chromatin-mediated repression in the 
absence of trans-activation. These activities implicate the Cdc68 protein in the 
regulation of chromatin structure and/or function. Here we report that Cdc68 is 
found in association with another essential nuclear protein, Pob3, in what we 
term the CP complex. This dimer of Cdc68 with Pob3 is stable to partial 
purification, so that the functions of gene activation and repression that are 
assigned to Cdc68 are likely to be properties of the CP complex. The CP complex 
is highly abundant, suggesting that it may be widespread throughout chromatin.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.34.21972
PMID: 9705338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
