---
pmid: '1722334'
title: 'Cloning and expression of APE, the cDNA encoding the major human apurinic
  endonuclease: definition of a family of DNA repair enzymes.'
authors:
- Demple B
- Herman T
- Chen DS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC53153
doi: 10.1073/pnas.88.24.11450
---

# Cloning and expression of APE, the cDNA encoding the major human apurinic endonuclease: definition of a family of DNA repair enzymes.
**Authors:** Demple B, Herman T, Chen DS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.88.24.11450](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.88.24.11450)
**PMC:** [PMC53153](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC53153/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Dec 15;88(24):11450-4. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.88.24.11450.

Cloning and expression of APE, the cDNA encoding the major human apurinic 
endonuclease: definition of a family of DNA repair enzymes.

Demple B(1), Herman T, Chen DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Toxicology, Harvard University, School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115.

Abasic (AP) sites are common, potentially mutagenic DNA damages that are 
attacked by AP endonucleases. The biological roles of these enzymes in metazoans 
have not been tested. We have cloned the human cDNA (APE) that encodes the main 
nuclear AP endonuclease. The predicted Ape protein, which contains likely 
nuclear transport signals, is a member of a family of DNA repair enzymes that 
includes two bacterial AP endonucleases (ExoA protein of Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and exonuclease III of Escherichia coli) and Rrp1 protein of 
Drosophila melanogaster. Purified Ape protein lacks the 3'-exonuclease activity 
against undamaged DNA that is found in the bacterial and Drosophila enzymes, but 
the lack of obvious amino acid changes to account for this difference suggests 
that the various enzyme functions evolved by fine tuning a conserved active 
site. Expression of the active human enzyme in AP endonuclease-deficient E. coli 
conferred significant resistance to killing by the DNA-alkylating agent methyl 
methanesulfonate. The APE cDNA provides a molecular tool for analyzing the role 
of this central enzyme in maintaining genetic stability in humans.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.88.24.11450
PMCID: PMC53153
PMID: 1722334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
