---
pmid: '25661920'
title: CCAR2 negatively regulates nuclear receptor LXRα by competing with SIRT1 deacetylase.
authors:
- Sakurabashi A
- Wada-Hiraike O
- Hirano M
- Fu H
- Isono W
- Fukuda T
- Morita Y
- Tanikawa M
- Miyamoto Y
- Oda K
- Kawana K
- Osuga Y
- Fujii T
journal: J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.001
---

# CCAR2 negatively regulates nuclear receptor LXRα by competing with SIRT1 deacetylase.
**Authors:** Sakurabashi A, Wada-Hiraike O, Hirano M, Fu H, Isono W, Fukuda T, Morita Y, Tanikawa M, Miyamoto Y, Oda K, Kawana K, Osuga Y, Fujii T
**Journal:** J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.001)

## Abstract

1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 May;149:80-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.001.  Epub 2015 Feb 3.

CCAR2 negatively regulates nuclear receptor LXRα by competing with SIRT1 
deacetylase.

Sakurabashi A(1), Wada-Hiraike O(2), Hirano M(1), Fu H(1), Isono W(1), Fukuda 
T(1), Morita Y(1), Tanikawa M(1), Miyamoto Y(1), Oda K(1), Kawana K(1), Osuga 
Y(1), Fujii T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1 Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1 Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. Electronic 
address: osamuwh-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Liver X receptors (LXRs) monitor endogenous sterol levels to maintain whole-body 
cholesterol levels and regulate inflammatory responses. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that LXRs may inhibit cellular proliferation, but the underlying 
mechanism remains unclear. Cell cycle and apoptosis regulator 2 (CCAR2), 
previously known as DBC1/KIAA1967, is a transcriptional regulator that regulates 
cellular proliferation and energy metabolism by inhibiting sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) 
deacetylase. Based on the findings that CCAR2 regulates several nuclear 
receptors, including the estrogen receptors and androgen receptor, we aimed to 
identify the underlying mechanism of CCAR2 regulation of LXRα. We found that 
CCAR2 formed a complex with LXRα in a ligand-independent manner in HepG2 cells, 
and in vitro pull-down assays, it revealed a direct interaction between the 
amino terminus of CCAR2 and the AF-2 domain of LXRα. Thereby, CCAR2 attenuates 
the ligand-dependent transcriptional activation function of LXRα. RNA 
interference-mediated depletion of endogenous CCAR2 potentiated the expression 
of the LXRα target genes ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 and G1, and the 
abrogation of CCAR2 resulted in decreased cellular proliferation. Moreover, 
competitive immunoprecipitation studies revealed that the LXRα downregulation 
involves the inhibition of SIRT1-LXRα complex formation. Therefore, these 
results clearly indicate a novel mechanism in which CCAR2 may regulate the 
transcriptional activation function of LXRα due to its specific inhibition of 
SIRT1 and serve to regulate cellular proliferation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.02.001
PMID: 25661920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
