---
pmid: '35016035'
title: Identification and functional characterization of transcriptional activators
  in human cells.
authors:
- Alerasool N
- Leng H
- Lin ZY
- Gingras AC
- Taipale M
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008
---

# Identification and functional characterization of transcriptional activators in human cells.
**Authors:** Alerasool N, Leng H, Lin ZY, Gingras AC, Taipale M
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2022 Feb 3;82(3):677-695.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008. Epub
 2022 Jan 10.

Identification and functional characterization of transcriptional activators in 
human cells.

Alerasool N(1), Leng H(2), Lin ZY(3), Gingras AC(4), Taipale M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada; Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.
(2)Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Sinai Health 
System, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada; Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Sinai 
Health System, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada. Electronic address: 
gingras@lunenfeld.ca.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, 
Canada; Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E1, Canada. Electronic address: 
mikko.taipale@utoronto.ca.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2022 Feb 3;82(3):497-499. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2022.01.006.

Transcription is orchestrated by thousands of transcription factors (TFs) and 
chromatin-associated proteins, but how these are causally connected to 
transcriptional activation is poorly understood. Here, we conduct an unbiased 
proteome-scale screen to systematically uncover human proteins that activate 
transcription in a natural chromatin context. By combining interaction 
proteomics and chemical inhibitors, we delineate the preference of these 
transcriptional activators for specific co-activators, highlighting how even 
closely related TFs can function via distinct cofactors. We also identify potent 
transactivation domains among the hits and use AlphaFold2 to predict and 
experimentally validate interaction interfaces of two activation domains with 
BRD4. Finally, we show that many novel activators are partners in fusion events 
in tumors and functionally characterize a myofibroma-associated fusion between 
SRF and C3orf62, a potent p300-dependent activator. Our work provides a 
functional catalog of potent transactivators in the human proteome and a 
platform for discovering transcriptional regulators at genome scale.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008
PMID: 35016035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests University of Toronto 
has filed a provisional patent related to this work.
