---
pmid: '11826309'
title: Central functions of the lumenal and peripheral thylakoid proteome of Arabidopsis
  determined by experimentation and genome-wide prediction.
authors:
- Peltier JB
- Emanuelsson O
- Kalume DE
- Ytterberg J
- Friso G
- Rudella A
- Liberles DA
- Söderberg L
- Roepstorff P
- von Heijne G
- van Wijk KJ
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC150561
doi: 10.1105/tpc.010304
---

# Central functions of the lumenal and peripheral thylakoid proteome of Arabidopsis determined by experimentation and genome-wide prediction.
**Authors:** Peltier JB, Emanuelsson O, Kalume DE, Ytterberg J, Friso G, Rudella A, Liberles DA, Söderberg L, Roepstorff P, von Heijne G, van Wijk KJ
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.010304](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.010304)
**PMC:** [PMC150561](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC150561/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2002 Jan;14(1):211-36. doi: 10.1105/tpc.010304.

Central functions of the lumenal and peripheral thylakoid proteome of 
Arabidopsis determined by experimentation and genome-wide prediction.

Peltier JB(1), Emanuelsson O, Kalume DE, Ytterberg J, Friso G, Rudella A, 
Liberles DA, Söderberg L, Roepstorff P, von Heijne G, van Wijk KJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Experimental proteome analysis was combined with a genome-wide prediction screen 
to characterize the protein content of the thylakoid lumen of Arabidopsis 
chloroplasts. Soluble thylakoid proteins were separated by two-dimensional 
electrophoresis and identified by mass spectrometry. The identities of 81 
proteins were established, and N termini were sequenced to validate localization 
prediction. Gene annotation of the identified proteins was corrected by 
experimental data, and an interesting case of alternative splicing was 
discovered. Expression of a surprising number of paralogs was detected. 
Expression of five isomerases of different classes suggests strong (un)folding 
activity in the thylakoid lumen. These isomerases possibly are connected to a 
network of peripheral and lumenal proteins involved in antioxidative response, 
including peroxiredoxins, m-type thioredoxins, and a lumenal ascorbate 
peroxidase. Characteristics of the experimentally identified lumenal proteins 
and their orthologs were used for a genome-wide prediction of the lumenal 
proteome. Lumenal proteins with a typical twin-arginine translocation motif were 
predicted with good accuracy and sensitivity and included additional isomerases 
and proteases. Thus, prime functions of the lumenal proteome include assistance 
in the folding and proteolysis of thylakoid proteins as well as protection 
against oxidative stress. Many of the predicted lumenal proteins must be present 
at concentrations at least 10,000-fold lower than proteins of the photosynthetic 
apparatus.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.010304
PMCID: PMC150561
PMID: 11826309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
