---
reference_id: PMID:11312657
title: Rack1 binds HIV-1 Nef and can act as a Nef-protein kinase C adaptor.
authors:
- Gallina A
- Rossi F
- Milanesi G
journal: Virology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/viro.2001.0855
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Rack1 binds HIV-1 Nef and can act as a Nef-protein kinase C adaptor.
**Authors:** Gallina A, Rossi F, Milanesi G
**Journal:** Virology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/viro.2001.0855](https://doi.org/10.1006/viro.2001.0855)

## Content

1. Virology. 2001 Apr 25;283(1):7-18. doi: 10.1006/viro.2001.0855.

Rack1 binds HIV-1 Nef and can act as a Nef-protein kinase C adaptor.

Gallina A(1), Rossi F, Milanesi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Polo Universitario Ospedale San Paolo,
University of Milano, via A. di Rudiní 8, I-20142 Milan, Italy.

Nef proteins of primate immunodeficiency viruses exert pleiotropic effects, such
as enhanced endocytosis of CD4 and MHC-I cell surface molecules, perturbation of
signal transduction cascades, and virion infectivity enhancement. Nef function
intersects that of a number of cell kinases, including C kinases (PKCs) and
Src-family kinases. Here the interaction of HIV-1 Nef with Rack1 (receptor for
activated C kinase 1) is reported. Nef binds the Rack1 C-terminal moiety in a
yeast two-hybrid system and in cell-free pull-down assays and copurifies with in
vitro translated Rack1. Nef and Rack1 partially colocalize on the trans-Golgi
network and plasma membranes. The presence of Rack1 doubles Nef phosphorylation
by PKCs in vitro. Our data agree with the idea that Rack1 acts as a Nef
intracellular docking site, bringing Nef and PKCs together. Other signal
transduction or endocytosis proteins, in particular Src-like kinases, might meet
Nef by intermediation of the Rack1 adaptor.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/viro.2001.0855
PMID: 11312657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]