---
pmid: '17592131'
title: 'Metal-free superoxide dismutase forms soluble oligomers under physiological
  conditions: a possible general mechanism for familial ALS.'
authors:
- Banci L
- Bertini I
- Durazo A
- Girotto S
- Gralla EB
- Martinelli M
- Valentine JS
- Vieru M
- Whitelegge JP
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1899188
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704307104
---

# Metal-free superoxide dismutase forms soluble oligomers under physiological conditions: a possible general mechanism for familial ALS.
**Authors:** Banci L, Bertini I, Durazo A, Girotto S, Gralla EB, Martinelli M, Valentine JS, Vieru M, Whitelegge JP
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0704307104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0704307104)
**PMC:** [PMC1899188](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1899188/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 3;104(27):11263-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0704307104. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Metal-free superoxide dismutase forms soluble oligomers under physiological 
conditions: a possible general mechanism for familial ALS.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Durazo A, Girotto S, Gralla EB, Martinelli M, Valentine 
JS, Vieru M, Whitelegge JP.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center (CERM) and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Florence, Italy.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder 
selectively affecting motor neurons; 90% of the total cases are sporadic, but 2% 
are associated with mutations in the gene coding for the antioxidant enzyme 
copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1). The causes of motor neuron death in ALS 
are poorly understood in general, but for SOD1-linked familial ALS, aberrant 
oligomerization of SOD1 mutant proteins has been strongly implicated. In this 
work, we show that wild-type human SOD1, when lacking both its metal ions, forms 
large, stable, soluble protein oligomers with an average molecular mass of 
approximately 650 kDa under physiological conditions, i.e., 37 degrees C, pH 
7.0, and 100 microM protein concentration. It further is shown here that 
intermolecular disulfide bonds are formed during oligomerization and that Cys-6 
and Cys-111 are implicated in this bonding. The formation of the soluble 
oligomers was monitored by their ability to enhance the fluorescence of 
thioflavin T, a benzothiazole dye that increases in fluorescence intensity upon 
binding to amyloid fibers, and by disruption of this binding upon addition of 
the chaotropic agent guanidine hydrochloride. Our results suggest a general, 
unifying picture of SOD1 aggregation that could operate when wild-type or mutant 
SOD1 proteins lack their metal ions. Although we cannot exclude other mechanisms 
in SOD1-linked familial ALS, the one proposed here has the strength of 
explaining how a large and diverse set of SOD1 mutant proteins all could lead to 
disease through the same mechanism.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0704307104
PMCID: PMC1899188
PMID: 17592131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder selectively affecting motor neurons; 90% of the total cases are sporadic, but 2% are associated with mutations in the gene coding for the antioxidant enzyme copper–zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1). The causes of motor neuron death in ALS are poorly understood in general, but for SOD1-linked familial ALS, aberrant oligomerization of SOD1 mutant proteins has been strongly implicated. In this work, we show that wild-type human SOD1, when lacking both its metal ions, forms large, stable, soluble protein oligomers with an average molecular mass of ≈650 kDa under physiological conditions, i.e., 37°C, pH 7.0, and 100 μM protein concentration. It further is shown here that intermolecular disulfide bonds are formed during oligomerization and that Cys-6 and Cys-111 are implicated in this bonding. The formation of the soluble oligomers was monitored by their ability to enhance the fluorescence of thioflavin T, a benzothiazole dye that increases in fluorescence intensity upon binding to amyloid fibers, and by disruption of this binding upon addition of the chaotropic agent guanidine hydrochloride. Our results suggest a general, unifying picture of SOD1 aggregation that could operate when wild-type or mutant SOD1 proteins lack their metal ions. Although we cannot exclude other mechanisms in SOD1-linked familial ALS, the one proposed here has the strength of explaining how a large and diverse set of SOD1 mutant proteins all could lead to disease through the same mechanism.

Results

SOD1 has been estimated to be present in cells at concentrations of ≈100 μM ( 15 – 17 ). To mimic as closely as possible the conditions experienced by the protein in vivo , we prepared 100 μM protein solutions at pH 7.0 and incubated them at 37°C. Changes in secondary structure were monitored by CD spectroscopy, and the degree of oligomerization state was monitored through gel-filtration chromatography and fluorescence of ThT, a benzothiazole dye that exhibits increases in fluorescence intensity upon binding to amyloid fibers ( 18 , 19 ). Solutions of fully metallated Cu 2 Zn 2 SOD1 were unchanged after incubation at 37°C for more than 1 month, and the same was true for the copper-free derivative, E 2 Zn 2 SOD1 (E denotes empty). In contrast, the behavior of the completely metal-depleted protein was dramatically different. Incubated in the presence of ThT, it showed a progressive increase in fluorescence, with a fast process in the first 230 h of incubation, which slowed down after 1 month and then reached a plateau in the following 4 months ( Fig. 1 ). No turbidity was detected during the entire time period.

The detection of ThT-binding fluorescence is a clear indication of the formation of oligomeric assemblies, and it raises the possibility that these assemblies may share structural features with amyloid ( 18 ). The rate of ThT fluorescence enhancement depended strongly on temperature: the higher the temperature, the faster the rate of aggregation. Different pH conditions also affected the reaction: all other things being equal, the rate doubled at pH 5 relative to pH 7 (data not shown). This increase in rate may be attributable to the diminished repulsive negative charge as the solution pH approaches the pI of the protein (4.8).

After incubation at 37°C for 5 days or more, apo SOD1 samples at pH 7 showed a heterogeneous population of states for SOD1, ranging from dimers to a broad band of high-molecular-weight species, as shown by gel-filtration chromatography. Analysis of the fractions by multiangle light-scattering [ supporting information (SI) Fig. 5 ] showed that the broad high-molecular-weight band consisted of a mixture of species having an average molecular weight that increased with the incubation time ( SI Table 1 ). After 7 months of incubation, the molecular mass ranged between 430 and 750 kDa, with an average value of ≈650 kDa (≈25–45 SOD1 monomers). CD analyses of the high-molecular-weight fraction indicate that the oligomeric assemblies have a significantly higher percentage (58%) of β secondary structure than the freshly prepared apo sample (39%) ( Fig. 2 ).

The oligomeric material itself, although clearly soluble, did not ionize in electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) under denaturing, nonreducing conditions ( Fig. 3 and SI Fig. 6 ). However, covalent SOD1 dimers and trimers were detected, which was suggestive of covalent intermediates formed in the initial stages of aggregation ( Fig. 3 ). Addition of the reducing agent DTT to all of the experimental samples and to the controls, followed by analysis under the same conditions, resulted in the appearance of a strong signal for monomeric SOD1 and the disappearance of the signals for any higher-order species, suggesting that intermolecular disulfide bonds are a structural property of the aggregates ( SI Fig. 6 ). This conclusion is supported further by the observations that incubation of apo WT SOD1 in the presence of a reducing agent, either tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) or DTT, resulted in no enhanced fluorescence in the presence of ThT ( SI Fig. 7 A ) and only the monomeric state was observed through gel-filtration chromatography ( SI Fig. 7 B ), as is expected for disulfide-reduced apo SOD1 ( 20 ).

Free-cysteine content in apo SOD1 can be monitored by changes in 4-acetamido-4′-maleimidylstilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid (AMS) fluorescence on its modification of free thiols. Freshly prepared SOD1 has two free cysteines per monomer. The number of free thiols was observed to decrease simultaneously with protein aggregation (monitored by ThT fluorescence) ( Fig. 1 ), with the two processes following the same time course: they are fast initially, and they essentially plateau after 9 to 10 days. When the two free cysteines were mutated to noncysteine residues, either as single mutations (data not shown) or as a double mutation (C6A/C111S SOD1, hereafter called AS SOD1) ( Fig. 1 ), no aggregate formation was observed during incubation; only dimeric species were detected, even after 7 months of incubation. This behavior is a demonstration of the involvement of both the two free cysteines, Cys-6 and Cys-111, in the mechanism of aggregation, through formation of disulfide bonds. The data on these SOD1 mutants further indicate that the disulfide cysteines, Cys-57 and Cys-146, need not be involved in the initiation of oligomer formation.

The involvement of Cys-6 and Cys-111 in promoting oligomerization of SOD1 also was evidenced in the expression behavior of WT and mutant SOD1 in Escherichia coli , where SOD1 is produced mainly in the demetallated form ( SI Table 2 ). WT SOD1 and a large number of ALS-related SOD1 mutant proteins containing both Cys-6 and Cys-111 always were extracted in the insoluble fraction unless high concentrations of reducing agent were added. By contrast, when Cys-6 and/or Cys-111 were mutated, SOD1 was found in the soluble fraction after cell osmotic shock ( 21 ), suggesting that demetallated WT and ALS-related SOD1 mutants form disulfide-linked oligomers also in vivo , but only when both Cys-6 and Cys-111 are present.

When the chaotropic agent guanidine hydrochloride (Gdn·HCl), which disrupts hydrogen-bond networks that stabilize protein secondary and tertiary structures, was added to a solution of soluble oligomerized apo WT SOD1, the ThT-binding fluorescence was quenched in 15 min, whereas gel filtration of the resulting solution showed that high-molecular-weight species still were present. We attribute the loss of ThT-binding ability to disruption of the tertiary structure of the assemblies; we also attribute the fact that the SOD1 oligomeric state persists to covalent S S bonds between cysteines of the SOD1 subunits, similarly to what was observed in ESI-MS analysis under denaturing conditions (see above and SI Fig. 6 ).

Discussion

Human SOD1 is characterized by an unusual combination of structural features: a strong homodimeric quaternary structure; an eight-stranded β-barrel motif in each subunit; a strong intrasubunit disulfide bond between a highly conserved pair of cysteines, namely Cys-57 and Cys-146; the presence of metal ions (copper and zinc) with specific structural and enzymatic roles; and two free cysteines per subunit (Cys-6 and Cys-111). Maturation of the protein in vivo , to attain the correctly folded quaternary structure and enzymatic activity, requires formation of the disulfide bond, dimerization, and acquisition of copper and zinc ions. The lack of one or more of these features has a major impact on the properties of SOD1. For example, the apoprotein is dimeric when the disulfide bond is intact, but it is monomeric when the disulfide bond is reduced. By contrast, the disulfide-reduced SOD1 protein is dimeric when zinc ions are bound ( 22 ). Our results, described here, demonstrate that the dimeric SOD1 apoprotein, even with its intrasubunit disulfide bonds intact, has a marked tendency to form soluble high-molecular-weight oligomers under conditions very close to physiological. This oligomerization occurs in vitro as well as in vivo in E. coli , provided Cys-6 and Cys-111 are present. Metallated forms of the SOD1 protein do not oligomerize under the same conditions.

Although the absence of metal ions in the SOD1 apoprotein is clearly a major factor determining the propensity of the protein to oligomerize, formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds also plays an important role, as demonstrated by the absence of aggregation of the apoprotein under reducing conditions. Interestingly, disulfide-bond involvement in the formation of amyloid fibrils previously has been reported for other neurodegenerative diseases ( 23 , 24 ). In SOD1, we identify Cys-6 and Cys-111 as responsible for this process because single point mutation of either one of them prevents aggregation. We therefore hypothesize a mechanism of aggregation in which the SOD1 apoprotein, which is known to be destabilized and highly flexible because of the lack of metal ions, can sample a broad range of conformations, some of which cause the two free cysteines to be exposed to the solvent. Indeed, it has been shown previously in an engineered SOD1 monomer, artificially stabilized through two mutations at the subunit–subunit interface, that the absence of metals, and particularly of the structural metal zinc, causes the protein to be quite mobile and that several loops, including loop IV and the electrostatic loop VII, are characterized by a molten globule state within which a quite broad range of conformations are sampled ( 25 ). This flexibility is expected to make the two free cysteines more solvent-accessible relative to the dimeric, metallated form. Once the free cysteines are solvent-accessible, high-molecular-weight oligomers readily may be assembled through disulfide-bond formation and noncovalent interactions between β-sheets ( Fig. 4 ). It is not clear at this stage whether the driving force for oligomerization is primarily noncovalent protein–protein interactions, which then are stabilized further by covalent disulfide cross-linking, or the opposite. The binding of ThT to the oligomeric assemblies and their increased percentage of β secondary structure are consistent with the possibility that these assemblies are held together by hydrogen bonds and electrostatic interactions similar to those occurring in amyloid fibrils. In the absence of additional structural information, however, this conclusion remains speculative because ThT binding is not totally specific to amyloid ( 26 ). It also should be noted that this study supports a critical role for both Cys-6 and Cys-111 in the initiation of the aggregation process and intermolecular disulfide formation and does not exclude the possibility of subsequent involvement of Cys-57 and Cys-146 via disulfide exchange reactions as the aggregation proceeds.

The key factors in aggregation appear to be lack of metals and the presence of the free cysteines, factors that may be exacerbated in ALS mutant proteins. A large number of ALS-related SOD1 mutants have a decreased metal affinity and, indeed, some fail to be metal-reconstituted even in vitro ( 27 ). Also for WT, the protein is produced in an immature form that then needs several steps to reach the final active form. Among the various posttranslational modifications SOD1 must undergo, metallation is a complex process that involves several steps and interactions with other proteins. Metal uptake might be altered by misregulation of any of these steps by external factors. Therefore, when some SOD1 is present in the immature, demetallated state, aggregation could start, giving rise to amyloid-like soluble oligomers. We also must take into account the fact that SOD1 is present in both cytoplasm and mitochondria, and that its metal ions are acquired independently in the two cell compartments. These two cell compartments have quite different redox properties that further could modulate aggregation in vivo ( 28 ). This finding also is consistent with a recent suggestion of Wang et al. ( 7 ): they report that non-native intermolecular disulfide bonds help to stabilize the aggregates in vivo and that the redox state of the cell may play a role in aggregation.

The oligomers observed in this study appear to us to be likely candidates for the toxic species that cause SOD1-linked ALS. The mechanism discussed here for SOD1 aggregation is quite general because it does not depend on a specific mutation. It provides a unified picture of SOD1 oligomerization, as well as an in vitro system in which to study this process.
