---
pmid: '14597662'
title: The COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a critical step in phytochrome A-mediated
  regulation of HY5 activity.
authors:
- Saijo Y
- Sullivan JA
- Wang H
- Yang J
- Shen Y
- Rubio V
- Ma L
- Hoecker U
- Deng XW
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC280614
doi: 10.1101/gad.1122903
---

# The COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a critical step in phytochrome A-mediated regulation of HY5 activity.
**Authors:** Saijo Y, Sullivan JA, Wang H, Yang J, Shen Y, Rubio V, Ma L, Hoecker U, Deng XW
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1122903](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1122903)
**PMC:** [PMC280614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC280614/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2003 Nov 1;17(21):2642-7. doi: 10.1101/gad.1122903.

The COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a critical step in phytochrome A-mediated 
regulation of HY5 activity.

Saijo Y(1), Sullivan JA, Wang H, Yang J, Shen Y, Rubio V, Ma L, Hoecker U, Deng 
XW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Arabidopsis COP1 is a constitutive repressor of photomorphogenesis that 
interacts with photomorphogenesis-promoting factors such as HY5 to promote their 
proteasome-mediated degradation. SPA1 is a repressor of phytochrome A-mediated 
responses to far-red light. Here we report that COP1 acts as part of a large 
protein complex and interacts with SPA1 in a light-dependent manner. We further 
demonstrate the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of COP1 on HY5 in vitro and the 
alteration of that activity by SPA1. Thus, the COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a 
critical step in coordinating COP1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent 
degradation of HY5 with PHYA signaling.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1122903
PMCID: PMC280614
PMID: 14597662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Arabidopsis COP1 is a constitutive repressor of photomorphogenesis that interacts with photomorphogenesis-promoting factors such as HY5 to promote their proteasome-mediated degradation. SPA1 is a repressor of phytochrome A-mediated responses to far-red light. Here we report that COP1 acts as part of a large protein complex and interacts with SPA1 in a light-dependent manner. We further demonstrate the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of COP1 on HY5 in vitro and the alteration of that activity by SPA1. Thus, the COP1-SPA1 interaction defines a critical step in coordinating COP1-mediated ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of HY5 with PHYA signaling.
