---
pmid: '1568247'
title: Somatic mutations in the neurofibromatosis 1 gene in human tumors.
authors:
- Li Y
- Bollag G
- Clark R
- Stevens J
- Conroy L
- Fults D
- Ward K
- Friedman E
- Samowitz W
- Robertson M
journal: Cell
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90408-5
---

# Somatic mutations in the neurofibromatosis 1 gene in human tumors.
**Authors:** Li Y, Bollag G, Clark R, Stevens J, Conroy L, Fults D, Ward K, Friedman E, Samowitz W, Robertson M
**Journal:** Cell (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(92)90408-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(92)90408-5)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1992 Apr 17;69(2):275-81. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90408-5.

Somatic mutations in the neurofibromatosis 1 gene in human tumors.

Li Y(1), Bollag G, Clark R, Stevens J, Conroy L, Fults D, Ward K, Friedman E, 
Samowitz W, Robertson M, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City 84112.

The neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) gene product, neurofibromin, contains a 
GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-related domain, or NF1 GRD, that is able to 
down-regulate p21ras by stimulating its intrinsic GTPase. Since p21ras.GTP is a 
major regulator of growth and differentiation, mutant neurofibromins resulting 
from somatic mutations in the NF1 gene might interfere with ras signaling 
pathways and contribute to the development of tumors. We describe an amino acid 
substitution in the NF1 GRD, altering Lys-1423, that has occurred in three tumor 
types: colon adenocarcinoma, myelodysplastic syndrome, and anaplastic 
astrocytoma, and in one family with neurofibromatosis 1. The GAP activity of the 
mutant NF1 GRD is 200- to 400-fold lower than that of wild type, whereas binding 
affinity is unaffected. Thus, germline mutations in NF1 that cause 
neurofibromatosis 1 can also occur in somatic cells and contribute to the 
development of sporadic tumors, including tumors not associated with 
neurofibromatosis 1.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90408-5
PMID: 1568247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
