---
pmid: '21126803'
title: Perlecan domain V inhibits α2 integrin-mediated amyloid-β neurotoxicity.
authors:
- Wright S
- Parham C
- Lee B
- Clarke D
- Auckland L
- Johnston J
- Lawrence AL
- Dickeson SK
- Santoro SA
- Griswold-Prenner I
- Bix G
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.018
---

# Perlecan domain V inhibits α2 integrin-mediated amyloid-β neurotoxicity.
**Authors:** Wright S, Parham C, Lee B, Clarke D, Auckland L, Johnston J, Lawrence AL, Dickeson SK, Santoro SA, Griswold-Prenner I, Bix G
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.018)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jul;33(7):1379-88. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.018. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Perlecan domain V inhibits α2 integrin-mediated amyloid-β neurotoxicity.

Wright S(1), Parham C, Lee B, Clarke D, Auckland L, Johnston J, Lawrence AL, 
Dickeson SK, Santoro SA, Griswold-Prenner I, Bix G.

Author information:
(1)Elan Pharmaceuticals Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is a key component of amyloid plaques, one of the 
pathological features of Alzheimer's disease. Another feature is pronounced cell 
loss in the brain leading to an enlargement of the ventricular area and a 
decrease in brain weight and volume. Aβ plaque deposition and neuronal toxicity 
can be modeled by treating human cortical neuronal cultures with Aβ and showing 
robust Aβ deposition and neurotoxicity that is mediated by α2β1 and αvβ1 
integrins. The current study expands on these findings by showing that the 
domain V of perlecan, a known α2 integrin ligand, inhibits Aβ neurotoxicity in 
an α2 integrin-dependent manner. Additionally, Aβ binds more efficiently to 
cells expressing activated α2 integrin. Finally the inhibition of Aβ 
neurotoxicity with domain V is synergistic with inhibitors of αv integrin and β1 
integrin. We propose that domain V and potentially other α2 integrin ligands 
could be a new therapeutic approach for inhibiting the Aβ plaque deposition and 
neurotoxicity observed in Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.10.018
PMID: 21126803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
