---
pmid: '12717735'
title: Genetic screen for small body size mutants in C. elegans reveals many TGFbeta
  pathway components.
authors:
- Savage-Dunn C
- Maduzia LL
- Zimmerman CM
- Roberts AF
- Cohen S
- Tokarz R
- Padgett RW
journal: Genesis
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/gene.10184
---

# Genetic screen for small body size mutants in C. elegans reveals many TGFbeta pathway components.
**Authors:** Savage-Dunn C, Maduzia LL, Zimmerman CM, Roberts AF, Cohen S, Tokarz R, Padgett RW
**Journal:** Genesis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1002/gene.10184](https://doi.org/10.1002/gene.10184)

## Abstract

1. Genesis. 2003 Apr;35(4):239-47. doi: 10.1002/gene.10184.

Genetic screen for small body size mutants in C. elegans reveals many TGFbeta 
pathway components.

Savage-Dunn C(1), Maduzia LL, Zimmerman CM, Roberts AF, Cohen S, Tokarz R, 
Padgett RW.

Author information:
(1)Waksman Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers 
University, 190 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8020, USA.

In the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, a TGFbeta-related signaling pathway 
regulates body size and male tail morphogenesis. We sought to identify genes 
encoding components or modifiers of this pathway in a large-scale genetic 
screen. Remarkably, this screen was able to identify essentially all core 
components of the TGFbeta signaling pathway. Among 34 Small mutants, many 
mutations disrupt genes encoding recognizable components of the TGFbeta pathway: 
DBL-1 ligand, DAF-4 type II receptor, SMA-6 type I receptor, and SMA-2, SMA-3, 
and SMA-4 Smads. Moreover, we find that at least 11 additional complementation 
groups can mutate to the Small phenotype. Four of these 11 genes, sma-9, sma-14, 
sma-16, and sma-20 affect male tail morphogenesis as well as body size. Two 
genes, sma-11 and sma-20, also influence regulation of the developmentally 
arrested dauer larval stage, suggesting a role in a second characterized TGFbeta 
pathway in C. elegans. Other genes may represent tissue-specific factors or 
parallel pathways for body size control. Because of the conservation of TGFbeta 
signaling pathways, homologs of these genes may be involved in tissue 
specificity and/or crosstalk of TGFbeta pathways in other animals.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/gene.10184
PMID: 12717735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
