---
pmid: '14643676'
title: Expression and localization of components of the histone deacetylases multiprotein
  repressory complexes in the mouse preimplantation embryo.
authors:
- Kantor B
- Makedonski K
- Shemer R
- Razin A
journal: Gene Expr Patterns
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.modgep.2003.07.003
---

# Expression and localization of components of the histone deacetylases multiprotein repressory complexes in the mouse preimplantation embryo.
**Authors:** Kantor B, Makedonski K, Shemer R, Razin A
**Journal:** Gene Expr Patterns (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.modgep.2003.07.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.modgep.2003.07.003)

## Abstract

1. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Dec;3(6):697-702. doi: 10.1016/j.modgep.2003.07.003.

Expression and localization of components of the histone deacetylases 
multiprotein repressory complexes in the mouse preimplantation embryo.

Kantor B(1), Makedonski K, Shemer R, Razin A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew 
University-Hadassah Medical School, 91120, Jerusalem, Israel.

DNA methylation had been implicated in the assembly of multiprotein repressory 
complexes that affect chromatin architecture thereby rendering genes inactive. 
Proteins containing methyl binding domains (MBDs) are major components of these 
complexes. MBD3 is a component of the HDAC associated chromatin remodeling 
complex Mi2/NuRD. The addition of MBD2 to the Mi2/NuRD complex creates MeCP1, a 
complex that is known to inactivate methylated promoters. The undermethylated 
state of the mouse preimplantation embryo prompted us to investigate the known 
repressory complexes at this developmental stage. We found individual components 
of Mi2/NuRD: MBD3, Mi2, HDAC1 and HDAC2 to be expressed from a very early stage 
of embryo development and to localize in close proximity with each other and 
with constitutive heterochromatin by the blastula stage. Expression of MBD2, a 
component of MeCP1, starts in the blastula stage. Then it is also found to be in 
proximity with heterochromatin (based on DAPI staining) and with MBD3, Mi2 and 
HDAC1. In contrast, expression of MeCP2, an MBD containing component of a third 
repressory complex (MeCP2/Sin3A), is not seen in the preimplantation embryo. Our 
results suggest that both Mi2/NuRD and MeCP1 complexes are already present at 
the very early stages of embryo development, while a MeCP2 complex is added to 
the arsenal of repressory complexes post-implantation at a stage when DNA 
methylation takes place.

DOI: 10.1016/j.modgep.2003.07.003
PMID: 14643676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
