---
pmid: '15341631'
title: 'Biological functions of ent- and syn-copalyl diphosphate synthases in rice:
  key enzymes for the branch point of gibberellin and phytoalexin biosynthesis.'
authors:
- Otomo K
- Kenmoku H
- Oikawa H
- König WA
- Toshima H
- Mitsuhashi W
- Yamane H
- Sassa T
- Toyomasu T
journal: Plant J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02175.x
---

# Biological functions of ent- and syn-copalyl diphosphate synthases in rice: key enzymes for the branch point of gibberellin and phytoalexin biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Otomo K, Kenmoku H, Oikawa H, König WA, Toshima H, Mitsuhashi W, Yamane H, Sassa T, Toyomasu T
**Journal:** Plant J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02175.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02175.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2004 Sep;39(6):886-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02175.x.

Biological functions of ent- and syn-copalyl diphosphate synthases in rice: key 
enzymes for the branch point of gibberellin and phytoalexin biosynthesis.

Otomo K(1), Kenmoku H, Oikawa H, König WA, Toshima H, Mitsuhashi W, Yamane H, 
Sassa T, Toyomasu T.

Author information:
(1)Course of the Science of Bioresources, The United Graduate School of 
Agricultural Science, Iwate University (Yamagata University), Tsuruoka, Yamagata 
997-8555, Japan.

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) produces ent-copalyl diphosphate (ent-CDP) and syn-CDP as 
precursors for several classes of phytoalexins and the phytohormones, 
gibberellins (GAs). It has recently been shown that a loss-of-function mutation 
of OsCPS1, a gene encoding a putative ent-CDP synthase, results in a severely 
GA-deficient dwarf phenotype in rice. To clarify the biological functions of the 
ent- and syn-CDP synthases involved in the biosynthesis of phytoalexins and/or 
GAs, we isolated two cDNAs, OsCyc1 and OsCyc2, encoding putative diterpene 
cyclases from ultraviolet (UV)-irradiated rice leaves (cv. Nipponbare). The 
production of phytoalexins in rice leaves is known to be highly induced by UV 
treatment. Using a bacterial expression system, we demonstrated that OsCyc1 
encodes syn-CDP synthase and that OsCyc2 and OsCPS1 encode ent-CDP synthase. The 
level of expression of the OsCyc1 and OsCyc2 transcripts in rice leaves 
increased drastically in response to UV treatment, whereas expression of the 
OsCPS1 transcript was not induced by UV light. These results suggest that 
OsCyc1, OsCyc2 and OsCPS1 are responsible for the biosynthesis of momilactones A 
and B and oryzalexin S, oryzalexins A-F and phytocassanes A-E, and GAs, 
respectively. Our results strongly suggest the presence of two ent-CDP synthase 
isoforms in rice, one that participates in the biosynthesis of GAs and a second 
that is involved in the biosynthesis of phytoalexins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02175.x
PMID: 15341631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
