---
pmid: '32376478'
title: 'Biochemical characterization of d-aspartate oxidase from Caenorhabditis elegans:
  its potential use in the determination of free d-glutamate in biological samples.'
authors:
- Katane M
- Kuwabara H
- Nakayama K
- Saitoh Y
- Miyamoto T
- Sekine M
- Homma H
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140442
---

# Biochemical characterization of d-aspartate oxidase from Caenorhabditis elegans: its potential use in the determination of free d-glutamate in biological samples.
**Authors:** Katane M, Kuwabara H, Nakayama K, Saitoh Y, Miyamoto T, Sekine M, Homma H
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140442](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140442)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Proteins Proteom. 2020 Aug;1868(8):140442. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140442. Epub 2020 May 3.

Biochemical characterization of d-aspartate oxidase from Caenorhabditis elegans: 
its potential use in the determination of free d-glutamate in biological 
samples.

Katane M(1), Kuwabara H(1), Nakayama K(1), Saitoh Y(1), Miyamoto T(1), Sekine 
M(1), Homma H(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, 
Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, 
Japan. Electronic address: hommah@pharm.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

d-Aspartate oxidase (DDO) is a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-containing 
flavoprotein that stereospecifically acts on acidic d-amino acids (i.e., free 
d-aspartate and d-glutamate). Mammalian DDO, which exhibits higher activity 
toward d-aspartate than d-glutamate, is presumed to regulate levels of 
d-aspartate in the body and is not thought to degrade d-glutamate in vivo. By 
contrast, three DDO isoforms are present in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, 
DDO-1, DDO-2, and DDO-3, all of which exhibit substantial activity toward 
d-glutamate as well as d-aspartate. In this study, we optimized the Escherichia 
coli culture conditions for production of recombinant C. elegans DDO-1, purified 
the protein, and showed that it is a flavoprotein with a noncovalently but 
tightly attached FAD. Furthermore, C. elegans DDO-1, but not mammalian (rat) 
DDO, efficiently and selectively degraded d-glutamate in addition to 
d-aspartate, even in the presence of various other amino acids. Thus, C. elegans 
DDO-1 might be a useful tool for determining these acidic d-amino acids in 
biological samples.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbapap.2020.140442
PMID: 32376478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest related to this work.
