---
pmid: '15913339'
title: Spectroscopic evidence for the formation of a four-coordinate Co2+ cobalamin
  species upon binding to the human ATP:cobalamin adenosyltransferase.
authors:
- Stich TA
- Yamanishi M
- Banerjee R
- Brunold TC
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/ja050546r
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Spectroscopic evidence for the formation of a four-coordinate Co2+ cobalamin species upon binding to the human ATP:cobalamin adenosyltransferase.
**Authors:** Stich TA, Yamanishi M, Banerjee R, Brunold TC
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ja050546r](https://doi.org/10.1021/ja050546r)

## Abstract

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2005 Jun 1;127(21):7660-1. doi: 10.1021/ja050546r.

Spectroscopic evidence for the formation of a four-coordinate Co2+ cobalamin 
species upon binding to the human ATP:cobalamin adenosyltransferase.

Stich TA(1), Yamanishi M, Banerjee R, Brunold TC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 
53706, USA.

The human adenosyltransferase hATR converts exogenous cobalamin into coenzyme 
B12 by transferring the adenosyl group from cosubstrate ATP to a transiently 
formed Co1+cobalamin (Co1+Cbl) species. A particularly puzzling aspect of hATR 
function is that the midpoint potential for Co2+Cbl --> Co1+Cbl reduction is 
below that of readily available biological reductants. Our magnetic circular 
dichroism and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopic studies reported 
here reveal that, in the absence of ATP, the interaction between Co2+Cbl and 
hATR promotes partial conversion of the cofactor to its "base-off" form in which 
a water molecule occupies the lower axial position. This interaction becomes 
much stronger in the presence of ATP, leading to the formation of an 
unprecedented Co2+Cbl species with spectroscopic signatures consistent with an 
essentially four-coordinate, square-planar Co2+ center. This unusual Co2+Cbl 
coordination is expected to raise the Co2+/1+ reduction potential well into the 
physiological range.

DOI: 10.1021/ja050546r
PMID: 15913339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
