---
pmid: '34759314'
title: Self-guarding of MORC3 enables virulence factor-triggered immunity.
authors:
- Gaidt MM
- Morrow A
- Fairgrieve MR
- Karr JP
- Yosef N
- Vance RE
journal: Nature
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9045311
doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04054-5
---

# Self-guarding of MORC3 enables virulence factor-triggered immunity.
**Authors:** Gaidt MM, Morrow A, Fairgrieve MR, Karr JP, Yosef N, Vance RE
**Journal:** Nature (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-021-04054-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04054-5)
**PMC:** [PMC9045311](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9045311/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2021 Dec;600(7887):138-142. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04054-5. Epub 2021
 Nov 10.

Self-guarding of MORC3 enables virulence factor-triggered immunity.

Gaidt MM(1), Morrow A(2), Fairgrieve MR(3), Karr JP(4), Yosef N(2)(5)(6)(7), 
Vance RE(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. moritzgaidt@gmail.com.
(2)Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Genetics, Genomics and Development, Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Center for Computational Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(6)Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, and Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, Department of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. rvance@berkeley.edu.
(9)Cancer Research Laboratory and the Immunotherapeutics and Vaccine Research 
Initiative, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA. rvance@berkeley.edu.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA. rvance@berkeley.edu.

Pathogens use virulence factors to inhibit the immune system1. The guard 
hypothesis2,3 postulates that hosts monitor (or 'guard') critical innate immune 
pathways such that their disruption by virulence factors provokes a secondary 
immune response1. Here we describe a 'self-guarded' immune pathway in human 
monocytes, in which guarding and guarded functions are combined in one protein. 
We find that this pathway is triggered by ICP0, a key virulence factor of herpes 
simplex virus type 1, resulting in robust induction of anti-viral type I 
interferon (IFN). Notably, induction of IFN by ICP0 is independent of canonical 
immune pathways and the IRF3 and IRF7 transcription factors. A CRISPR screen 
identified the ICP0 target MORC34 as an essential negative regulator of IFN. 
Loss of MORC3 recapitulates the IRF3- and IRF7-independent IFN response induced 
by ICP0. Mechanistically, ICP0 degrades MORC3, which leads to de-repression of a 
MORC3-regulated DNA element (MRE) adjacent to the IFNB1 locus. The MRE is 
required in cis for IFNB1 induction by the MORC3 pathway, but is not required 
for canonical IFN-inducing pathways. As well as repressing the MRE to regulate 
IFNB1, MORC3 is also a direct restriction factor of HSV-15. Our results thus 
suggest a model in which the primary anti-viral function of MORC3 is 
self-guarded by its secondary IFN-repressing function-thus, a virus that 
degrades MORC3 to avoid its primary anti-viral function will unleash the 
secondary anti-viral IFN response.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04054-5
PMCID: PMC9045311
PMID: 34759314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests REV consults for Ventus 
Therapeutics and Tempest Therapeutics. A provisional patent application covering 
these findings has been submitted.
