---
pmid: '11524432'
title: Modification of epidermal growth factor-like repeats with O-fucose. Molecular
  cloning and expression of a novel GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Shao L
- Shi S
- Harris RJ
- Spellman MW
- Stanley P
- Haltiwanger RS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M107849200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Modification of epidermal growth factor-like repeats with O-fucose. Molecular cloning and expression of a novel GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Shao L, Shi S, Harris RJ, Spellman MW, Stanley P, Haltiwanger RS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M107849200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M107849200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):40338-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M107849200. Epub 
2001 Aug 27.

Modification of epidermal growth factor-like repeats with O-fucose. Molecular 
cloning and expression of a novel GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase.

Wang Y(1), Shao L, Shi S, Harris RJ, Spellman MW, Stanley P, Haltiwanger RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism, Genentech, Inc., South San 
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

The O-fucose modification is found on epidermal growth factor-like repeats of a 
number of cell surface and secreted proteins. O-Fucose glycans play important 
roles in ligand-induced receptor signaling. For example, elongation of O-fucose 
on Notch by the beta1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase Fringe modulates the 
ability of Notch to respond to its ligands. The enzyme that adds O-fucose to 
epidermal growth factor-like repeats, GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase 
(O-FucT-1), was purified previously from Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Here 
we report the isolation of a cDNA that encodes human O-FucT-1. A probe deduced 
from N-terminal sequence analysis of purified CHO O-FucT-1 was used to screen a 
human heart cDNA library and expressed sequence tag and genomic data bases. The 
cDNA contains an open reading frame encoding a protein of 388 amino acids with a 
predicted N-terminal transmembrane sequence typical of a type II membrane 
orientation. Likewise, the mouse homolog obtained from an expressed sequence tag 
and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends of a mouse liver cDNA library encodes a 
type II transmembrane protein of 393 amino acids with 90.4% identity to human 
O-FucT-1. Homologs were also found in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans with 
41.2 and 29.4% identity to human O-FucT-1, respectively. The human gene (POFUT1) 
is on chromosome 20 between PLAGL2 and KIF3B, near the centromere at 20p11. The 
mouse gene (Pofut1) maps near Plagl2 on a homologous region of mouse chromosome 
2. POFUT1 gene transcripts were expressed in all tissues examined, consistent 
with the widespread localization of the modification. Expression of a soluble 
form of human O-FucT-1 in insect cells yielded a protein of the predicted 
molecular weight with O-FucT-1 kinetic and enzymatic properties similar to those 
of O-FucT-1 purified from CHO cells. The identification of the gene encoding 
protein O-fucosyltransferase I now makes possible mutational strategies to 
examine the functions of the unusual O-fucose post-translational modification.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M107849200
PMID: 11524432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
