---
pmid: '7685339'
title: Circulating human pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A is disulfide-bridged
  to the proform of eosinophil major basic protein.
authors:
- Oxvig C
- Sand O
- Kristensen T
- Gleich GJ
- Sottrup-Jensen L
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# Circulating human pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A is disulfide-bridged to the proform of eosinophil major basic protein.
**Authors:** Oxvig C, Sand O, Kristensen T, Gleich GJ, Sottrup-Jensen L
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jun 15;268(17):12243-6.

Circulating human pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A is disulfide-bridged to 
the proform of eosinophil major basic protein.

Oxvig C(1), Sand O, Kristensen T, Gleich GJ, Sottrup-Jensen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

A previously unrecognized association between pregnancy-associated plasma 
protein-A (PAPP-A) and the proform of eosinophil major basic protein (proMBP) is 
demonstrated. PAPP-A isolated from pooled pregnancy serum is shown to be a 
disulfide-bridged complex with proMBP (PAPP-A/proMBP) in which the subunits of 
the constituents are present in a 1:1 molar ratio. The results are the outcome 
of analysis of tryptic and CNBr/tryptic peptides from PAPP-A/proMBP, sequence 
analysis of intact and reduced and carboxymethylated PAPP-A/proMBP, and reaction 
with monoclonal antibodies directed against MBP and its proform. In addition, it 
is shown that commercial polyclonal anti-PAPP-A is polyspecific, also reacting 
with MBP.

PMID: 7685339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
