---
pmid: '10606751'
title: Different induction of gulonolactone oxidase in aromatic hydrocarbon-responsive
  or -unresponsive mouse strains.
authors:
- Braun L
- Kardon T
- El Koulali K
- Csala M
- Mandl J
- Bánhegyi G
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01649-x
---

# Different induction of gulonolactone oxidase in aromatic hydrocarbon-responsive or -unresponsive mouse strains.
**Authors:** Braun L, Kardon T, El Koulali K, Csala M, Mandl J, Bánhegyi G
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01649-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01649-x)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 17;463(3):345-9. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01649-x.

Different induction of gulonolactone oxidase in aromatic hydrocarbon-responsive 
or -unresponsive mouse strains.

Braun L(1), Kardon T, El Koulali K, Csala M, Mandl J, Bánhegyi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Semmelweis University of Medicine, H-1444, 
Budapest, Hungary.

The role of aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated signal transduction 
pathways was investigated in the regulation of ascorbate synthesis by using 
Ah-responsive and Ah-unresponsive mouse strains. In vivo 3-methylcholanthrene 
treatment increased hepatic and plasma ascorbate concentrations only in the 
Ah-responsive strain. The mRNA level of gulonolactone oxidase and the microsomal 
ascorbate production from p-nitrophenyl glucuronide, D-glucuronic acid or 
gulonolactone in the liver of Ah-responsive and Ah-unresponsive mice were 
compared. In Ah-responsive mice, these parameters were higher originally, and 
they further increased upon in vivo addition of 3-methylcholanthrene, while in 
Ah-unresponsive mice the treatment was not effective. These results suggest that 
the transcription of gulonolactone oxidase gene is regulated by an Ah 
receptor-dependent signal transduction pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(99)01649-x
PMID: 10606751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
