---
pmid: '28893908'
title: The intrinsically disordered N-terminal domain of galectin-3 dynamically mediates
  multisite self-association of the protein through fuzzy interactions.
authors:
- Lin YH
- Qiu DC
- Chang WH
- Yeh YQ
- Jeng US
- Liu FT
- Huang JR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5663883
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.802793
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The intrinsically disordered N-terminal domain of galectin-3 dynamically mediates multisite self-association of the protein through fuzzy interactions.
**Authors:** Lin YH, Qiu DC, Chang WH, Yeh YQ, Jeng US, Liu FT, Huang JR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M117.802793](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M117.802793)
**PMC:** [PMC5663883](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5663883/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2017 Oct 27;292(43):17845-17856. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M117.802793.
Epub  2017 Sep 11.

The intrinsically disordered N-terminal domain of galectin-3 dynamically 
mediates multisite self-association of the protein through fuzzy interactions.

Lin YH(1), Qiu DC(1), Chang WH(1), Yeh YQ(2), Jeng US(2)(3), Liu FT(4), Huang 
JR(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and.
(2)the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 30076, Taiwan.
(3)the Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan, and.
(4)the Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.
(5)From the Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and 
jierongh@ym.edu.tw.
(6)the Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang-Ming University, 
Number 155 Section 2 Li-nong Street, Taipei 11221, Taiwan.

Galectins are a family of lectins that bind β-galactosides through their 
conserved carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) and can induce aggregation with 
glycoproteins or glycolipids on the cell surface and thereby regulate cell 
activation, migration, adhesion, and signaling. Galectin-3 has an intrinsically 
disordered N-terminal domain and a canonical CRD. Unlike the other 14 known 
galectins in mammalian cells, which have dimeric or tandem-repeated CRDs 
enabling multivalency for various functions, galectin-3 is monomeric, and its 
functional multivalency therefore is somewhat of a mystery. Here, we used NMR 
spectroscopy, mutagenesis, small-angle X-ray scattering, and computational 
modeling to study the self-association-related multivalency of galectin-3 at the 
residue-specific level. We show that the disordered N-terminal domain (residues 
∼20-100) interacts with itself and with a part of the CRD not involved in 
carbohydrate recognition (β-strands 7-9; residues ∼200-220), forming a fuzzy 
complex via inter- and intramolecular interactions, mainly through 
hydrophobicity. These fuzzy interactions are characteristic of intrinsically 
disordered proteins to achieve liquid-liquid phase separation, and we 
demonstrated that galectin-3 can also undergo liquid-liquid phase separation. We 
propose that galectin-3 may achieve multivalency through this multisite 
self-association mechanism facilitated by fuzzy interactions.

© 2017 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M117.802793
PMCID: PMC5663883
PMID: 28893908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

Galectins are a family of lectins that bind β-galactosides through their conserved carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) and can induce aggregation with glycoproteins or glycolipids on the cell surface and thereby regulate cell activation, migration, adhesion, and signaling. Galectin-3 has an intrinsically disordered N-terminal domain and a canonical CRD. Unlike the other 14 known galectins in mammalian cells, which have dimeric or tandem-repeated CRDs enabling multivalency for various functions, galectin-3 is monomeric, and its functional multivalency therefore is somewhat of a mystery. Here, we used NMR spectroscopy, mutagenesis, small-angle X-ray scattering, and computational modeling to study the self-association–related multivalency of galectin-3 at the residue-specific level. We show that the disordered N-terminal domain (residues ∼20–100) interacts with itself and with a part of the CRD not involved in carbohydrate recognition (β-strands 7–9; residues ∼200–220), forming a fuzzy complex via inter- and intramolecular interactions, mainly through hydrophobicity. These fuzzy interactions are characteristic of intrinsically disordered proteins to achieve liquid–liquid phase separation, and we demonstrated that galectin-3 can also undergo liquid–liquid phase separation. We propose that galectin-3 may achieve multivalency through this multisite self-association mechanism facilitated by fuzzy interactions.

Introduction

Galectins are a family of lectins that bind to β-galactoside through their conserved carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) 2 ( 1 ). Extracellularly, they can induce aggregation of or form lattices with glycoproteins or glycolipids on the cell surface and thus regulate cell activation, migration, adhesion, and signaling ( 1 ). Fourteen of the 15 known galectins have dimeric or tandem-repeated CRDs; this multivalency facilitates the above-described functions ( 1 – 3 ). Galectin-3 is the only chimeric member of this family ( 4 ), with its CRD being connected to its non-lectin N-terminal domain (NTD; residues 1–112, Fig. 1 , A–C ). This intrinsically disordered NTD is essential for the biological activity of galectin-3 ( 5 – 8 ). On the basis of the protein's co-precipitation ratio with pentasaccharides, it was reported that galectin-3 forms pentamers cross-linked through the NTD ( 9 ). Galectin-3, however, is mainly found in its monomeric form in solution ( 5 , 6 , 10 , 11 ). How this protein becomes a functional oligomer is still under debate.

Depending on which domain is involved, the interactions are categorized as type-N ( 6 , 9 , 12 – 14 ) or type-C ( 15 – 18 ) for the NTD- or CRD-mediated self-associations. In most studies published to date, saccharide or asialofetuin has been used to induce self-association; indirect assays, such as chemical cross-linking ( 5 , 19 ), fluorescence anisotropy ( 16 ), and solid-phase radioligand-binding assay ( 15 ), have also been used to study galectin-3 self-association. On the other hand, NMR spectroscopy provides residue-specific information and can detect a protein's intrinsic self-association propensity in the absence of additional ligands. Birdsall et al. ( 20 ) showed evidence of NTD and CRD interaction in an early NMR study. More recently, Mayo and co-workers ( 21 ) assigned the backbone chemical shifts of galectin-3 and demonstrated detailed studies of this protein ( 18 , 22 ). They identified a transient α-helix in the NTD (residues 5–15) and showed that the PGA X motif is the epitope interacting with the CRD (by titrating synthetic peptides with the CRD alone). They also observed a concentration-dependent NMR chemical shift in the CRD part and concluded that the self-association is a type-C interaction. Their study also showed, however, that no self-association was observed in the absence of the NTD based on the results of the molecular diffusion coefficients. How the NTD mediates galectin-3 self-association is thus still unclear.

Here we performed NMR dynamics and paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) studies of more than 15 galectin-3 variants to depict a detailed model of how this intrinsically disordered NTD mediates its self-association. We found that the NTD and the CRD interact in a “fuzzy” complex manner inter- and intramolecularly through both NTD–NTD and NTD–CRD interactions.

Conclusion

Our results show that galectin-3 self-associates via inter- and intramolecular NTD–CRD interactions and intermolecular NTD–NTD contacts. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time these three types of interactions have been shown to occur in a fuzzy manner and to be driven by hydrophobicity. The fact that galectin-3 undergoes liquid–liquid phase separation sheds new light on the protein's function in its self-associated form. Our study also provides new insight on how galectin-3 self-associates when it binds to glycoconjugates, such as those present on the cell surface, resulting in aggregation of these glycoconjugates or the formation of galectin lattices.
