---
pmid: '22085542'
title: CNK3 and IPCEF1 produce a single protein that is required for HGF dependent
  Arf6 activation and migration.
authors:
- Attar MA
- Salem JC
- Pursel HS
- Santy LC
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.10.018
---

# CNK3 and IPCEF1 produce a single protein that is required for HGF dependent Arf6 activation and migration.
**Authors:** Attar MA, Salem JC, Pursel HS, Santy LC
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.10.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.10.018)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Feb 1;318(3):228-37. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.10.018. Epub
 2011 Nov 7.

CNK3 and IPCEF1 produce a single protein that is required for HGF dependent Arf6 
activation and migration.

Attar MA(1), Salem JC, Pursel HS, Santy LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Epithelial cells are largely immotile under normal circumstances, but become 
motile during development, repair of tissue damage and during cancer metastasis. 
Numerous growth factors act to initiate epithelial cell movements. Hepatocyte 
growth factor (HGF) induces many epithelial cell lines to begin crawling. A 
number of small GTPases act downstream of HGF to alter cell shape and promote 
movement. Arf6 is one of these GTPases that can alter the cortical actin 
cytoskeleton and promote epithelial movement. Activation of Arf6 in MDCK cells 
by its guanine nucleotide exchange factor cytohesin 2/ARNO produces a scattering 
response strikingly reminiscent of the action of HGF. We have previously shown 
that IPCEF1, a scaffold that binds to cytohesin 2, is required for 
cytohesin-induced scattering. We report here that IPCEF1 is actually the 
C-terminal half of CNK3. CNKs are scaffolds involved in signal transduction 
downstream of Ras. We have found that both MDCK and CaCo-2 cells express a fused 
CNK3/IPCEF1 protein. Knockdown of this protein impairs HGF-induced Arf6 
activation and migration in response to HGF treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.10.018
PMID: 22085542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
