---
pmid: '17053782'
title: C-terminal phosphorylation controls the stability and function of p27kip1.
authors:
- Kossatz U
- Vervoorts J
- Nickeleit I
- Sundberg HA
- Arthur JS
- Manns MP
- Malek NP
journal: EMBO J
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1630410
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601388
---

# C-terminal phosphorylation controls the stability and function of p27kip1.
**Authors:** Kossatz U, Vervoorts J, Nickeleit I, Sundberg HA, Arthur JS, Manns MP, Malek NP
**Journal:** EMBO J (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601388](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601388)
**PMC:** [PMC1630410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1630410/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2006 Nov 1;25(21):5159-70. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601388. Epub 2006
Oct  19.

C-terminal phosphorylation controls the stability and function of p27kip1.

Kossatz U(1), Vervoorts J, Nickeleit I, Sundberg HA, Arthur JS, Manns MP, Malek 
NP.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Entry of cells into the cell division cycle requires the coordinated activation 
of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) and the deactivation of cyclin kinase 
inhibitors. Degradation of p27kip1 is known to be a central component of this 
process as it allows controlled activation of cdk2-associated kinase activity. 
Turnover of p27 at the G1/S transition is regulated through phosphorylation at 
T187 and subsequent SCF(skp2)-dependent ubiquitylation. However, detailed 
analysis of this process revealed the existence of additional pathways that 
regulate the abundance of the protein in early G1 and as cells exit quiescence. 
Here, we report on a molecular mechanism that regulates p27 stability by 
phosphorylation at T198. Phosphorylation of p27 at T198 prevents 
ubiquitin-dependent degradation of free p27. T198 phosphorylation also controls 
progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle by regulating the association 
of p27 with cyclin-cdk complexes. Our results unveil the molecular composition 
of a pathway, which regulates the abundance and activity of p27kip1 during early 
G1. They also explain how the T187- and the T198-dependent turnover systems 
synergize to allow cell cycle progression in G1.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601388
PMCID: PMC1630410
PMID: 17053782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Entry of cells into the cell division cycle requires the coordinated activation of cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) and the deactivation of cyclin kinase inhibitors. Degradation of p27kip1 is known to be a central component of this process as it allows controlled activation of cdk2-associated kinase activity. Turnover of p27 at the G1/S transition is regulated through phosphorylation at T187 and subsequent SCF skp2 -dependent ubiquitylation. However, detailed analysis of this process revealed the existence of additional pathways that regulate the abundance of the protein in early G1 and as cells exit quiescence. Here, we report on a molecular mechanism that regulates p27 stability by phosphorylation at T198. Phosphorylation of p27 at T198 prevents ubiquitin-dependent degradation of free p27. T198 phosphorylation also controls progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle by regulating the association of p27 with cyclin–cdk complexes. Our results unveil the molecular composition of a pathway, which regulates the abundance and activity of p27kip1 during early G1. They also explain how the T187- and the T198-dependent turnover systems synergize to allow cell cycle progression in G1.

Introduction

The cyclin kinase inhibitor p27kip1 plays a pivotal role in the regulation of the mammalian cell cycle. High levels of p27 expression are found in quiescent cells and the protein contributes to the maintenance of the quiescent state ( Coats et al , 1996 ; Sherr and Roberts, 1999 ). Upon sufficient mitogenic stimulation p27 levels drop, thus allowing the activation of cyclin E- and cyclin A-associated cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdk2) ( Coats et al , 1996 ). The levels of p27 expression throughout the cell cycle are controlled by transcriptional, translational and post-translational mechanisms ( Millard et al , 1997 ; Kolluri et al , 1999 ; Montagnoli et al , 1999 ; Medema et al , 2000 ; Gopfert et al , 2003 ). Phosphorylation-induced degradation of p27 by the skp2-dependent SCF (skp-cullin-f-box) E3 ligase has been studied in detail. Phosphorylation of p27 at a conserved c-terminal threonine (T187) creates a binding site for the F-box protein skp2, which in concert with the SCF complex allows polyubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of p27 ( Sheaff et al , 1997 ; Vlach et al , 1997 ; Carrano et al , 1999 ; Sutterluty et al , 1999 ). Mouse fibroblasts derived from mice expressing a nonphosphorylatable form of p27 (p27T187A) reaccumulate p27T187A at the G1/S transition due to impaired turnover of the mutant form ( Malek et al , 2001 ). However, the downregulation of p27 observed after mitogenic stimulation of quiescent cells was not impaired in the T187A cells, thereby indicating that a degradation system independent of this phosphorylation site is required for the turnover of p27 in early G1. Loss of the F-box protein skp2 in the mouse leads to a severe defect in tissue homeostasis involving multiple organs including the liver, kidney, lung and testes of homozygous skp2 knockout mice ( Nakayama et al , 2000 ). Interestingly, while several proteins have been shown to be substrates of the skp2-dependent SCF complex, loss of p27 reverts the phenotype of the skp2 knockout mouse back to normal ( Nakayama et al , 2004 ). Moreover, loss of skp2 prevents the degradation of p27 in primary mouse fibroblasts and liver cells after mitogenic stimulation, thereby indicating that some cell types might require skp2 for the turnover of p27 in early G1 ( Kossatz et al , 2004 ). Meanwhile, a second ubiquitin ligase for p27, named KPC1/2, was shown to regulate the stability of p27 ( Kamura et al , 2004 ). Degradation of p27 by the KPC ubiquitin ligase requires nucleo-cytoplasmic transport ( Kamura et al , 2004 ); however, not all degradation of p27 takes place in the cytosol ( Ishida et al , 2000 ; Boehm et al , 2002 ). In fact, confining p27 to the nucleus leads to a decrease in its stability indicating that nuclear degradation systems take part in the turnover of p27 ( Rodier et al , 2001 ). In this work, our goal was to identify post-translational modifications on p27, which contribute to the regulation of p27 stability specifically in early G1. As our initial characterization of this early degradation system pointed towards a phosphorylation-dependent system ( Malek et al , 2001 ), we speculated that phosphorylation of p27 at a site different from T187 might induce degradation of the protein upon mitogenic stimulation of quiescent cells. In this work, we identify the c-terminal threonine T198 as a phosphorylation site, which controls several important aspects of p27 function including binding to cyclin–cdk complexes, subcellular localization and protein stability. Interestingly, cyclin–cdk binding and protein stability are intimately linked processes, which cooperate to allow cell cycle-regulated expression of the p27 protein.

Discussion

To allow p27 to efficiently control cell cycle progression, it must be expressed at high levels in quiescent cells and decrease in response to mitogenic stimulation to allow timely activation of cyclin E and cdk2 complexes. This pattern of p27 expression is essentially opposite to what is seen for the expression and activation of cyclin E–cdk2 complexes, which are inactive in quiescent cells and during early G1 and become activated as the cell progresses towards S phase.

In this work, we describe the identification of a mechanism that controls the levels, localization and activity of the cyclin kinase inhibitor p27 through phosphorylation at T198. During the G0 phase of the cell cycle when cyclin/cdk levels are generally low, p27 is preferentially in its monomeric form ( Poon et al , 1995 ; Soos et al , 1996 ). Our work shows that in order to prevent proteolytic degradation of this free, cyclin unbound form, p27 needs to be phosphorylated at T198. However, phosphorylation at this site serves a second function as cells enter the G1 phase. Under normal conditions, p27T198 phosphorylation increases after mitogenic stimulation of quiescent cells and the majority of the protein associates with cyclin D/cdk4 complexes. By studying the distribution of p27T198A in cdk2- and cdk4-containing complexes using p27T198A-expressing cell lines, we found that when both complexes are highly expressed during early and mid G1 most p27T198A is found in cdk2 complexes and very little is associated with cdk4. Also in asynchronous cells significantly more p27T198A is bound into cdk2 complexes than in wild-type control cells. Loss of T198 phosphorylation therefore prevents binding to cyclin D/cdk4 complexes and instead promotes the binding of p27T198A into cyclin E/cdk2 complexes. This shift in complex formation has two consequences: first, it prevents timely activation of cdk2-associated kinase activity. Loss of cdk2 kinase activation impairs the phosphorylation of Rb and is responsible for the observed delay in cell cycle progression in p27T198A-expressing fibroblast cell lines.

Secondly, the increased binding of p27T198A into cyclin E/cdk2 complexes stabilizes the mutant form of the protein as shown in cell synchronization experiments using p27T198A and wild-type cells. These data indicate that phosphorylation at T198 is necessary to allow downregulation of p27 after mitogen stimulation of quiescent cells. We realize that the increase in T198 phosphorylation at p27 when cells exit from quiescence and the stabilization of the p27T198A mutant during exactly this time of the cell cycle could be taken as evidence for a direct role of T198 phosphorylation in turnover of p27 during early G1. However at this point of our analysis, our data argues for a passive stabilization of p27T198A in cdk2-containing complexes as opposed to a direct defect in a turnover system. Nevertheless, it remains possible that T198-phosphorylated p27 that is bound to cyclin D/cdk4 complexes is recognized as part of this multimeric complex by an ubiquitin ligase. A similar mechanism has been shown for T187-phosphorylated p27 bound to cyclin E/cdk2 complexes, which is recognized by the F-box protein skp2 and ubiquitylated by the SCF E3 ligase ( Montagnoli et al , 1999 ).

To date three kinases have been shown to phosphorylate p27 at T198 namely AKT, RSK1 and RSK2 ( Fujita et al , 2002 , 2003 ). The activation of these kinases in response to mitogen stimulation could be responsible for the increase in the expression of T198-phosphorylated p27. We show in this work that T198 phosphorylation is required for binding to cdk4-containing complexes and exit from the nucleus. Although we were unable to detect differences in binding of T198-phosphorylated p27 compared to nonphosphorylated p27 to pre-assembled cyclin D/cdk4 complexes in vitro , our results do not rule out the possibility that phosphorylation at T198 promotes cyclin D/cdk4 complex formation. In fact, previous studies have shown differences in the phosphorylation pattern of p27 bound to cyclin D- or E-containing complexes throughout the cell cycle ( Ciarallo et al , 2002 ) and T198-phosphorylated p27 was preferentially detected in cyclin D/cdk4 complexes (J Slingerland, personal communication). In fact, p27 also serves as an assembly factor for cyclin D complexes ( LaBaer et al , 1997 ) by helping to activate cyclin D/cdk4 kinase activity, which in turn promotes Rb phosphorylation. Interestingly, AKT activity itself is under the control of E2F-dependent transcriptional control ( Chaussepied and Ginsberg, 2004 ). AKT phosphorylation of p27 at T198 could therefore promote cyclin D/cdk4 complex formation, which in turn helps to activate AKT thereby forming a positive feedback loop that promotes progression through early G1. AKT has been shown to be dysregulated in many human cancers ( Testa and Tsichlis, 2005 ) and specifically breast cancers with high constitutive AKT activity express p27T198 predominantly in the cytoplasm and show reactivity with a T198-specific antibody ( Viglietto et al , 2002 ; Motti et al , 2004 ). It is therefore conceivable that tumor cells abuse this mechanism to exclude p27 from the nucleus and sequester it into cdk4 complexes thereby allowing early activation of cdk2 kinase activity. Phosphorylation of p27 at T198 might, therefore, present a means to inactivate p27 by several different mechanisms in tumor cells.

By proposing this new regulatory mechanism, we consider two possible pitfalls. First, we considered the possibility that changes in the subcellular localization of p27T198A might have influenced its stability. Previous reports had shown that p27 phosphorylation at T198 by AKT and RSK facilitates its nucleo-cytoplasmic transport and promotes cytoplasmic anchoring of p27 ( Fujita et al , 2002 , 2003 ; Motti et al , 2005 ). Based on these results, we tested the possibility that changes in p27T198A subcellular localization might have caused the dramatic decrease in its stability. As shown by immunofluorescent staining of quiescent cells, p27T198A and wild-type p27 are exclusively localized to the nucleus in the G0 phase. Inhibition of proteasomal turnover in these cells did result in an increase in the number of stained nuclei but did not lead to an increase in cytoplasmic p27T198A staining, which indicates that turnover of p27T198A during the G0 phase is exclusively taking place in the nucleus. Therefore, differences in subcellular localization are not responsible for the increased turnover of the mutant form in quiescent cells. After release from quiescence, we find T198 phosphorylation to be required for the timely exit of p27 from the nucleus, which is in agreement with the cited earlier reports ( Fujita et al , 2002 , 2003 ; Motti et al , 2004 ). By comparing subcellular localization and expression levels of p27 and the p27T198A protein, we show however that even under conditions when p27T198A is almost entirely cytoplasmic, its levels are still significantly higher than in wild-type cells. Also, changing p27T198 subcellular localization to the cytoplasm by deleting the NLS did not stabilize the mutant protein compared to wild-type p27. We therefore conclude that while nucleo-cytoplasmic transport is clearly impaired in p27T198A-expressing cells, it is not the cause of the changes in p27 stability and cell cycle progression in these cells.

Second, our observation that p27T198A is preferentially bound into cdk2-containing complexes could also result in an increased turnover by the well-documented SCFskp2 and T187-dependent degradation system ( Sheaff et al , 1997 ; Vlach et al , 1997 ; Montagnoli et al , 1999 ), especially in proliferating cells. Indeed, mutating T187 in the T198A mutant to create p27T187A/T198A led to an increase in the steady-state levels of the double mutant, but did not restore expression levels back to wild-type p27. Wild-type levels were however reached when the amount of cyclin E/cdk2 was artificially increased. Also, lowering the levels of the F-Box protein skp2, which is essential for T187-dependent turnover of p27, did not result in a stabilization of p27T198A, a result in agreement with the observation that p27T198A is unstable in quiescent cells where skp2 is not expressed. p27T198A is however still subject to skp2-dependent degradation at the G1/S transition, a function which is essential to allow progression of p27T198A cells into S phase. The kinetics of T187 phosphorylation on p27T198A corresponded directly to the release of p27T198A from cdk2 complexes, Rb phosphorylation and the onset of S phase. Given that T187 phosphorylation although delayed is still clearly detectable in p27T198A-expressing cell lines, we conclude that phosphorylation at T198 and at T187 are independent events, which regulate the turnover of p27 during the G1 and S phase of the cell cycle sequentially.
