---
pmid: '16868027'
title: Efficient ADAM22 surface expression is mediated by phosphorylation-dependent
  interaction with 14-3-3 protein family members.
authors:
- Gödde NJ
- D'Abaco GM
- Paradiso L
- Novak U
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.03065
---

# Efficient ADAM22 surface expression is mediated by phosphorylation-dependent interaction with 14-3-3 protein family members.
**Authors:** Gödde NJ, D'Abaco GM, Paradiso L, Novak U
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.03065](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.03065)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Aug 15;119(Pt 16):3296-305. doi: 10.1242/jcs.03065. Epub 2006
 Jul 25.

Efficient ADAM22 surface expression is mediated by phosphorylation-dependent 
interaction with 14-3-3 protein family members.

Gödde NJ(1), D'Abaco GM, Paradiso L, Novak U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Parkville 3050, Australia.

ADAM22 is one of three catalytically inactive ADAM family members highly 
expressed in the brain. ADAM22 has numerous splice variants, all with 
considerable cytoplasmic tails of up to 148 amino acids. ADAM22 can act to 
inhibit cell proliferation, however, it has been suggested that it also acts as 
an adhesion protein. We identified three 14-3-3 protein members by a yeast 
two-hybrid screen and show by co-immunoprecipitation that the cytoplasmic domain 
of ADAM22 can interact with all six 14-3-3 proteins expressed in the brain. In 
addition, we show that 14-3-3 proteins interact preferentially with the serine 
phosphorylated precursor form of ADAM22. ADAM22 has two 14-3-3 protein binding 
consensus motifs; the first binding site, spanning residues 831-834, was shown 
to be the most crucial for 14-3-3 binding to occur. The interaction between 
ADAM22 and 14-3-3 proteins is dependent on phosphorylation of ADAM22, but not of 
14-3-3 proteins. ADAM22 point mutants lacking functional 14-3-3 protein binding 
motifs could no longer accumulate efficiently at the cell surface. Deletion of 
both 14-3-3 binding sites and newly identified ER retention motifs restored 
localization of ADAM22 at the cell surface. These results reveal a role for 
14-3-3 proteins in targeting ADAM22 to the membrane by masking ER retention 
signals.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.03065
PMID: 16868027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
