---
pmid: '8280098'
title: Phospholipase C in Dictyostelium discoideum. Identification of stimulatory
  and inhibitory surface receptors and G-proteins.
authors:
- Bominaar AA
- Van Haastert PJ
journal: Biochem J
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1137809
doi: 10.1042/bj2970189
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Phospholipase C in Dictyostelium discoideum. Identification of stimulatory and inhibitory surface receptors and G-proteins.
**Authors:** Bominaar AA, Van Haastert PJ
**Journal:** Biochem J (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1042/bj2970189](https://doi.org/10.1042/bj2970189)
**PMC:** [PMC1137809](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1137809/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1994 Jan 1;297 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):189-93. doi: 10.1042/bj2970189.

Phospholipase C in Dictyostelium discoideum. Identification of stimulatory and 
inhibitory surface receptors and G-proteins.

Bominaar AA(1), Van Haastert PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

A combined biochemical and genetic approach was used to show that phospholipase 
C in the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium is under dual regulation by the 
chemoattractant cyclic AMP (cAMP). This dual regulation involves stimulatory and 
inhibitory surface receptors and G-proteins. In wild-type cells both cAMP and 
guanosine 5'-[gamma-thio]triphosphate (GTP[S]) stimulated phospholipase C. In 
contrast, mutant fgd A, lacking the G-protein alpha-subunit G alpha 2, showed no 
stimulation by either cAMP or GTP[S], indicating that G alpha 2 is the 
stimulatory G-protein. In mutant fgd C cAMP did not stimulate phospholipase C, 
but stimulation by GTP[S] was normal, suggesting that the defect in this mutant 
is upstream of the stimulatory G alpha 2. Inhibition of phospholipase C was 
achieved in wild-type cells by the partial antagonist 3'-deoxy-3'-aminoadenosine 
3',5'-phosphate (3'NH-cAMP). This inhibition was no longer observed in 
transformed cell lines lacking either the surface cAMP receptor cAR1 or the 
G-protein alpha-subunit G alpha 1; in these cells the agonist cAMP still 
activated phospholipase C. These results indicate that Dictyostelium 
phospholipase C is regulated via a stimulatory and an inhibitory pathway. The 
inhibitory pathway is composed of the surface receptor cAR1 and the G-protein 
G1. The stimulatory pathway consists of an unknown cAMP receptor (possibly the 
fgd C gene product) and the G-protein G2.

DOI: 10.1042/bj2970189
PMCID: PMC1137809
PMID: 8280098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A combined biochemical and genetic approach was used to show that phospholipase C in the cellular slime mould Dictyostelium is under dual regulation by the chemoattractant cyclic AMP (cAMP). This dual regulation involves stimulatory and inhibitory surface receptors and G-proteins. In wild-type cells both cAMP and guanosine 5'-[gamma-thio]triphosphate (GTP[S]) stimulated phospholipase C. In contrast, mutant fgd A, lacking the G-protein alpha-subunit G alpha 2, showed no stimulation by either cAMP or GTP[S], indicating that G alpha 2 is the stimulatory G-protein. In mutant fgd C cAMP did not stimulate phospholipase C, but stimulation by GTP[S] was normal, suggesting that the defect in this mutant is upstream of the stimulatory G alpha 2. Inhibition of phospholipase C was achieved in wild-type cells by the partial antagonist 3'-deoxy-3'-aminoadenosine 3',5'-phosphate (3'NH-cAMP). This inhibition was no longer observed in transformed cell lines lacking either the surface cAMP receptor cAR1 or the G-protein alpha-subunit G alpha 1; in these cells the agonist cAMP still activated phospholipase C. These results indicate that Dictyostelium phospholipase C is regulated via a stimulatory and an inhibitory pathway. The inhibitory pathway is composed of the surface receptor cAR1 and the G-protein G1. The stimulatory pathway consists of an unknown cAMP receptor (possibly the fgd C gene product) and the G-protein G2.
