---
pmid: '17043677'
title: 'Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 Interactome: evidence for the close connectivity
  of risk genes and a potential synaptic basis for schizophrenia.'
authors:
- Camargo LM
- Collura V
- Rain JC
- Mizuguchi K
- Hermjakob H
- Kerrien S
- Bonnert TP
- Whiting PJ
- Brandon NJ
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001880
---

# Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 Interactome: evidence for the close connectivity of risk genes and a potential synaptic basis for schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Camargo LM, Collura V, Rain JC, Mizuguchi K, Hermjakob H, Kerrien S, Bonnert TP, Whiting PJ, Brandon NJ
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.mp.4001880](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4001880)

## Abstract

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Jan;12(1):74-86. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001880. Epub 2006
Oct  17.

Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 Interactome: evidence for the close connectivity of 
risk genes and a potential synaptic basis for schizophrenia.

Camargo LM(1), Collura V, Rain JC, Mizuguchi K, Hermjakob H, Kerrien S, Bonnert 
TP, Whiting PJ, Brandon NJ.

Author information:
(1)Merck Research Labs, Merck & Co., Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
miguel_camargo@merck.com

Disrupted in Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a schizophrenia risk gene associated 
with cognitive deficits in both schizophrenics and the normal ageing population. 
In this study, we have generated a network of protein-protein interactions 
(PPIs) around DISC1. This has been achieved by utilising iterative yeast-two 
hybrid (Y2H) screens, combined with detailed pathway and functional analysis. 
This so-called 'DISC1 interactome' contains many novel PPIs and provides a 
molecular framework to explore the function of DISC1. The network implicates 
DISC1 in processes of cytoskeletal stability and organisation, intracellular 
transport and cell-cycle/division. In particular, DISC1 looks to have a PPI 
profile consistent with that of an essential synaptic protein, which fits well 
with the underlying molecular pathology observed at the synaptic level and the 
cognitive deficits seen behaviourally in schizophrenics. Utilising a similar 
approach with dysbindin (DTNBP1), a second schizophrenia risk gene, we show that 
dysbindin and DISC1 share common PPIs suggesting they may affect common 
biological processes and that the function of schizophrenia risk genes may 
converge.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001880
PMID: 17043677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
