---
pmid: '14699129'
title: Identification of two novel components of the human NDC80 kinetochore complex.
authors:
- Bharadwaj R
- Qi W
- Yu H
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310224200
---

# Identification of two novel components of the human NDC80 kinetochore complex.
**Authors:** Bharadwaj R, Qi W, Yu H
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M310224200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M310224200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):13076-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M310224200. Epub 
2003 Dec 29.

Identification of two novel components of the human NDC80 kinetochore complex.

Bharadwaj R(1), Qi W, Yu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Proper kinetochore function is essential for the accurate segregation of 
chromosomes during mitosis. Kinetochores provide the attachment sites for 
spindle microtubules and are required for the alignment of chromosomes at the 
metaphase plate (chromosome congression). Components of the conserved NDC80 
complex are required for chromosome congression, and their disruption results in 
mitotic arrest accompanied by multiple spindle aberrations. To better understand 
the function of the NDC80 complex, we have identified two novel subunits of the 
human NDC80 complex, termed human SPC25 (hSPC25) and human SPC24 (hSPC24), using 
an immunoaffinity approach. hSPC25 interacted with HEC1 (human homolog of yeast 
Ndc80) throughout the cell cycle and localized to kinetochores during mitosis. 
RNA interference-mediated depletion of hSPC25 in HeLa cells caused aberrant 
mitosis, followed by cell death, a phenotype similar to that of cells depleted 
of HEC1. Loss of hSPC25 also caused multiple spindle aberrations, including 
elongated, multipolar, and fractured spindles. In the absence of hSPC25, MAD1 
and HEC1 failed to localize to kinetochores during mitosis, whereas the 
kinetochore localization of BUB1 and BUBR1 was largely unaffected. 
Interestingly, the kinetochore localization of MAD1 in cells with a compromised 
NDC80 function was restored upon microtubule depolymerization. Thus, hSPC25 is 
an essential kinetochore component that plays a significant role in proper 
execution of mitotic events.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M310224200
PMID: 14699129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
