---
pmid: '7958916'
title: DNA damage triggers a prolonged p53-dependent G1 arrest and long-term induction
  of Cip1 in normal human fibroblasts.
authors:
- Di Leonardo A
- Linke SP
- Clarkin K
- Wahl GM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.8.21.2540
---

# DNA damage triggers a prolonged p53-dependent G1 arrest and long-term induction of Cip1 in normal human fibroblasts.
**Authors:** Di Leonardo A, Linke SP, Clarkin K, Wahl GM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.8.21.2540](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.21.2540)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 1;8(21):2540-51. doi: 10.1101/gad.8.21.2540.

DNA damage triggers a prolonged p53-dependent G1 arrest and long-term induction 
of Cip1 in normal human fibroblasts.

Di Leonardo A(1), Linke SP, Clarkin K, Wahl GM.

Author information:
(1)Gene Expression Lab, Salk Institute, La Jolla, California 92037.

The tumor suppressor p53 is a cell cycle checkpoint protein that contributes to 
the preservation of genetic stability by mediating either a G1 arrest or 
apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Recent reports suggest that p53 causes 
growth arrest through transcriptional activation of the cyclin-dependent kinase 
(Cdk)-inhibitor Cip1. Here, we characterize the p53-dependent G1 arrest in 
several normal human diploid fibroblast (NDF) strains and p53-deficient cell 
lines treated with 0.1-6 Gy gamma radiation. DNA damage and cell cycle 
progression analyses showed that NDF entered a prolonged arrest state resembling 
senescence, even at low doses of radiation. This contrasts with the view that 
p53 ensures genetic stability by inducing a transient arrest to enable repair of 
DNA damage, as reported for some myeloid leukemia lines. Gamma radiation 
administered in early to mid-, but not late, G1 induced the arrest, suggesting 
that the p53 checkpoint is only active in G1 until cells commit to enter S phase 
at the G1 restriction point. A log-linear plot of the fraction of irradiated G0 
cells able to enter S phase as a function of dose is consistent with single-hit 
kinetics. Cytogenetic analyses combined with radiation dosage data indicate that 
only one or a small number of unrepaired DNA breaks may be sufficient to cause 
arrest. The arrest also correlated with long-term elevations of p53 protein, 
Cip1 mRNA, and Cip1 protein. We propose that p53 helps maintain genetic 
stability in NDF by mediating a permanent cell cycle arrest through long-term 
induction of Cip1 when low amounts of unrepaired DNA damage are present in G1 
before the restriction point.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.8.21.2540
PMID: 7958916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
