---
pmid: '17971398'
title: Identification of palmitoylated mitochondrial proteins using a bio-orthogonal
  azido-palmitate analogue.
authors:
- Kostiuk MA
- Corvi MM
- Keller BO
- Plummer G
- Prescher JA
- Hangauer MJ
- Bertozzi CR
- Rajaiah G
- Falck JR
- Berthiaume LG
journal: FASEB J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2860959
doi: 10.1096/fj.07-9199com
---

# Identification of palmitoylated mitochondrial proteins using a bio-orthogonal azido-palmitate analogue.
**Authors:** Kostiuk MA, Corvi MM, Keller BO, Plummer G, Prescher JA, Hangauer MJ, Bertozzi CR, Rajaiah G, Falck JR, Berthiaume LG
**Journal:** FASEB J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.07-9199com](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.07-9199com)
**PMC:** [PMC2860959](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2860959/)

## Abstract

1. FASEB J. 2008 Mar;22(3):721-32. doi: 10.1096/fj.07-9199com. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Identification of palmitoylated mitochondrial proteins using a bio-orthogonal 
azido-palmitate analogue.

Kostiuk MA(1), Corvi MM, Keller BO, Plummer G, Prescher JA, Hangauer MJ, 
Bertozzi CR, Rajaiah G, Falck JR, Berthiaume LG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alberta, Faculty of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2H7, Canada.

Increased levels of circulating saturated free fatty acids, such as palmitate, 
have been implicated in the etiology of type II diabetes and cancer. In addition 
to being a constituent of glycerolipids and a source of energy, palmitate also 
covalently attaches to numerous cellular proteins via a process named 
palmitoylation. Recognized for its roles in membrane tethering, cellular 
signaling, and protein trafficking, palmitoylation is also emerging as a 
potential regulator of metabolism. Indeed, we showed previously that the 
acylation of two mitochondrial proteins at their active site cysteine residues 
result in their inhibition. Herein, we sought to identify other palmitoylated 
proteins in mitochondria using a nonradioactive bio-orthogonal azido-palmitate 
analog that can be selectively derivatized with various tagged 
triarylphosphines. Our results show that, like palmitate, incorporation of 
azido-palmitate occurred on mitochondrial proteins via thioester bonds at sites 
that could be competed out by palmitoyl-CoA. Using this method, we identified 21 
putative palmitoylated proteins in the rat liver mitochondrial matrix, a 
compartment not recognized for its content in palmitoylated proteins, and 
confirmed the palmitoylation of newly identified mitochondrial 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase. We postulate that covalent modification 
and perhaps inhibition of various mitochondrial enzymes by palmitoyl-CoA could 
lead to the metabolic impairments found in obesity-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.07-9199com
PMCID: PMC2860959
PMID: 17971398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
