---
pmid: '9188558'
title: Nuclear localization of the NS3 protein of hepatitis C virus and factors affecting
  the localization.
authors:
- Muramatsu S
- Ishido S
- Fujita T
- Itoh M
- Hotta H
journal: J Virol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC191726
doi: 10.1128/JVI.71.7.4954-4961.1997
---

# Nuclear localization of the NS3 protein of hepatitis C virus and factors affecting the localization.
**Authors:** Muramatsu S, Ishido S, Fujita T, Itoh M, Hotta H
**Journal:** J Virol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.71.7.4954-4961.1997](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.71.7.4954-4961.1997)
**PMC:** [PMC191726](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC191726/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 1997 Jul;71(7):4954-61. doi: 10.1128/JVI.71.7.4954-4961.1997.

Nuclear localization of the NS3 protein of hepatitis C virus and factors 
affecting the localization.

Muramatsu S(1), Ishido S, Fujita T, Itoh M, Hotta H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Hyogo, Japan.

Subcellular localization of the NS2 and NS3 proteins of hepatitis C virus was 
analyzed. In stable Ltk transfectants inducibly expressing an NS2-NS3 
polyprotein (amino acids [aa] 810 to 1463), processed full-size NS2 (aa 810 to 
1026) was detected exclusively in a cytoplasmic membrane fraction. On the other 
hand, the other processed product, carboxy-truncated NS3 (NS3 deltaC1463; aa 
1027 to 1463), was present in both cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. To further 
analyze subcellular localization of NS3, NS3 deltaC1459 (aa 1027 to 1459), 
full-size NS3 (NS3F; aa 1027 to 1657), and both amino- and carboxy-truncated NS3 
(NS3 deltaNdeltaC; aa 1201 to 1459) were expressed in HeLa cells by using a 
vaccinia virus-T7 hybrid expression system. NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F accumulated 
in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm, exhibiting a dot-like staining 
pattern. On the other hand, NS3 deltaNdeltaC was localized predominantly in the 
cytoplasm, suggesting the presence of a nuclear localization signal(s) in the 
amino-terminal sequence of NS3. NS4A, a viral cofactor for the NS3 protease, 
inhibited nuclear transport of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F, with the latter 
inhibited to a lesser extent than was the former. Interestingly, wild-type p53 
tumor suppressor augmented nuclear localization of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F, 
whereas mutant-type p53 inhibited nuclear localization and augmented cytoplasmic 
localization of NS3 deltaC1459. However, subcellular localization of NS3 
deltaNdeltaC was not affected by either type of p53. Wild-type p53-mediated 
nuclear accumulation of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F was inhibited partially, but not 
completely, by coexpressed NS4A, with NS3F again affected less prominently than 
was NS3 deltaC1459.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.71.7.4954-4961.1997
PMCID: PMC191726
PMID: 9188558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Subcellular localization of the NS2 and NS3 proteins of hepatitis C virus was analyzed. In stable Ltk transfectants inducibly expressing an NS2-NS3 polyprotein (amino acids [aa] 810 to 1463), processed full-size NS2 (aa 810 to 1026) was detected exclusively in a cytoplasmic membrane fraction. On the other hand, the other processed product, carboxy-truncated NS3 (NS3 deltaC1463; aa 1027 to 1463), was present in both cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions. To further analyze subcellular localization of NS3, NS3 deltaC1459 (aa 1027 to 1459), full-size NS3 (NS3F; aa 1027 to 1657), and both amino- and carboxy-truncated NS3 (NS3 deltaNdeltaC; aa 1201 to 1459) were expressed in HeLa cells by using a vaccinia virus-T7 hybrid expression system. NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F accumulated in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm, exhibiting a dot-like staining pattern. On the other hand, NS3 deltaNdeltaC was localized predominantly in the cytoplasm, suggesting the presence of a nuclear localization signal(s) in the amino-terminal sequence of NS3. NS4A, a viral cofactor for the NS3 protease, inhibited nuclear transport of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F, with the latter inhibited to a lesser extent than was the former. Interestingly, wild-type p53 tumor suppressor augmented nuclear localization of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F, whereas mutant-type p53 inhibited nuclear localization and augmented cytoplasmic localization of NS3 deltaC1459. However, subcellular localization of NS3 deltaNdeltaC was not affected by either type of p53. Wild-type p53-mediated nuclear accumulation of NS3 deltaC1459 and NS3F was inhibited partially, but not completely, by coexpressed NS4A, with NS3F again affected less prominently than was NS3 deltaC1459.
