---
pmid: '19726682'
title: Metalloprotease ADAM10 is required for Notch1 site 2 cleavage.
authors:
- van Tetering G
- van Diest P
- Verlaan I
- van der Wall E
- Kopan R
- Vooijs M
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2781502
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006775
---

# Metalloprotease ADAM10 is required for Notch1 site 2 cleavage.
**Authors:** van Tetering G, van Diest P, Verlaan I, van der Wall E, Kopan R, Vooijs M
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.006775](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.006775)
**PMC:** [PMC2781502](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2781502/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 6;284(45):31018-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006775. Epub 
2009 Sep 2.

Metalloprotease ADAM10 is required for Notch1 site 2 cleavage.

van Tetering G(1), van Diest P, Verlaan I, van der Wall E, Kopan R, Vooijs M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 
100, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11754.

Notch signaling is controlled by ligand binding, which unfolds a negative 
control region to induce proteolytic cleavage of the receptor. First, a 
membrane-proximal cleavage is executed by a metalloprotease, removing the 
extracellular domain. This allows gamma-secretase to execute a second cleavage 
within the Notch transmembrane domain, which releases the intracellular domain 
to enter the nucleus. Here we show that the ADAM10 metalloprotease Kuzbanian, 
but not ADAM17/tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme, plays an essential 
role in executing ligand-induced extracellular cleavage at site 2 (S2) in cells 
and localizes this step to the plasma membrane. Importantly, genetic or 
pharmacological inhibition of metalloproteases still allowed extracellular 
cleavage of Notch, indicating the presence of unknown proteases with the ability 
to cleave at S2. Gain of function mutations identified in human cancers and in 
model organisms that map to the negative control region alleviate the 
requirement for ligand binding for extracellular cleavage to occur. Because 
cancer-causing Notch1 mutations also depend on (rate-limiting) S2 proteolysis, 
the identity of these alternative proteases has important implications for 
understanding Notch activation in normal and cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.006775
PMCID: PMC2781502
PMID: 19726682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
