---
pmid: '17135237'
title: An insight into the mechanism of human cysteine dioxygenase. Key roles of the
  thioether-bonded tyrosine-cysteine cofactor.
authors:
- Ye S
- Wu X
- Wei L
- Tang D
- Sun P
- Bartlam M
- Rao Z
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609337200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# An insight into the mechanism of human cysteine dioxygenase. Key roles of the thioether-bonded tyrosine-cysteine cofactor.
**Authors:** Ye S, Wu X, Wei L, Tang D, Sun P, Bartlam M, Rao Z
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M609337200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M609337200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 2;282(5):3391-402. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M609337200. Epub
2006  Nov 29.

An insight into the mechanism of human cysteine dioxygenase. Key roles of the 
thioether-bonded tyrosine-cysteine cofactor.

Ye S(1), Wu X, Wei L, Tang D, Sun P, Bartlam M, Rao Z.

Author information:
(1)Tsinghua-IBP Joint Research Group for Structural Biology, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China.

Cysteine dioxygenase is a non-heme mononuclear iron metalloenzyme that catalyzes 
the oxidation of cysteine to cysteine sulfinic acid with addition of molecular 
dioxygen. This irreversible oxidative catabolism of cysteine initiates several 
important metabolic pathways related to diverse sulfurate compounds. Cysteine 
dioxygenase is therefore very important for maintaining the proper hepatic 
concentration of intracellular free cysteine. Mechanisms for mouse and rat 
cysteine dioxygenases have recently been reported based on their crystal 
structures in the absence of substrates, although there is still a lack of 
direct evidence. Here we report the first crystal structure of human cysteine 
dioxygenase in complex with its substrate L-cysteine to 2.7A, together with 
enzymatic activity and metal content assays of several single point mutants. Our 
results provide an insight into a new mechanism of cysteine thiol dioxygenation 
catalyzed by cysteine dioxygenase, which is tightly associated with a 
thioether-bonded tyrosine-cysteine cofactor involving Tyr-157 and Cys-93. This 
cross-linked protein-derived cofactor plays several key roles different from 
those in galactose oxidase. This report provides a new potential target for 
therapy of diseases related to human cysteine dioxygenase, including 
neurodegenerative and autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M609337200
PMID: 17135237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
