---
pmid: '17291498'
title: Sox-2 is expressed by glial and progenitor cells and Pax-6 is expressed by
  neuroblasts in the human subventricular zone.
authors:
- Baer K
- Eriksson PS
- Faull RL
- Rees MI
- Curtis MA
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.12.008
---

# Sox-2 is expressed by glial and progenitor cells and Pax-6 is expressed by neuroblasts in the human subventricular zone.
**Authors:** Baer K, Eriksson PS, Faull RL, Rees MI, Curtis MA
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.12.008)

## Abstract

1. Exp Neurol. 2007 Apr;204(2):828-31. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.12.008. Epub
 2006 Dec 20.

Sox-2 is expressed by glial and progenitor cells and Pax-6 is expressed by 
neuroblasts in the human subventricular zone.

Baer K(1), Eriksson PS, Faull RL, Rees MI, Curtis MA.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroscience, School of Medicine, University of Wales Swansea, 
Singleton Park, West Glamorgan SA2 8PP, UK. k.baer@swansea.ac.uk

Transcription factors (TFs) are responsible for the specification and fate 
determination of cells as they develop from progenitor cells into specific types 
of cells in the brain. Sox-2 and Pax-6 are TFs with key functional roles in the 
developing brain, although less is known about TFs in the rudimentary germinal 
zones in the adult human brain. In this study we have investigated the 
distribution and characterization of Sox-2 and Pax-6 in the human subventricular 
zone (SVZ). Sox-2 immunoreactivity showed a nuclear labeling pattern and 
colocalised on GFAP immunoreactive cells as well as on bromodeoxyuridine 
(BrdU)-positive cells, whereas Pax-6 immunoreactivity was detectable in the 
nucleus and the cytoplasm of SVZ cells and colocalised with PSA-NCAM-positive 
progenitor cells. Thus, our data surprisingly reveal that these TFs are 
differentially expressed in the adult human SVZ where Sox-2 and Pax-6 specify a 
glial and neuronal fate, respectively.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.12.008
PMID: 17291498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
