---
pmid: '30626284'
title: Structural insights into BCL2 pro-survival protein interactions with the key
  autophagy regulator BECN1 following phosphorylation by STK4/MST1.
authors:
- Lee EF
- Smith NA
- Soares da Costa TP
- Meftahi N
- Yao S
- Harris TJ
- Tran S
- Pettikiriarachchi A
- Perugini MA
- Keizer DW
- Evangelista M
- Smith BJ
- Fairlie WD
journal: Autophagy
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6526822
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1564557
---

# Structural insights into BCL2 pro-survival protein interactions with the key autophagy regulator BECN1 following phosphorylation by STK4/MST1.
**Authors:** Lee EF, Smith NA, Soares da Costa TP, Meftahi N, Yao S, Harris TJ, Tran S, Pettikiriarachchi A, Perugini MA, Keizer DW, Evangelista M, Smith BJ, Fairlie WD
**Journal:** Autophagy (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2018.1564557](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2018.1564557)
**PMC:** [PMC6526822](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6526822/)

## Abstract

1. Autophagy. 2019 May;15(5):785-795. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1564557. Epub
2019  Jan 9.

Structural insights into BCL2 pro-survival protein interactions with the key 
autophagy regulator BECN1 following phosphorylation by STK4/MST1.

Lee EF(1)(2)(3), Smith NA(1), Soares da Costa TP(1), Meftahi N(1), Yao S(4), 
Harris TJ(2), Tran S(2)(3), Pettikiriarachchi A(5), Perugini MA(1), Keizer 
DW(4), Evangelista M(2), Smith BJ(1), Fairlie WD(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)a La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science , La Trobe University , Melbourne 
, Australia.
(2)b Cell Death and Survival Group , Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research 
Institute , Heidelberg , Australia.
(3)c School of Cancer Medicine , La Trobe University , Melbourne , Australia.
(4)d Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute , The University of 
Melbourne , Parkville , Australia.
(5)e Structural Biology Division , The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research , Parkville , Australia.

BECN1/Beclin 1 is a critical protein in the initiation of autophagosome 
formation. Recent studies have shown that phosphorylation of BECN1 by STK4/MST1 
at threonine 108 (T108) within its BH3 domain blocks macroautophagy/autophagy by 
increasing BECN1 affinity for its negative regulators, the anti-apoptotic 
proteins BCL2/Bcl-2 and BCL2L1/Bcl-xL. It was proposed that this increased 
binding is due to formation of an electrostatic interaction with a conserved 
histidine residue on the anti-apoptotic molecules. Here, we performed 
biophysical studies which demonstrated that a peptide corresponding to the BECN1 
BH3 domain in which T108 is phosphorylated (p-T108) does show increased affinity 
for anti-apoptotic proteins that is significant, though only minor (<2-fold). We 
also determined X-ray crystal structures of BCL2 and BCL2L1 with T108-modified 
BECN1 BH3 peptides, but only showed evidence of an interaction between the BH3 
peptide and the conserved histidine residue when the histidine flexibility was 
restrained due to crystal contacts. These data, together with molecular dynamics 
studies, indicate that the histidine is highly flexible, even when complexed 
with BECN1 BH3. Binding studies also showed that detergent can increase the 
affinity of the interaction. Although this increase was similar for both the 
phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides, it suggests factors such as 
membranes could impact on the interaction between BECN1 and BCL2 proteins, and 
therefore, on the regulation of autophagy. Hence, we propose that 
phosphorylation of BECN1 by STK4/MST1 can increase the affinity of the 
interaction between BECN1 and anti-apoptotic proteins and this interaction can 
be stabilized by local environmental factors. Abbreviations: asu: asymmetric 
unit; BH3: BCL2/Bcl-2 homology 3; DAPK: death associated protein kinase; MD: 
molecular dynamics; MST: microscale thermophoresis; NMR: nuclear magnetic 
resonance; PDB: protein data bank; p-T: phosphothreonine; SPR: surface plasmon 
resonance; STK4/MST1: serine/threonine kinase 4.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2018.1564557
PMCID: PMC6526822
PMID: 30626284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
