---
pmid: '12730686'
title: Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.
authors:
- Howard BR
- Vajdos FF
- Li S
- Sundquist WI
- Hill CP
journal: Nat Struct Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsb927
---

# Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.
**Authors:** Howard BR, Vajdos FF, Li S, Sundquist WI, Hill CP
**Journal:** Nat Struct Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsb927](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsb927)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Biol. 2003 Jun;10(6):475-81. doi: 10.1038/nsb927.

Structural insights into the catalytic mechanism of cyclophilin A.

Howard BR(1), Vajdos FF, Li S, Sundquist WI, Hill CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, Utah 84132, USA.

Cyclophilins constitute a ubiquitous protein family whose functions include 
protein folding, transport and signaling. They possess both sequence-specific 
binding and proline cis-trans isomerase activities, as exemplified by the 
interaction between cyclophilin A (CypA) and the HIV-1 CA protein. Here, we 
report crystal structures of CypA in complex with HIV-1 CA protein variants that 
bind preferentially with the substrate proline residue in either the cis or the 
trans conformation. Cis- and trans-Pro substrates are accommodated within the 
enzyme active site by rearrangement of their N-terminal residues and with 
minimal distortions in the path of the main chain. CypA Arg55 guanidinium group 
probably facilitates catalysis by anchoring the substrate proline oxygen and 
stabilizing sp3 hybridization of the proline nitrogen in the transition state.

DOI: 10.1038/nsb927
PMID: 12730686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
