---
pmid: '19088061'
title: IL-23 modulates CD56+/CD3- NK cell and CD56+/CD3+ NK-like T cell function differentially
  from IL-12.
authors:
- van de Wetering D
- de Paus RA
- van Dissel JT
- van de Vosse E
journal: Int Immunol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn132
---

# IL-23 modulates CD56+/CD3- NK cell and CD56+/CD3+ NK-like T cell function differentially from IL-12.
**Authors:** van de Wetering D, de Paus RA, van Dissel JT, van de Vosse E
**Journal:** Int Immunol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/intimm/dxn132](https://doi.org/10.1093/intimm/dxn132)

## Abstract

1. Int Immunol. 2009 Feb;21(2):145-53. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxn132. Epub 2008 Dec 
15.

IL-23 modulates CD56+/CD3- NK cell and CD56+/CD3+ NK-like T cell function 
differentially from IL-12.

van de Wetering D(1), de Paus RA, van Dissel JT, van de Vosse E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

NK and NK-like T cells play an essential role in linking innate and adaptive 
immunity through their ability to secrete IFN-gamma. The exact trigger 
initiating production of IFN-gamma is uncertain. Antigen-presenting cell 
(APC)-derived IL-12 is thought to be the classical IFN-gamma-inducing cytokine 
but requires an additional stimulus such as IFN-gamma itself. IL-23 and IL-18 
are among the first cytokines secreted by APC in response to binding of 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns such as LPS. Thus, early APC-derived 
IL-23 may be an initial trigger of IFN-gamma production in NK and NK-like T 
cells. Herein, we characterized the effect of IL-23 on IFN-gamma secretion by NK 
and NK-like T cells. Our findings show that IL-23 and IL-18 synergistically 
elicit IFN-gamma production in NK-like T cells but not in NK cells. In contrast, 
IL-12 together with IL-18-induced secretion of IFN-gamma in both populations. 
The observed synergy between IL-23 and IL-18 in NK-like T cells coincided with 
IL-23-mediated up-regulation of IL-18Ralpha. Furthermore, IL-23 up-regulated 
CD56 expression in NK-like T cells and, together with IL-18, induced 
proliferation of NK and NK-like T cells. We postulate a role for APC-derived 
IL-23 in the activation of NK and NK-like T cells early in infection and in 
shaping T(h)1 differentiation, via induction of IFN-gamma, which provides the 
additional stimulus needed for APC to subsequently produce IL-12.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxn132
PMID: 19088061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
