---
pmid: '24209621'
title: A four-step cycle driven by PI(4)P hydrolysis directs sterol/PI(4)P exchange
  by the ER-Golgi tether OSBP.
authors:
- Mesmin B
- Bigay J
- Moser von Filseck J
- Lacas-Gervais S
- Drin G
- Antonny B
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.056
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A four-step cycle driven by PI(4)P hydrolysis directs sterol/PI(4)P exchange by the ER-Golgi tether OSBP.
**Authors:** Mesmin B, Bigay J, Moser von Filseck J, Lacas-Gervais S, Drin G, Antonny B
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.056](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.056)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2013 Nov 7;155(4):830-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.056.

A four-step cycle driven by PI(4)P hydrolysis directs sterol/PI(4)P exchange by 
the ER-Golgi tether OSBP.

Mesmin B(1), Bigay J, Moser von Filseck J, Lacas-Gervais S, Drin G, Antonny B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Nice Sophia 
Antipolis and CNRS, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Nov 25;27(4):369-70. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.11.009.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;15(2):79. doi: 10.1038/nrm3740.

Several proteins at endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi membrane contact sites 
contain a PH domain that interacts with the Golgi phosphoinositide PI(4)P, a 
FFAT motif that interacts with the ER protein VAP-A, and a lipid transfer 
domain. This architecture suggests the ability to both tether organelles and 
transport lipids between them. We show that in oxysterol binding protein (OSBP) 
these two activities are coupled by a four-step cycle. Membrane tethering by the 
PH domain and the FFAT motif enables sterol transfer by the lipid transfer 
domain (ORD), followed by back transfer of PI(4)P by the ORD. Finally, PI(4)P is 
hydrolyzed in cis by the ER protein Sac1. The energy provided by PI(4)P 
hydrolysis drives sterol transfer and allows negative feedback when PI(4)P 
becomes limiting. Other lipid transfer proteins are tethered by the same 
mechanism. Thus, OSBP-mediated back transfer of PI(4)P might coordinate the 
transfer of other lipid species at the ER-Golgi interface.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.056
PMID: 24209621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
