---
pmid: '16408020'
title: Thioredoxin catalyzes the S-nitrosation of the caspase-3 active site cysteine.
authors:
- Mitchell DA
- Marletta MA
journal: Nat Chem Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nchembio720
---

# Thioredoxin catalyzes the S-nitrosation of the caspase-3 active site cysteine.
**Authors:** Mitchell DA, Marletta MA
**Journal:** Nat Chem Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nchembio720](https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio720)

## Abstract

1. Nat Chem Biol. 2005 Aug;1(3):154-8. doi: 10.1038/nchembio720. Epub 2005 Jul
10.

Thioredoxin catalyzes the S-nitrosation of the caspase-3 active site cysteine.

Mitchell DA(1), Marletta MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, 211 Lewis Hall, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California 94720-1460, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2005 Aug;1(3):126-7. doi: 10.1038/nchembio0805-126.

Nitric oxide (NO) signaling through the formation of cGMP is well established; 
however, there seems to be an increasing role for cGMP-independent NO signaling. 
Although key molecular details remain unanswered, S-nitrosation represents an 
example of cGMP-independent NO signaling. This modification has garnered recent 
attention as it has been shown to modulate the function of several important 
biochemical pathways. Although an analogy to O-phosphorylation can be drawn, 
little is known about protein nitrosothiol regulation in vivo. In solution, NO 
readily reacts with oxygen to yield a nitrosating agent, but this process alone 
provides no specificity for nitrosation. This lack of specificity is exemplified 
by the in vitro poly-S-nitrosation of caspase-3 (Casp-3, ref. 6) and the 
ryanodine receptor. Previous in vivo work with Casp-3 suggests that a 
protein-assisted process may be responsible for selective S-nitrosation of the 
catalytic cysteine (Cys163). We demonstrated that a single cysteine in 
thioredoxin (Trx) is capable of a targeted, reversible transnitrosation reaction 
with Cys163 of Casp-3. A greater understanding of how S-nitrosation is mediated 
has broad implications for cGMP-independent signaling. The example described 
here also suggests a new role for Trx in the regulation of apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio720
PMID: 16408020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
