---
pmid: '19942931'
title: 'Mtd/Bok takes a swing: proapoptotic Mtd/Bok regulates trophoblast cell proliferation
  during human placental development and in preeclampsia.'
authors:
- Ray JE
- Garcia J
- Jurisicova A
- Caniggia I
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.167
---

# Mtd/Bok takes a swing: proapoptotic Mtd/Bok regulates trophoblast cell proliferation during human placental development and in preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Ray JE, Garcia J, Jurisicova A, Caniggia I
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cdd.2009.167](https://doi.org/10.1038/cdd.2009.167)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2010 May;17(5):846-59. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.167. Epub 2009
 Nov 27.

Mtd/Bok takes a swing: proapoptotic Mtd/Bok regulates trophoblast cell 
proliferation during human placental development and in preeclampsia.

Ray JE(1), Garcia J, Jurisicova A, Caniggia I.

Author information:
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Canada.

We have previously reported that matador/Bcl-2 ovarian killer (Mtd/Bok), a 
proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family, regulates human trophoblast apoptosis 
and that its levels are elevated in severe preeclamptic pregnancy. Herein, we 
show that Mtd is also involved in the regulation of proliferation in normal and 
pathological placentae. Mtd was found in proliferating trophoblast cells during 
early placental development and in preeclampsia (PE). The main isoform of Mtd 
associated with trophoblast proliferation was Mtd-L, the full-length isoform, 
which preferentially localized to the nuclear compartment in proliferating 
cells, whereas during apoptosis it switched localization to the cytoplasm where 
it associated with mitochondria. Mtd expression in proliferating cells 
colocalized with cyclin E1, a G(1)/S phase cell cycle regulator. MtdL-specific 
knockdown in the early first trimester villous explants and in HEK293 revealed a 
direct effect of Mtd-L on cyclin E1 expression and cell cycle progression. We 
conclude that Mtd-L functions to regulate trophoblast cell proliferation during 
early placentation and that the elevated levels of Mtd found in PE may 
contribute to increased trophoblast proliferation accompanying this devastating 
disorder of pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1038/cdd.2009.167
PMID: 19942931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
