---
pmid: '17627937'
title: Liver-specific activities of FGF19 require Klotho beta.
authors:
- Lin BC
- Wang M
- Blackmore C
- Desnoyers LR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704244200
---

# Liver-specific activities of FGF19 require Klotho beta.
**Authors:** Lin BC, Wang M, Blackmore C, Desnoyers LR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M704244200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M704244200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):27277-27284. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M704244200.
Epub  2007 Jul 11.

Liver-specific activities of FGF19 require Klotho beta.

Lin BC(1), Wang M(1), Blackmore C(1), Desnoyers LR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080.
(2)Department of Molecular Oncology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080. Electronic address: desnoyer@gene.com.

Hepatocyte function is regulated by members of the fibroblast growth factor 
(FGF) family of proteins, but little is known about the specific molecular 
mechanisms of this endocrine pathway. FGF19 regulates bile acid homeostasis and 
gall bladder filling; FGF19 binds only to FGF receptor 4 (FGFR4), but its 
liver-specific activity cannot be explained solely by the distribution of this 
receptor. Although it has been suggested that Klotho beta (KLB) may have a role 
in mediating FGF19 activity, we have provided for the first time definitive 
evidence that KLB is required for FGF19 binding to FGFR4, intracellular 
signaling, and downstream modulation of gene expression. We have shown that 
FGFR4 is widely distributed in mouse, whereas KLB distribution is more 
restricted. Liver was the only organ in which both genes were abundantly 
expressed. We show that in mice, FGF19 injection triggers liver-specific 
induction of c-Fos and repression of CYP7A1. The tissue-specific activity of 
FGF19 supports the unique intersection of KLB and FGFR4 distribution in liver. 
These studies define KLB as a novel FGFR4 coreceptor required for FGF19 liver 
specific functions.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M704244200
PMID: 17627937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
