---
pmid: '18316030'
title: 'Insulin, cGMP, and TGF-beta signals regulate food intake and quiescence in
  C. elegans: a model for satiety.'
authors:
- You YJ
- Kim J
- Raizen DM
- Avery L
journal: Cell Metab
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3786678
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.005
---

# Insulin, cGMP, and TGF-beta signals regulate food intake and quiescence in C. elegans: a model for satiety.
**Authors:** You YJ, Kim J, Raizen DM, Avery L
**Journal:** Cell Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.005)
**PMC:** [PMC3786678](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3786678/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Metab. 2008 Mar;7(3):249-57. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.005.

Insulin, cGMP, and TGF-beta signals regulate food intake and quiescence in C. 
elegans: a model for satiety.

You YJ(1), Kim J, Raizen DM, Avery L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. young@eatworms.swmed.edu

Despite the prevalence of obesity and its related diseases, the signaling 
pathways for appetite control and satiety are not clearly understood. Here we 
report C. elegans quiescence behavior, a cessation of food intake and movement 
that is possibly a result of satiety. C. elegans quiescence shares several 
characteristics of satiety in mammals. It is induced by high-quality food, it 
requires nutritional signals from the intestine, and it depends on prior feeding 
history: fasting enhances quiescence after refeeding. During refeeding after 
fasting, quiescence is evoked, causing gradual inhibition of food intake and 
movement, mimicking the behavioral sequence of satiety in mammals. Based on 
these similarities, we propose that quiescence results from satiety. This 
hypothesized satiety-induced quiescence is regulated by peptide signals such as 
insulin and TGF-beta. The EGL-4 cGMP-dependent protein kinase functions 
downstream of insulin and TGF-beta in sensory neurons including ASI to control 
quiescence in response to food intake.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.01.005
PMCID: PMC3786678
PMID: 18316030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
