---
pmid: '8497322'
title: Fission yeast chk1 protein kinase links the rad checkpoint pathway to cdc2.
authors:
- Walworth N
- Davey S
- Beach D
journal: Nature
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/363368a0
---

# Fission yeast chk1 protein kinase links the rad checkpoint pathway to cdc2.
**Authors:** Walworth N, Davey S, Beach D
**Journal:** Nature (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1038/363368a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/363368a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1993 May 27;363(6427):368-71. doi: 10.1038/363368a0.

Fission yeast chk1 protein kinase links the rad checkpoint pathway to cdc2.

Walworth N(1), Davey S, Beach D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 
11724.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 May 27;363(6427):302. doi: 10.1038/363302a0.

The dependence of cell-cycle progression on the integrity of the genome has been 
described as checkpoint control. A number of mutants of the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, selected for their sensitivity to DNA damage caused 
by radiation (rad mutants) or to the DNA synthesis inhibitor hydroxyurea (hus 
mutants) have been classified as checkpoint mutants because they fail to arrest 
the cell cycle in response to DNA damage or incompletely replicated DNA. 
Coupling of the checkpoint pathways that monitor DNA repair and replication to 
control of the cell cycle is essential. In a search for components that interact 
with the cell-cycle regulatory kinase p34cdc2, we have identified a novel 
fission yeast protein kinase homologue which is involved in cell-cycle arrest 
when DNA damage has occurred or when unligated DNA is present. We have called 
the gene encoding this protein chk1 for checkpoint kinase. Multiple copies of 
chk1 partially rescue the ultraviolet sensitivity of rad1-1, a mutant deficient 
in checkpoint control. Identification of a gene involved in checkpoint control 
as a rescue of a cdc2 mutant links the rad1-dependent DNA-damage-sensing pathway 
and p34cdc2 activity.

DOI: 10.1038/363368a0
PMID: 8497322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
