---
pmid: '16950791'
title: Role of Hcn1 and its phosphorylation in fission yeast anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
  function.
authors:
- Yoon HJ
- Feoktistova A
- Chen JS
- Jennings JL
- Link AJ
- Gould KL
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M603867200
---

# Role of Hcn1 and its phosphorylation in fission yeast anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome function.
**Authors:** Yoon HJ, Feoktistova A, Chen JS, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Gould KL
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M603867200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M603867200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 27;281(43):32284-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M603867200. Epub 
2006 Sep 1.

Role of Hcn1 and its phosphorylation in fission yeast anaphase-promoting 
complex/cyclosome function.

Yoon HJ(1), Feoktistova A, Chen JS, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Gould KL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Department of Cell and Developmental 
Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a conserved multisubunit 
ubiquitin ligase required for the degradation of key cell cycle regulators. The 
APC/C becomes active at the metaphase/anaphase transition and remains active 
during G(1) phase. One mechanism linked to activation of the APC/C is 
phosphorylation. Although many sites of mitotic phosphorylation have been 
identified in core components of the APC/C, the consequence of any individual 
phosphorylation event has not been elucidated in vivo. In this study, we show 
that Hcn1 is an essential core component of the fission yeast APC/C and is 
critical for maintaining complex integrity. Moreover, Hcn1 is a phosphoprotein 
in vivo. Phosphorylation of Hcn1 occurs at a single Cdk1 site in vitro and in 
vivo. Mutation of this site to alanine, but not aspartic acid, compromises APC/C 
function and leads to a specific defect in the completion of cell division.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M603867200
PMID: 16950791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
