---
pmid: '15155881'
title: The Arabidopsis F-box protein SLEEPY1 targets gibberellin signaling repressors
  for gibberellin-induced degradation.
authors:
- Dill A
- Thomas SG
- Hu J
- Steber CM
- Sun TP
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC490034
doi: 10.1105/tpc.020958
---

# The Arabidopsis F-box protein SLEEPY1 targets gibberellin signaling repressors for gibberellin-induced degradation.
**Authors:** Dill A, Thomas SG, Hu J, Steber CM, Sun TP
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.020958](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.020958)
**PMC:** [PMC490034](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC490034/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2004 Jun;16(6):1392-405. doi: 10.1105/tpc.020958. Epub 2004 May
21.

The Arabidopsis F-box protein SLEEPY1 targets gibberellin signaling repressors 
for gibberellin-induced degradation.

Dill A(1), Thomas SG, Hu J, Steber CM, Sun TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708-1000, 
USA.

The nuclear DELLA proteins are highly conserved repressors of hormone 
gibberellin (GA) signaling in plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana, GA derepresses 
its signaling pathway by inducing proteolysis of the DELLA protein REPRESSOR OF 
ga1-3 (RGA). SLEEPY1 (SLY1) encodes an F-box-containing protein, and the 
loss-of-function sly1 mutant has a GA-insensitive dwarf phenotype and 
accumulates a high level of RGA. These findings suggested that SLY1 recruits RGA 
to the SCFSLY1 E3 ligase complex for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation 
by the 26S proteasome. In this report, we provide new insight into the molecular 
mechanism of how SLY1 interacts with the DELLA proteins for controlling GA 
response. By yeast two-hybrid and in vitro pull-down assays, we demonstrated 
that SLY1 interacts directly with RGA and GA INSENSITIVE (GAI, a closely related 
DELLA protein) via their C-terminal GRAS domain. The rga and gai null mutations 
additively suppressed the recessive sly1 mutant phenotype, further supporting 
the model that SCFSLY1 targets both RGA and GAI for degradation. The N-terminal 
DELLA domain of RGA previously was shown to be essential for GA-induced 
degradation. However, we found that this DELLA domain is not required for 
protein-protein interaction with SLY1 in yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), 
suggesting that its role is in a GA-triggered conformational change of the DELLA 
proteins. We also identified a novel gain-of-function sly1-d mutation that 
increased GA signaling by reducing the levels of the DELLA protein in plants. 
This effect of sly1-d appears to be caused by an enhanced interaction between 
sly1-d and the DELLA proteins.

Copyright 2004 American Society of Plant Biologists

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.020958
PMCID: PMC490034
PMID: 15155881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The nuclear DELLA proteins are highly conserved repressors of hormone gibberellin (GA) signaling in plants. In Arabidopsis thaliana , GA derepresses its signaling pathway by inducing proteolysis of the DELLA protein REPRESSOR OF ga1-3 (RGA). SLEEPY1 ( SLY1 ) encodes an F-box–containing protein, and the loss-of-function sly1 mutant has a GA-insensitive dwarf phenotype and accumulates a high level of RGA. These findings suggested that SLY1 recruits RGA to the SCF SLY1 E3 ligase complex for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by the 26S proteasome. In this report, we provide new insight into the molecular mechanism of how SLY1 interacts with the DELLA proteins for controlling GA response. By yeast two-hybrid and in vitro pull-down assays, we demonstrated that SLY1 interacts directly with RGA and GA INSENSITIVE (GAI, a closely related DELLA protein) via their C-terminal GRAS domain. The rga and gai null mutations additively suppressed the recessive sly1 mutant phenotype, further supporting the model that SCF SLY1 targets both RGA and GAI for degradation. The N-terminal DELLA domain of RGA previously was shown to be essential for GA-induced degradation. However, we found that this DELLA domain is not required for protein–protein interaction with SLY1 in yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ), suggesting that its role is in a GA-triggered conformational change of the DELLA proteins. We also identified a novel gain-of-function sly1-d mutation that increased GA signaling by reducing the levels of the DELLA protein in plants. This effect of sly1-d appears to be caused by an enhanced interaction between sly1-d and the DELLA proteins.

INTRODUCTION

The hormone gibberellin (GA) tightly regulates many growth and developmental processes throughout the life cycle of a plant. The important roles of GA are illustrated by the dramatic defects of GA biosynthetic and signaling mutants in germination, leaf expansion, stem elongation, apical dominance, floral development, and fertility ( Davies, 1995 ). The DELLA proteins are highly conserved negative regulators of GA signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana and several crop plants, including barley ( Hordeum vulgare ), grape ( Vitis vinifera ), maize ( Zea mays ), rice ( Oryza sativa ), and wheat ( Triticum aestivum ) ( Boss and Thomas, 2002 ; Olszewski et al., 2002 ). These DELLA proteins were named after a conserved amino acid motif near their N termini ( Olszewski et al., 2002 ; Peng and Harberd, 2002 ). The DELLA proteins form a subfamily within a family of putative transcriptional regulators known as GRAS (for GA INSENSITIVE [GAI], REPRESSOR OF ga1-3 [RGA], and SCR) ( Pysh et al., 1999 ). In addition to GA signaling, these plant-specific GRAS family proteins also regulate other developmental processes, such as radial patterning ( Di Laurenzio et al., 1996 ; Helariutta et al., 2000 ), control of axillary and shoot meristems ( Stuurman et al., 2002 ; Greb et al., 2003 ; Li et al., 2003 ), and light signaling ( Bolle et al., 2000 ). In Arabidopsis, there are >30 GRAS proteins, all of which demonstrate high sequence similarity in their C-terminal GRAS domain ( Arabidopsis Genome Initiative, 2000 ). The N termini of GRAS proteins are in general divergent and probably specify their diverse roles in different cellular pathways. The DELLA proteins, however, contain two highly conserved motifs (named DELLA and VHYNP) within their N-terminal DELLA domain ( Silverstone et al., 1998 ; Peng et al., 1999 ; Itoh et al., 2002 ). Sequence analysis of the DELLA proteins suggested that they are likely transcriptional regulators. They contain polymeric Ser/Thr motifs (possible target sites of phosphorylation or glycosylation), Leu heptad repeats that may mediate protein–protein interactions, nuclear localization signals, and a putative Src homology 2 phosphotyrosine binding domain. In support of their function in transcriptional regulation, several DELLA proteins direct the green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion into plant cell nuclei (reviewed in Olszewski et al., 2002 ). Furthermore, transient expression of a fusion protein consisting of both the Gal4 DNA binding domain and the rice DELLA protein (Slender Rice1 [SLR1]) activates transcription of the reporter gene that contains a Gal4 binding site in spinach ( Spinacia oleracea ) leaf cells ( Ogawa et al., 2000 ).

In Arabidopsis, five genes encoding the DELLA proteins ( GAI , RGA , RGL1 , RGL2 , and RGL3 ) are present. With the exception of RGL3 , all of them have been shown to function as negative regulators of GA signaling ( Olszewski et al., 2002 ; Peng and Harberd, 2002 ). In the GA-deficient ga1-3 mutant background, a combination of rga and gai null alleles results in a complete suppression of a subset of defects of ga1-3 to wild-type or GA-overdose phenotype ( Dill and Sun, 2001 ; King et al., 2001 ). These include leaf expansion, flowering time, apical dominance, and stem elongation. Therefore, RGA and GAI interact synergistically to repress these GA-induced growth processes, but they do not play a major role in regulating germination and floral development. By contrast, RGL1 and RGL2 have been implicated to control seed germination in studies using gene silencing or Ds insertion mutant lines ( Lee et al., 2002 ; Wen and Chang, 2002 ).

The uniqueness of the N-terminal DELLA domain hints that this region may specify the role of the DELLA proteins in GA response. The initial evidence came from the finding that the gain-of-function gai-1 mutant allele encodes a gai protein lacking 17 amino acids of the DELLA motif ( Peng et al., 1997 ). This mutant has a GA-insensitive dwarf phenotype ( Koornneef et al., 1985 ). Peng et al. (1997) hypothesized that this mutation in the N-terminal regulatory domain produces a constitutively active repressor that is resistant to inactivation by the GA signal. Subsequently, it was shown that many GA-insensitive semidominant dwarf mutants in other plant species also contain mutations in DELLA protein genes ( Peng et al., 1999 ; Boss and Thomas, 2002 ; Chandler et al., 2002 ). All of these mutations result in amino acid substitutions, deletions, or truncations in the DELLA domain of the encoded protein. In fact, this type of mutation in an Rht gene (encoding a DELLA protein) is the cause for the semidwarf phenotype of the wheat cultivars that were essential in improving grain yield during the Green Revolution in the 1960s and 1970s ( Peng et al., 1999 ).

A previous genetic screen designed to identify suppressors of gai-1 resulted in the isolation of recessive spindly ( spy ) mutants and the dominant gar2 mutant ( Wilson and Somerville, 1995 ). SPY encodes an O -linked N -acetylglucosamine transferase, which negatively regulates GA signaling probably by modifying its target proteins in the pathway ( Thornton et al., 1999 ). The GAR2 gene had not been cloned. The dominant nature of gar2 could be because of a loss-of-function mutation that causes haplo-insufficiency or a gain-of-function mutation that either increases GAR2 function, generates a new function, or interferes with GAR2 function.

GA appears to derepress its signaling pathway by inducing rapid degradation of some of the DELLA proteins, including RGA in Arabidopsis ( Silverstone et al., 2001 ), SLR1 in rice ( Itoh et al., 2002 ), and SLN1 in barley ( Gubler et al., 2002 ). The levels of SLN1 and RGA are significantly reduced after 5 to 10 min of GA treatment, indicating that this phenomenon is an early event in the GA-signaling cascade ( Gubler et al., 2002 ; S.G. Thomas and T.-p. Sun, unpublished results). In the DELLA gain-of-function mutants (e.g., Arabidopsis rga- Δ 17 , barley sln-d , and rice slr1 ), the mutant protein is resistant to GA-dependent degradation ( Dill et al., 2001 ; Gubler et al., 2002 ; Itoh et al., 2002 ). These results suggest that the N-terminal DELLA and VHYNP motifs are essential in the GA-induced degradation of these DELLA proteins. However, GFP protein fusions with RGL1 or GAI were reported to remain stable after GA treatment ( Fleck and Harberd, 2002 ; Wen and Chang, 2002 ), suggesting that GA may regulate other DELLA proteins via different mechanisms.

Many eukaryotic proteins destined for degradation by the 26S proteasome are polyubiquinated by an E3 ubiquitin ligase enzyme complex ( Hershko and Ciechanover, 1998 ; Pickart, 2001 ). These ubiquitin-proteasome pathways play crucial regulatory roles in a wide variety of cellular processes in yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ), animals, and plants ( Conaway et al., 2002 ; Hellmann and Estelle, 2002 ; Hare et al., 2003 ; Vierstra, 2003 ). One group of E3 ubiquitin ligases that are important in plants is the SCF complex (named after the three core components Skp1, cdc53/cullin, and F-box proteins) ( Gagne et al., 2002 ). The F-box protein binds to Skp1 through a degenerate F-box motif, which consists of ∼40 amino acids in the N-terminal region ( Schulman et al., 2000 ). In addition, the F-box protein recruits the targets via its C-terminal protein–protein interaction domain and provides the substrate specificity to the SCF E3 ( Kipreos and Pagano, 2000 ). The Arabidopsis SLY1 and rice GID2 genes encode highly homologous F-box proteins, which are positive regulators of GA signaling because loss-of-function sly1 and gid2 mutants are GA-insensitive dwarfs ( Steber et al., 1998 ; Sasaki et al., 2003 ). The recessive sly1-10 and gid2 mutants accumulate markedly elevated levels of RGA and SLR1 proteins, respectively ( McGinnis et al., 2003 ; Sasaki et al., 2003 ). Furthermore, the rga and slr1 loss-of-function mutations suppress the sly1-10 and gid2 mutant phenotypes, respectively. These results suggest that SLY1 and GID2 may be components of SCF E3 ligase complexes that ubiquitinate RGA and SLR1, respectively, and target their destruction via the 26S proteasome. In support of this model, GID2 interacts with a SCF Skp1 component OsSkp2 in a yeast two-hybrid assay ( Sasaki et al., 2003 ). In addition, in the presence of 26S proteasome inhibitor, wild-type plants accumulated ubiquitinated forms of SLR1 protein in response to GA treatment, whereas gid2 plants did not. Furthermore, another DELLA protein, SLN1 in barley, can be stabilized by proteasome inhibitor treatment ( Fu et al., 2002 ).

Although previous studies suggested that SCF SLY1 and SCF GID2 target RGA and SLR1, respectively, for degradation in response to GA, there was no direct evidence for a physical interaction between SLY1-RGA and GID2-SLR1. In this article, we demonstrate that SLY1 interacts not only with RGA, but also with GAI through their GRAS domains. In contrast with a previous study ( Fleck and Harberd, 2002 ), we show that GA induces degradation of the endogenous GAI protein and that the sly1-10 mutant accumulates a significantly higher amount of GAI than in the wild type. The rga and gai null alleles synergistically suppress several GA-mediated processes in sly1-10 . These observations indicate a direct role for SLY1 in targeting GA-induced degradation of GAI as well as RGA. We further demonstrate that the dominant gar2 mutation is a sly1 gain-of-function allele (hence renamed sly1-d ), which results in a single amino acid substitution in the protein. Similar to its effect on the gai-1 mutant, this novel sly1-d ( gar2 ) allele partially suppresses the rga- Δ 17 mutant phenotype. sly1-d interacts more strongly with RGA than SLY1 in yeast and causes reduced levels of RGA and rga-Δ17 proteins in plants. These observations are a case in which a gain-of-function mutation in an F-box protein gene perturbs plant development by causing a reduction in the levels of the F-box protein substrates.

DISCUSSION

Our data provide multiple lines of evidence to support the model that SLY1 is a nuclear-localized F-box component of the SCF SLY1 E3 ubiquitin ligase, which regulates GA responses by binding directly and triggering GA-induced degradation of the DELLA proteins RGA and GAI. Moreover, the interaction between GAI and SLY1 requires the GRAS domain of GAI, as opposed to the regulatory N-terminal DELLA domain. In addition, we demonstrated that the dominant gar2 mutation is a gain-of-function allele of SLY1 (named sly1-d ), which caused a much stronger interaction with RGA and GAI in the yeast two-hybrid system and suppressed the dwarf phenotype of rga- Δ 17 by reducing the levels of RGA and rga-Δ17 proteins in plants.
