---
pmid: '11015200'
title: Mapping the functional domains of elongation factor-2 kinase.
authors:
- Pavur KS
- Petrov AN
- Ryazanov AG
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi0007270
---

# Mapping the functional domains of elongation factor-2 kinase.
**Authors:** Pavur KS, Petrov AN, Ryazanov AG
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi0007270](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi0007270)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2000 Oct 10;39(40):12216-24. doi: 10.1021/bi0007270.

Mapping the functional domains of elongation factor-2 kinase.

Pavur KS(1), Petrov AN, Ryazanov AG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 675 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, New Jersey 
08854, USA.

A new class of eukaryotic protein kinases that are not homologous to members of 
the serine/threonine/tyrosine protein kinase superfamily was recently identified 
[Futey, L. M., et al. (1995) J. Biol. Chem. 270, 523-529; Ryazanov, A. G., et 
al. (1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 4884-4889]. This class includes 
eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase, Dictyostelium myosin heavy chain kinases 
A, B, and C, and several mammalian putative protein kinases that are not yet 
fully characterized [Ryazanov, A. G., et al. (1999) Curr. Biol. 9, R43-R45]. 
eEF-2 kinase is a ubiquitous protein kinase that phosphorylates and inactivates 
eukaryotic translational elongation factor-2, and thus can modulate the rate of 
polypeptide chain elongation during translation. eEF-2 was the only known 
substrate for eEF-2 kinase. We demonstrate here that eEF-2 kinase can 
efficiently phosphorylate a 16-amino acid peptide, MH-1, corresponding to the 
myosin heavy chain kinase A phosphorylation site in Dictyostelium myosin heavy 
chains. This enabled us to develop a rapid assay for eEF-2 kinase activity. To 
localize the functional domains of eEF-2 kinase, we expressed human eEF-2 kinase 
in Escherichia coli as a GST-tagged fusion protein, and then performed 
systematic in vitro deletion mutagenesis. We analyzed eEF-2 kinase deletion 
mutants for the ability to autophosphorylate, and to phosphorylate eEF-2 as well 
as a peptide substrate, MH-1. Mutants with deletions between amino acids 51 and 
335 were unable to autophosphorylate, and were also unable to phosphorylate 
eEF-2 and MH-1. Mutants with deletions between amino acids 521 and 725 were 
unable to phosphorylate eEF-2, but were still able to autophosphorylate and to 
phosphorylate MH-1. The kinases with deletions between amino acids 2 and 50 and 
336 and 520 were able to catalyze all three reactions. In addition, the 
C-terminal domain expressed alone (amino acids 336-725) binds eEF-2 in a 
coprecipitation assay. These results suggest that eEF-2 kinase consists of two 
domains connected by a linker region. The amino-terminal domain contains the 
catalytic domain, while the carboxyl-terminal domain contains the eEF-2 
targeting domain. The calmodulin-binding region is located between amino acids 
51 and 96. The amino acid sequence of the carboxyl-terminal domain of eEF-2 
kinase displays similarity to several proteins, all of which contain repeats of 
a 36-amino acid motif that we named "motif 36".

DOI: 10.1021/bi0007270
PMID: 11015200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
