---
pmid: '11866539'
title: 'Identification of endothelial cell genes expressed in an in vitro model of
  angiogenesis: induction of ESM-1, (beta)ig-h3, and NrCAM.'
authors:
- Aitkenhead M
- Wang SJ
- Nakatsu MN
- Mestas J
- Heard C
- Hughes CC
journal: Microvasc Res
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/mvre.2001.2380
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of endothelial cell genes expressed in an in vitro model of angiogenesis: induction of ESM-1, (beta)ig-h3, and NrCAM.
**Authors:** Aitkenhead M, Wang SJ, Nakatsu MN, Mestas J, Heard C, Hughes CC
**Journal:** Microvasc Res (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1006/mvre.2001.2380](https://doi.org/10.1006/mvre.2001.2380)

## Abstract

1. Microvasc Res. 2002 Mar;63(2):159-71. doi: 10.1006/mvre.2001.2380.

Identification of endothelial cell genes expressed in an in vitro model of 
angiogenesis: induction of ESM-1, (beta)ig-h3, and NrCAM.

Aitkenhead M(1), Wang SJ, Nakatsu MN, Mestas J, Heard C, Hughes CC.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California at Irvine, 
Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Blood vessel growth by angiogenesis plays an essential role in embryonic 
development, wound healing, and tumor growth. To understand the molecular cues 
underlying this process we have used the PCR-based subtractive hybridization 
method, representational difference analysis, to identify genes upregulated in 
endothelial cells (EC) forming tubes in 3D collagen gels, compared to migrating 
and proliferating cells in 2D cultures. We identified several previously 
characterized angiogenic markers, including the alpha(v) chain of the 
alpha(v)beta3 integrin and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, suggesting overlap 
in gene expression between tube-forming cells in vitro and in vivo. We also 
found a 2- to 10-fold upregulation of (beta)ig-h3 (a collagen-binding 
extracellular matrix protein), NrCAM (a "neural" cell adhesion molecule), 
Annexin II (a tPA receptor), ESM-1 (an EC-specific molecule of unknown 
function), and Id2 (an inhibitory bHLH transcription factor). We identified a 
novel splice variant of the ESM-1 gene and also detected dramatically enhanced 
expression of ESM-1 and (beta)ig-h3 in several tumors. Antisense 
oligonucleotides to (beta)ig-h3 blocked both gene expression and tube formation 
in vitro, suggesting that (beta)ig-h3 may play a critical role in EC-matrix 
interactions. These data expand the suite of genes implicated in vascular 
remodeling and angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1006/mvre.2001.2380
PMID: 11866539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
