---
pmid: '33864728'
title: Host PDZ-containing proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2.
authors:
- Caillet-Saguy C
- Durbesson F
- Rezelj VV
- Gogl G
- Tran QD
- Twizere JC
- Vignuzzi M
- Vincentelli R
- Wolff N
journal: FEBS J
year: '2021'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8250131
doi: 10.1111/febs.15881
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Host PDZ-containing proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Caillet-Saguy C, Durbesson F, Rezelj VV, Gogl G, Tran QD, Twizere JC, Vignuzzi M, Vincentelli R, Wolff N
**Journal:** FEBS J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/febs.15881](https://doi.org/10.1111/febs.15881)
**PMC:** [PMC8250131](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8250131/)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2021 Sep;288(17):5148-5162. doi: 10.1111/febs.15881. Epub 2021 May 1.

Host PDZ-containing proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2.

Caillet-Saguy C(1), Durbesson F(2), Rezelj VV(3), Gogl G(4), Tran QD(3)(5), 
Twizere JC(6), Vignuzzi M(3), Vincentelli R(2), Wolff N(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité Récepteurs-Canaux, UMR CNRS 3571, Paris, France.
(2)AFMB, UMR CNRS 7257, Marseille, France.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Unité Populations Virales et Pathogénèse, UMR CNRS 3569, 
Paris, France.
(4)IGBMC, INSERM U1258/UMR CNRS 7104, Illkirch, France.
(5)École doctorale BioSPC, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
France.
(6)GIGA Institute, Molecular Biology of Diseases, Viral Interactomes laboratory, 
University of Liege, Belgium.

Small linear motifs targeting protein interacting domains called PSD-95/Dlg/ZO-1 
(PDZ) have been identified at the C terminus of the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) proteins E, 3a, and N. Using a 
high-throughput approach of affinity-profiling against the full human PDZome, we 
identified sixteen human PDZ binders of SARS-CoV-2 proteins E, 3A, and N showing 
significant interactions with dissociation constants values ranging from 3 to 
82 μm. Six of them (TJP1, PTPN13, HTRA1, PARD3, MLLT4, LNX2) are also recognized 
by SARS-CoV while three (NHERF1, MAST2, RADIL) are specific to SARS-CoV-2 E 
protein. Most of these SARS-CoV-2 protein partners are involved in cellular 
junctions/polarity and could be also linked to evasion mechanisms of the immune 
responses during viral infection. Among the binders of the SARS-CoV-2 proteins 
E, 3a, or N, seven significantly affect viral replication under knock down gene 
expression in infected cells. This PDZ profiling identifying human proteins 
potentially targeted by SARS-CoV-2 can help to understand the multifactorial 
severity of COVID19 and to conceive effective anti-coronaviral agents for 
therapeutic purposes.

© 2021 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15881
PMCID: PMC8250131
PMID: 33864728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
