---
pmid: '23275581'
title: Natural variation in small molecule-induced TIR-NB-LRR signaling induces root
  growth arrest via EDS1- and PAD4-complexed R protein VICTR in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Kim TH
- Kunz HH
- Bhattacharjee S
- Hauser F
- Park J
- Engineer C
- Liu A
- Ha T
- Parker JE
- Gassmann W
- Schroeder JI
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3556982
doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.107235
---

# Natural variation in small molecule-induced TIR-NB-LRR signaling induces root growth arrest via EDS1- and PAD4-complexed R protein VICTR in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Kim TH, Kunz HH, Bhattacharjee S, Hauser F, Park J, Engineer C, Liu A, Ha T, Parker JE, Gassmann W, Schroeder JI
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.112.107235](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.112.107235)
**PMC:** [PMC3556982](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3556982/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2012 Dec;24(12):5177-92. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.107235. Epub 2012
Dec  28.

Natural variation in small molecule-induced TIR-NB-LRR signaling induces root 
growth arrest via EDS1- and PAD4-complexed R protein VICTR in Arabidopsis.

Kim TH(1), Kunz HH, Bhattacharjee S, Hauser F, Park J, Engineer C, Liu A, Ha T, 
Parker JE, Gassmann W, Schroeder JI.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0116, USA.

In a chemical genetics screen we identified the small-molecule 
[5-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)furan-2-yl]-piperidine-1-ylmethanethione (DFPM) that 
triggers rapid inhibition of early abscisic acid signal transduction via 
PHYTOALEXIN DEFICIENT4 (PAD4)- and ENHANCED DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY1 
(EDS1)-dependent immune signaling mechanisms. However, mechanisms upstream of 
EDS1 and PAD4 in DFPM-mediated signaling remain unknown. Here, we report that 
DFPM generates an Arabidopsis thaliana accession-specific root growth arrest in 
Columbia-0 (Col-0) plants. The genetic locus responsible for this natural 
variant, VICTR (VARIATION IN COMPOUND TRIGGERED ROOT growth response), encodes a 
TIR-NB-LRR (for Toll-Interleukin1 Receptor-nucleotide binding-Leucine-rich 
repeat) protein. Analyses of T-DNA insertion victr alleles showed that VICTR is 
necessary for DFPM-induced root growth arrest and inhibition of abscisic 
acid-induced stomatal closing. Transgenic expression of the Col-0 VICTR allele 
in DFPM-insensitive Arabidopsis accessions recapitulated the DFPM-induced root 
growth arrest. EDS1 and PAD4, both central regulators of basal resistance and 
effector-triggered immunity, as well as HSP90 chaperones and their cochaperones 
RAR1 and SGT1B, are required for the DFPM-induced root growth arrest. Salicylic 
acid and jasmonic acid signaling pathway components are dispensable. We further 
demonstrate that VICTR associates with EDS1 and PAD4 in a nuclear protein 
complex. These findings show a previously unexplored association between a 
TIR-NB-LRR protein and PAD4 and identify functions of plant immune signaling 
components in the regulation of root meristematic zone-targeted growth arrest.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.112.107235
PMCID: PMC3556982
PMID: 23275581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
