---
pmid: '15299030'
title: The Fanconi anemia proteins functionally interact with the protein kinase regulated
  by RNA (PKR).
authors:
- Zhang X
- Li J
- Sejas DP
- Rathbun KR
- Bagby GC
- Pang Q
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403884200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Fanconi anemia proteins functionally interact with the protein kinase regulated by RNA (PKR).
**Authors:** Zhang X, Li J, Sejas DP, Rathbun KR, Bagby GC, Pang Q
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M403884200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M403884200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 15;279(42):43910-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M403884200. Epub
2004  Aug 6.

The Fanconi anemia proteins functionally interact with the protein kinase 
regulated by RNA (PKR).

Zhang X(1), Li J, Sejas DP, Rathbun KR, Bagby GC, Pang Q.

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Ohio 45229, USA.

Protein kinase regulated by RNA (PKR) plays critical roles in cell growth and 
apoptosis and is implicated as a potential pathogenic factor of Alzheimer's, 
Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases. Here we report that this proapoptotic 
kinase is also involved in Fanconi anemia (FA), a disease characterized by bone 
marrow (BM) failure and leukemia. We have used a BM extract to show that three 
FA proteins, FANCA, FANCC, and FANCG, functionally interact with the PKR kinase, 
which in turn regulates translational control. By using a combined 
immunoprecipitation and reconstituted kinase assay, in which an active PKR 
kinase complex was captured from a normal cell extract, we demonstrated 
functional interactions between the FA proteins and the PKR kinase. In primary 
human BM cells, mutations in the FANCA, FANCC, and FANCG genes markedly increase 
the amount of PKR bound to FANCC, and this PKR accumulation is correlated with 
elevated PKR activation and hypersensitivity of BM progenitor cells to growth 
repression mediated by the inhibitory cytokines interferon-gamma and tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha. Specific inhibition of PKR by 2-aminopurine in these FA 
BM cells attenuates PKR activation and apoptosis induction. In lymphoblasts 
derived from an FA-C patient, overexpression of a dominant negative mutant PKR 
(PKRK296R) suppressed PKR activation and apoptosis induced by interferon-gamma 
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Furthermore, by using genetically matched 
wild-type and PKR-null cells, we demonstrated that forced expression of a 
patient-derived FA-C mutant (FANCCL554P) augmented double-stranded RNA-induced 
PKR activation and cell death. Thus, inappropriate activation of PKR as a 
consequence of certain FA mutations might play a role in bone marrow failure 
that frequently occurred in FA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M403884200
PMID: 15299030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
