---
pmid: '7958880'
title: The cAMP receptor CAR4 regulates axial patterning and cellular differentiation
  during late development of Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Louis JM
- Ginsburg GT
- Kimmel AR
journal: Genes Dev
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1101/gad.8.17.2086
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The cAMP receptor CAR4 regulates axial patterning and cellular differentiation during late development of Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Louis JM, Ginsburg GT, Kimmel AR
**Journal:** Genes Dev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.8.17.2086](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.8.17.2086)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 1994 Sep 1;8(17):2086-96. doi: 10.1101/gad.8.17.2086.

The cAMP receptor CAR4 regulates axial patterning and cellular differentiation 
during late development of Dictyostelium.

Louis JM(1), Ginsburg GT, Kimmel AR.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Pseudoplasmodia of developing Dictyostelium are organized with anteroposterior 
polarity. We have isolated CAR4, the gene for a new cell-surface, G 
protein-linked cAMP receptor. CAR4 mRNA is initially expressed during tip 
elongation and continues to accumulate into culmination. CAR4 is maximally 
expressed in pseudoplasmodia anteriors which are centers for extracellular cAMP 
signaling and for organization of cellular patterning. Although car4 null cells 
progress unperturbed through early development, they exhibit major patterning 
aberrations as the anteroposterior axis becomes established. Prestalk gene 
expression is significantly reduced in car4 nulls, whereas prespore-specific 
markers are overexpressed and detected in zones normally restricted to prestalk 
cells. Patterning defects are similarly apparent in terminally differentiated 
fruiting bodies. Our results show that cAMP signaling is required for pattern 
formation and cellular differentiation during late Dictyostelium development.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.8.17.2086
PMID: 7958880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
