---
pmid: '23118189'
title: Synchronizing nuclear import of ribosomal proteins with ribosome assembly.
authors:
- Kressler D
- Bange G
- Ogawa Y
- Stjepanovic G
- Bradatsch B
- Pratte D
- Amlacher S
- Strauß D
- Yoneda Y
- Katahira J
- Sinning I
- Hurt E
journal: Science
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1226960
---

# Synchronizing nuclear import of ribosomal proteins with ribosome assembly.
**Authors:** Kressler D, Bange G, Ogawa Y, Stjepanovic G, Bradatsch B, Pratte D, Amlacher S, Strauß D, Yoneda Y, Katahira J, Sinning I, Hurt E
**Journal:** Science (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1226960](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1226960)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2012 Nov 2;338(6107):666-71. doi: 10.1126/science.1226960.

Synchronizing nuclear import of ribosomal proteins with ribosome assembly.

Kressler D(1), Bange G, Ogawa Y, Stjepanovic G, Bradatsch B, Pratte D, Amlacher 
S, Strauß D, Yoneda Y, Katahira J, Sinning I, Hurt E.

Author information:
(1)Biochemie-Zentrum der Universität Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328, 
Heidelberg D-69120, Germany. dieter.kressler@unifr.ch

Ribosomal proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm, before nuclear import and 
assembly with ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Little is known about coordination of 
nucleocytoplasmic transport with ribosome assembly. Here, we identify a 
transport adaptor, symportin 1 (Syo1), that facilitates synchronized coimport of 
the two 5S-rRNA binding proteins Rpl5 and Rpl11. In vitro studies revealed that 
Syo1 concomitantly binds Rpl5-Rpl11 and furthermore recruits the import receptor 
Kap104. The Syo1-Rpl5-Rpl11 import complex is released from Kap104 by RanGTP and 
can be directly transferred onto the 5S rRNA. Syo1 can shuttle back to the 
cytoplasm by interaction with phenylalanine-glycine nucleoporins. X-ray 
crystallography uncovered how the α-solenoid symportin accommodates the Rpl5 
amino terminus, normally bound to 5S rRNA, in an extended groove. 
Symportin-mediated coimport of Rpl5-Rpl11 could ensure coordinated and 
stoichiometric incorporation of these proteins into pre-60S ribosomes.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1226960
PMID: 23118189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
