---
pmid: '17308034'
title: Effect of 21 different nitrogen sources on global gene expression in the yeast
  Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Godard P
- Urrestarazu A
- Vissers S
- Kontos K
- Bontempi G
- van Helden J
- André B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1899933
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01084-06
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Effect of 21 different nitrogen sources on global gene expression in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Godard P, Urrestarazu A, Vissers S, Kontos K, Bontempi G, van Helden J, André B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01084-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01084-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1899933](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1899933/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(8):3065-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01084-06. Epub 2007
Feb  16.

Effect of 21 different nitrogen sources on global gene expression in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Godard P(1), Urrestarazu A, Vissers S, Kontos K, Bontempi G, van Helden J, André 
B.

Author information:
(1)Physiologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, IBMM, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 
Rue des Pr. Jeener et Brachet 12, 6041 Gosselies, Belgium.

We compared the transcriptomes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells growing under 
steady-state conditions on 21 unique sources of nitrogen. We found 506 genes 
differentially regulated by nitrogen and estimated the activation degrees of all 
identified nitrogen-responding transcriptional controls according to the 
nitrogen source. One main group of nitrogenous compounds supports fast growth 
and a highly active nitrogen catabolite repression (NCR) control. Catabolism of 
these compounds typically yields carbon derivatives directly assimilable by a 
cell's metabolism. Another group of nitrogen compounds supports slower growth, 
is associated with excretion by cells of nonmetabolizable carbon compounds such 
as fusel oils, and is characterized by activation of the general control of 
amino acid biosynthesis (GAAC). Furthermore, NCR and GAAC appear interlinked, 
since expression of the GCN4 gene encoding the transcription factor that 
mediates GAAC is subject to NCR. We also observed that several 
transcriptional-regulation systems are active under a wider range of nitrogen 
supply conditions than anticipated. Other transcriptional-regulation systems 
acting on genes not involved in nitrogen metabolism, e.g., the pleiotropic-drug 
resistance and the unfolded-protein response systems, also respond to nitrogen. 
We have completed the lists of target genes of several nitrogen-sensitive 
regulons and have used sequence comparison tools to propose functions for about 
20 orphan genes. Similar studies conducted for other nutrients should provide a 
more complete view of alternative metabolic pathways in yeast and contribute to 
the attribution of functions to many other orphan genes.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01084-06
PMCID: PMC1899933
PMID: 17308034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
