---
pmid: '2647300'
title: A new role for a yeast transcriptional silencer gene, SIR2, in regulation of
  recombination in ribosomal DNA.
authors:
- Gottlieb S
- Esposito RE
journal: Cell
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90681-8
---

# A new role for a yeast transcriptional silencer gene, SIR2, in regulation of recombination in ribosomal DNA.
**Authors:** Gottlieb S, Esposito RE
**Journal:** Cell (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(89)90681-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(89)90681-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1989 Mar 10;56(5):771-6. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90681-8.

A new role for a yeast transcriptional silencer gene, SIR2, in regulation of 
recombination in ribosomal DNA.

Gottlieb S(1), Esposito RE.

Author information:
(1)Committee on Genetics, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637.

The yeast SIR2 gene is involved in regulating nucleosome phasing and 
transcription in the mating type system. We have found that SIR2 also plays 
another important role in the cell. Specifically, in wild-type SIR2 strains 
recombination between the tandemly repeated ribosomal RNA genes is depressed. In 
sir2 mutants, both mitotic and meiotic intrachromosomal recombination increase 
10- to 15-fold. In striking contrast to its effect on rDNA, the SIR2 gene does 
not affect intrachromosomal recombination between non-rDNA gene duplications. 
Furthermore, in the absence of the SIR2 gene product, rDNA acquires a partial 
dependency on recombination gene functions (RAD50 and RAD52) that are normally 
dispensable for exchange in the rDNA array. Thus, SIR2 may function in excluding 
the rDNA region from the general recombination system. Here we demonstrate that 
SIR2's effect is not restricted to controlling mating type expression, but 
rather that SIR2 functions in a more general way in the genome.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(89)90681-8
PMID: 2647300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
