---
pmid: '11062478'
title: Histone deacetylase interacts directly with DNA topoisomerase II.
authors:
- Tsai SC
- Valkov N
- Yang WM
- Gump J
- Sullivan D
- Seto E
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/81671
---

# Histone deacetylase interacts directly with DNA topoisomerase II.
**Authors:** Tsai SC, Valkov N, Yang WM, Gump J, Sullivan D, Seto E
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/81671](https://doi.org/10.1038/81671)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):349-53. doi: 10.1038/81671.

Histone deacetylase interacts directly with DNA topoisomerase II.

Tsai SC(1), Valkov N, Yang WM, Gump J, Sullivan D, Seto E.

Author information:
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Histone deacetylases (HDACs) modify nucleosomal histones, have a key role in the 
regulation of gene transcription, and may be involved in cell-cycle regulation, 
differentiation and human cancer. Purified recombinant human HDAC1 protein was 
used to screen a cDNA expression library, and one of the clones identified 
encoded DNA topoisomerase II (Topo II), an enzyme known to have a role in 
transcriptional regulation and chromatin organization. Coimmunoprecipitation 
experiments indicate that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are associated with Topo II in vivo 
under normal physiological conditions. Complexes containing Topo II possess HDAC 
activities, and complexes containing HDAC1 or HDAC2 possess Topo II activities. 
HDAC and Topo II modify each other's activity in vitro and in vivo. Our results 
indicate the existence of a functionally coupled complex between these two 
enzymes and offer insights into the potential mechanisms of action of both 
enzymes.

DOI: 10.1038/81671
PMID: 11062478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
