---
pmid: '9490035'
title: Molecular cloning of the peroxisome proliferator-induced 46-kDa cytosolic acyl-CoA
  thioesterase from mouse and rat liver--recombinant expression in Escherichia coli,
  tissue expression, and nutritional regulation.
authors:
- Lindquist PJ
- Svensson LT
- Alexson SE
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2510631.x
---

# Molecular cloning of the peroxisome proliferator-induced 46-kDa cytosolic acyl-CoA thioesterase from mouse and rat liver--recombinant expression in Escherichia coli, tissue expression, and nutritional regulation.
**Authors:** Lindquist PJ, Svensson LT, Alexson SE
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2510631.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2510631.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Feb 1;251(3):631-40. doi: 
10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2510631.x.

Molecular cloning of the peroxisome proliferator-induced 46-kDa cytosolic 
acyl-CoA thioesterase from mouse and rat liver--recombinant expression in 
Escherichia coli, tissue expression, and nutritional regulation.

Lindquist PJ(1), Svensson LT, Alexson SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences and Technology, Karolinska 
Institute, Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden.

Feeding clofibrate to rats and mice results in a strong induction of acyl-CoA 
thioesterase activity in the liver that is mainly due to increases in the enzyme 
activities in mitochondria and cytosol. The cytosolic acyl-CoA thioesterase 
protein of about 40 kDa, referred to as CTE-I, is strongly induced by the 
treatment. We report here the molecular cloning of the cDNA corresponding to the 
rat and mouse enzymes, and the further characterization of the mouse CTE-I by 
recombinant expression in bacteria and regulation of expression of the enzyme. 
The cDNAs corresponding to the rat and mouse enzymes contained open reading 
frames encoding proteins of 419 amino acids with calculated molecular masses of 
45938 Da and 46135 Da, respectively. Sequence analysis revealed an active site 
serine consensus sequence commonly found in lipases and carboxylesterases. 
Recombinant expression of the mouse CTE-I cDNA in Escherichia coli resulted in 
production of immunoreactive protein that was mainly active with long-chain 
acyl-CoAs. Northern blot analysis showed that the full-length CTE-I cDNA probe 
hybridized to two major transcripts corresponding to CTE-I and MTE-I 
(mitochondrial acyl-CoA thioesterase I), respectively. The expression of both 
mRNA species was found to be highly regulated. As expected, both CTE-I and MTE-I 
were strongly upregulated (> 50-fold) by clofibrate treatment. Interestingly, 
fasting for 48 h resulted in a similar magnitude of induction as two days of 
clofibrate feeding. In addition, feeding a fat-free diet resulted in 
down-regulation of CTE-I mRNA. CTE-I mRNA was strongly expressed in kidney and 
brown adipose tissue and MTE-I mRNA was expressed mainly in brown adipose tissue 
and heart but was also expressed in kidney and white adipose tissue. Dietary 
regulation and tissue-specific expression suggest that CTE-I and MTE-I play 
important roles in lipid metabolism.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1998.2510631.x
PMID: 9490035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
