---
pmid: '19763082'
title: Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer-mediated endosome to Golgi retrograde
  transport by the J-domain protein RME-8.
authors:
- Shi A
- Sun L
- Banerjee R
- Tobin M
- Zhang Y
- Grant BD
journal: EMBO J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2776105
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.272
---

# Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer-mediated endosome to Golgi retrograde transport by the J-domain protein RME-8.
**Authors:** Shi A, Sun L, Banerjee R, Tobin M, Zhang Y, Grant BD
**Journal:** EMBO J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2009.272](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2009.272)
**PMC:** [PMC2776105](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2776105/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2009 Nov 4;28(21):3290-302. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.272. Epub 2009 Sep
 17.

Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer-mediated endosome to Golgi 
retrograde transport by the J-domain protein RME-8.

Shi A(1), Sun L, Banerjee R, Tobin M, Zhang Y, Grant BD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University, 
Piscataway, NJ, USA.

After endocytosis, most cargo enters the pleiomorphic early endosomes in which 
sorting occurs. As endosomes mature, transmembrane cargo can be sequestered into 
inwardly budding vesicles for degradation, or can exit the endosome in membrane 
tubules for recycling to the plasma membrane, the recycling endosome, or the 
Golgi apparatus. Endosome to Golgi transport requires the retromer complex. 
Without retromer, recycling cargo such as the MIG-14/Wntless protein aberrantly 
enters the degradative pathway and is depleted from the Golgi. 
Endosome-associated clathrin also affects the recycling of retrograde cargo and 
has been shown to function in the formation of endosomal subdomains. Here, we 
find that the Caemorhabditis elegans endosomal J-domain protein RME-8 associates 
with the retromer component SNX-1. Loss of SNX-1, RME-8, or the clathrin 
chaperone Hsc70/HSP-1 leads to over-accumulation of endosomal clathrin, reduced 
clathrin dynamics, and missorting of MIG-14 to the lysosome. Our results 
indicate a mechanism, whereby retromer can regulate endosomal clathrin dynamics 
through RME-8 and Hsc70, promoting the sorting of recycling cargo into the 
retrograde pathway.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.272
PMCID: PMC2776105
PMID: 19763082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
