---
pmid: '25281747'
title: RING finger protein RNF207, a novel regulator of cardiac excitation.
authors:
- Roder K
- Werdich AA
- Li W
- Liu M
- Kim TY
- Organ-Darling LE
- Moshal KS
- Hwang JM
- Lu Y
- Choi BR
- MacRae CA
- Koren G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4256309
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592295
---

# RING finger protein RNF207, a novel regulator of cardiac excitation.
**Authors:** Roder K, Werdich AA, Li W, Liu M, Kim TY, Organ-Darling LE, Moshal KS, Hwang JM, Lu Y, Choi BR, MacRae CA, Koren G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.592295](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.592295)
**PMC:** [PMC4256309](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4256309/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 5;289(49):33730-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592295. Epub 
2014 Oct 3.

RING finger protein RNF207, a novel regulator of cardiac excitation.

Roder K(1), Werdich AA(2), Li W(1), Liu M(1), Kim TY(1), Organ-Darling LE(3), 
Moshal KS(1), Hwang JM(1), Lu Y(1), Choi BR(1), MacRae CA(2), Koren G(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiology, Department 
of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903.
(2)the Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and.
(3)the Department of Biological Sciences, Wellesley College, Wellesley, 
Massachusetts 02481.
(4)From the Cardiovascular Research Center, Division of Cardiology, Department 
of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02903, Gideon_Koren@Brown.edu.

Two recent studies (Newton-Cheh, C. et al. (2009) Common variants at ten loci 
influence QT interval duration in the QTGEN Study. Nat. Genet. 41, 399-406 and 
Pfeufer, A. et al. (2009) Common variants at ten loci modulate the QT interval 
duration in the QTSCD Study. Nat. Genet. 41, 407-414) identified an association, 
with genome-wide significance, between a single nucleotide polymorphism within 
the gene encoding RING finger protein 207 (RNF207) and the QT interval. We 
sought to determine the role of RNF207 in cardiac electrophysiology. Morpholino 
knockdown of RNF207 in zebrafish embryos resulted in action potential duration 
prolongation, occasionally a 2:1 atrioventricular block, and slowing of 
conduction velocity. Conversely, neonatal rabbit cardiomyocytes infected with 
RNF207-expressing adenovirus exhibited shortened action potential duration. 
Using transfections of U-2 OS and HEK293 cells, Western blot analysis and 
immunocytochemistry data demonstrate that RNF207 and the human 
ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG) potassium channel interact and colocalize. 
Furthermore, RNF207 overexpression significantly elevated total and membrane 
HERG protein and HERG-encoded current density by ∼30-50%, which was dependent on 
the intact N-terminal RING domain of RNF207. Finally, coexpression of RNF207 and 
HSP70 increased HERG expression compared with HSP70 alone. This effect was 
dependent on the C terminus of RNF207. Taken together, the evidence is strong 
that RNF207 is an important regulator of action potential duration, likely via 
effects on HERG trafficking and localization in a heat shock protein-dependent 
manner.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592295
PMCID: PMC4256309
PMID: 25281747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
