---
pmid: '19900410'
title: Molecular mechanism for the regulation of human ACC2 through phosphorylation
  by AMPK.
authors:
- Cho YS
- Lee JI
- Shin D
- Kim HT
- Jung HY
- Lee TG
- Kang LW
- Ahn YJ
- Cho HS
- Heo YS
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.029
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular mechanism for the regulation of human ACC2 through phosphorylation by AMPK.
**Authors:** Cho YS, Lee JI, Shin D, Kim HT, Jung HY, Lee TG, Kang LW, Ahn YJ, Cho HS, Heo YS
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.029)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jan 1;391(1):187-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.029. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Molecular mechanism for the regulation of human ACC2 through phosphorylation by 
AMPK.

Cho YS(1), Lee JI, Shin D, Kim HT, Jung HY, Lee TG, Kang LW, Ahn YJ, Cho HS, Heo 
YS.

Author information:
(1)R&D Center, CrystalGenomics, Inc., Seoul 138-739, Republic of Korea.

Acetyl-CoA carboxylases (ACCs) have been highlighted as therapeutic targets for 
obesity and diabetes, as they play crucial roles in fatty acid metabolism. ACC 
activity is regulated through the short-term mechanism of inactivation by 
reversible phosphorylation. Here, we report the crystal structures of the biotin 
carboxylase (BC) domain of human ACC2 phosphorylated by AMP-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK). The phosphorylated Ser222 binds to the putative dimer interface 
of BC, disrupting polymerization and providing the molecular mechanism of 
inactivation by AMPK. We also determined the structure of the human BC domain in 
complex with soraphen A, a macrocyclic polyketide natural product. This 
structure shows that the compound binds to the binding site of phosphorylated 
Ser222, implying that its inhibition mechanism is the same as that of 
phosphorylation by AMPK.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.11.029
PMID: 19900410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
