---
reference_id: PMID:11350175
title: "Functional analysis of the Hsp90-associated human peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerases FKBP51, FKBP52 and Cyp40."
authors:
- Pirkl F
- Buchner J
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4595
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Functional analysis of the Hsp90-associated human peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerases FKBP51, FKBP52 and Cyp40.
**Authors:** Pirkl F, Buchner J
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmbi.2001.4595](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmbi.2001.4595)

## Content

1. J Mol Biol. 2001 May 11;308(4):795-806. doi: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4595.

Functional analysis of the Hsp90-associated human peptidyl prolyl cis/trans
isomerases FKBP51, FKBP52 and Cyp40.

Pirkl F(1), Buchner J.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Organische Chemie und Biochemie, Technische Universität München,
Garching, 85747, Germany.

Large peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerases (PPIases) are important components of
the Hsp90 chaperone complex. In mammalian cells, either Cyp40, FKBP51 or FKBP52
is incorporated into these complexes. It has been suggested that members of this
protein family exhibit both prolyl isomerase and chaperone activity. Here we
define the structural and functional properties of the three mammalian large
PPIases. We find that in all cases two PPIase monomers bind to an Hsp90 dimer.
However, the affinities of the PPIases are different with FKBP52 exhibiting the
strongest interaction and Cyp40 the weakest. Furthermore, in the mammalian
system, in contrast to the yeast system, the catalytic activity of prolyl
isomerization corresponds well to that of the respective small PPIases.
Interestingly, Cyp40 and FKBP51 are the more potent chaperones. Thus, it seems
that both the affinity for Hsp90 and the differences in their chaperone
properties, which may reflect their interaction with the non-native protein in
the Hsp90 complex, are critical for the selective incorporation of a specific
large PPIase.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4595
PMID: 11350175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]