---
pmid: '26431207'
title: CUL4-DDB1-CDT2 E3 Ligase Regulates the Molecular Clock Activity by Promoting
  Ubiquitination-Dependent Degradation of the Mammalian CRY1.
authors:
- Tong X
- Zhang D
- Guha A
- Arthurs B
- Cazares V
- Gupta N
- Yin L
journal: PLoS One
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4592254
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139725
---

# CUL4-DDB1-CDT2 E3 Ligase Regulates the Molecular Clock Activity by Promoting Ubiquitination-Dependent Degradation of the Mammalian CRY1.
**Authors:** Tong X, Zhang D, Guha A, Arthurs B, Cazares V, Gupta N, Yin L
**Journal:** PLoS One (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0139725](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0139725)
**PMC:** [PMC4592254](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592254/)

## Abstract

1. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0139725. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139725. 
eCollection 2015.

CUL4-DDB1-CDT2 E3 Ligase Regulates the Molecular Clock Activity by Promoting 
Ubiquitination-Dependent Degradation of the Mammalian CRY1.

Tong X(1), Zhang D(1), Guha A(1), Arthurs B(1), Cazares V(1), Gupta N(1), Yin 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

The CUL4-DDB1 E3 ligase complex serves as a critical regulator in various 
cellular processes, including cell proliferation, DNA damage repair, and cell 
cycle progression. However, whether this E3 ligase complex regulates clock 
protein turnover and the molecular clock activity in mammalian cells is unknown. 
Here we show that CUL4-DDB1-CDT2 E3 ligase ubiquitinates CRY1 and promotes its 
degradation both in vitro and in vivo. Depletion of the major components of this 
E3 ligase complex, including Ddb1, Cdt2, and Cdt2-cofactor Pcna, leads to CRY1 
stabilization in cultured cells or in the mouse liver. CUL4A-DDB1-CDT2 E3 ligase 
targets lysine 585 within the C-terminal region of CRY1 protein, shown by the 
CRY1 585KA mutant's resistance to ubiquitination and degradation mediated by the 
CUL4A-DDB1 complex. Surprisingly, both depletion of Ddb1 and over-expression of 
Cry1-585KA mutant enhance the oscillatory amplitude of the Bmal1 promoter 
activity without altering its period length, suggesting that CUL4A-DDB1-CDT2 E3 
targets CRY1 for degradation and reduces the circadian amplitude. All together, 
we uncovered a novel biological role for CUL4A-DDB1-CDT2 E3 ligase that 
regulates molecular circadian behaviors via promoting ubiquitination-dependent 
degradation of CRY1.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139725
PMCID: PMC4592254
PMID: 26431207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
