---
pmid: '10526320'
title: Defective calmodulin-dependent rapid apical endocytosis in zebrafish sensory
  hair cell mutants.
authors:
- Seiler C
- Nicolson T
journal: J Neurobiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
---

# Defective calmodulin-dependent rapid apical endocytosis in zebrafish sensory hair cell mutants.
**Authors:** Seiler C, Nicolson T
**Journal:** J Neurobiol (1999)

## Abstract

1. J Neurobiol. 1999 Nov 15;41(3):424-34.

Defective calmodulin-dependent rapid apical endocytosis in zebrafish sensory 
hair cell mutants.

Seiler C(1), Nicolson T.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Spemannstr. 35, Abteilung 
Biochemie, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Vertebrate mechanosensory hair cells contain a narrow "pericuticular" zone which 
is densely populated with small vesicles between the cuticular plate and 
cellular junctions near the apical surface. The presence of many cytoplasmic 
vesicles suggests that the apical surface of hair cells has a high turnover 
rate. The significance of intense membrane trafficking at the apical surface is 
not known. Using a marker of endocytosis, the styryl dye FM1-43, this report 
shows that rapid apical endocytosis in zebrafish lateral line sensory hair cells 
is calcium and calmodulin dependent and is partially blocked by the presence of 
amiloride and dihydrostreptomycin, known inhibitors of mechanotransduction 
channels. As seen in lateral line hair cells, sensory hair cells within the 
larval otic capsule also exhibit rapid apical endocytosis. Defects in 
internalization of the dye in both lateral line and inner ear hair cells were 
found in five zebrafish auditory/vestibular mutants: sputnik, mariner, orbiter, 
mercury, and skylab. In addition, lateral line hair cells in these mutants were 
not sensitive to prolonged exposure to streptomycin, which is toxic to hair 
cells. The presence of endocytic defects in the majority of zebrafish 
mechanosensory mutants points to a important role of apical endocytosis in hair 
cell function.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 10526320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
