---
pmid: '14625387'
title: Foxj1 is required for apical localization of ezrin in airway epithelial cells.
authors:
- Huang T
- You Y
- Spoor MS
- Richer EJ
- Kudva VV
- Paige RC
- Seiler MP
- Liebler JM
- Zabner J
- Plopper CG
- Brody SL
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00830
---

# Foxj1 is required for apical localization of ezrin in airway epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Huang T, You Y, Spoor MS, Richer EJ, Kudva VV, Paige RC, Seiler MP, Liebler JM, Zabner J, Plopper CG, Brody SL
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00830](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00830)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2003 Dec 15;116(Pt 24):4935-45. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00830.

Foxj1 is required for apical localization of ezrin in airway epithelial cells.

Huang T(1), You Y, Spoor MS, Richer EJ, Kudva VV, Paige RC, Seiler MP, Liebler 
JM, Zabner J, Plopper CG, Brody SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, MO 63110, USA. brodys@msnotes.wustl.edu

Establishment and maintenance of epithelial cell polarity depend on cytoskeletal 
organization and protein trafficking to polarized cortical membranes. ERM 
(ezrin, radixin, moesin) family members link polarized proteins with 
cytoskeletal actin. Although ERMs are often considered to be functionally 
similar, we found that, in airway epithelial cells, apical localization of ERMs 
depend on cell differentiation and is independently regulated. Moesin was 
present in the apical membrane of all undifferentiated epithelial cells. 
However, in differentiated cells, ezrin and moesin were selectively localized to 
apical membranes of ciliated airway cells and were absent from secretory cells. 
To identify regulatory proteins required for selective ERM trafficking, we 
evaluated airway epithelial cells lacking Foxj1, an F-box factor that directs 
programs required for cilia formation at the apical membrane. Interestingly, 
Foxj1 expression was also required for localization of apical ezrin, but not 
moesin. Additionally, membrane-cytoskeletal and threonine-phosphorylated ezrin 
were decreased in Foxj1-null cells, consistent with absent apical ezrin. 
Although apical moesin expression was present in null cells, it could not 
compensate for ezrin because ERM-associated EBP50 and the beta2 adrenergic 
receptor failed to localize apically in the absence of Foxj1. These findings 
indicate that Foxj1 regulates ERM proteins differentially to selectively direct 
the apical localization of ezrin for the organization of multi-protein complexes 
in apical membranes of airway epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00830
PMID: 14625387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
