---
pmid: '18202225'
title: HO-1 underlies resistance of AML cells to TNF-induced apoptosis.
authors:
- Rushworth SA
- MacEwan DJ
journal: Blood
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-104042
---

# HO-1 underlies resistance of AML cells to TNF-induced apoptosis.
**Authors:** Rushworth SA, MacEwan DJ
**Journal:** Blood (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2007-07-104042](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2007-07-104042)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2008 Apr 1;111(7):3793-801. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-104042. Epub
2008  Jan 17.

HO-1 underlies resistance of AML cells to TNF-induced apoptosis.

Rushworth SA(1), MacEwan DJ.

Author information:
(1)School of Chemical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of East Anglia, Norwich, 
UK.

In human monocytes, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) induces a proinflammatory 
response. In NF-kappaB-inhibited monocytes, TNF stimulates cell death/apoptosis. 
In the present study, we analyzed the response of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) 
cells to TNF stimulation in conjunction with NF-kappaB inhibition. In all 
AML-derived cells tested, NF-kappaB-inhibited cells were resistant to 
TNF-induced apoptosis. Further investigation revealed that the cytoprotective 
gene heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) was induced in NF-kappaB-inhibited AML cells in 
response to TNF stimulation, and HO-1 was responsible for the resistance of AML 
cells to the cytotoxic actions of TNF. Moreover, after transfection with HO-1 
siRNA, the resistance to TNF-induced cell death signals of AML cells was 
removed. The HO-1 promoter region contains antioxidant-response elements that 
can bind the transcription factor NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2). We further 
demonstrated that Nrf2 was activated by TNF under NF-kappaB-inhibited 
conditions, to play the major role in up-regulating HO-1 expression and 
ultimately the fate of AML cells. These results demonstrate a novel mechanism by 
which TNF-induced cell death is inhibited in AML cells through the induction of 
HO-1, via Nrf2 activation.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-104042
PMID: 18202225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
