---
pmid: '7544393'
title: Identification of residues in the V domain of CD80 (B7-1) implicated in functional
  interactions with CD28 and CTLA4.
authors:
- Fargeas CA
- Truneh A
- Reddy M
- Hurle M
- Sweet R
- Sékaly RP
journal: J Exp Med
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: xml_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2192168
doi: 10.1084/jem.182.3.667
---

# Identification of residues in the V domain of CD80 (B7-1) implicated in functional interactions with CD28 and CTLA4.
**Authors:** Fargeas CA, Truneh A, Reddy M, Hurle M, Sweet R, Sékaly RP
**Journal:** J Exp Med (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.182.3.667](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.182.3.667)
**PMC:** [PMC2192168](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2192168/)

## Abstract

1. J Exp Med. 1995 Sep 1;182(3):667-75. doi: 10.1084/jem.182.3.667.

Identification of residues in the V domain of CD80 (B7-1) implicated in 
functional interactions with CD28 and CTLA4.

Fargeas CA(1), Truneh A, Reddy M, Hurle M, Sweet R, Sékaly RP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 
Québec, Canada.

The CD80 (B7-1) molecule is a 45-60-kD member of the immunoglobulin superfamily 
that is expressed on a variety of cell types of haematopoietic origin. CD80 can 
provide a critical costimulatory signal to T cells by interacting with the T 
cell surface molecule CD28. CD80 also binds to the CD28-related molecule CTLA4, 
which is expressed on activated T cells, Recently, additional ligands of CD28 
and CTLA4 have been described in mice and humans. One of them, CD86 (B-70 or 
B7-2) was characterized at the molecular level. Although similar in predicted 
structure to CD80, it is distantly related in amino acid sequence. In this 
study, human CD80 mutants were generated and tested for their ability to 
maintain the interaction with CD28 leading to adhesion and enhanced IL-2 
production. Two hydrophobic residues in the V-like domain of CD80 were 
identified as critical for binding to CD28 and are also important for the 
interaction with CTLA4. These residues are adjacent to the epitope of the BB1 
antibody, which inhibits CD28-CD80 interactions. One of these residues, Y87, is 
conserved in all CD80 and CD86 cloned from various species. These results being 
to unravel the structural requirements for binding to CD28 and CTLA4.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.182.3.667
PMCID: PMC2192168
PMID: 7544393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

The CD80 (B7-1) molecule is a 45-60-kD member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that is expressed on a variety of cell types of haematopoietic origin. CD80 can provide a critical costimulatory signal to T cells by interacting with the T cell surface molecule CD28. CD80 also binds to the CD28-related molecule CTLA4, which is expressed on activated T cells, Recently, additional ligands of CD28 and CTLA4 have been described in mice and humans. One of them, CD86 (B-70 or B7-2) was characterized at the molecular level. Although similar in predicted structure to CD80, it is distantly related in amino acid sequence. In this study, human CD80 mutants were generated and tested for their ability to maintain the interaction with CD28 leading to adhesion and enhanced IL-2 production. Two hydrophobic residues in the V-like domain of CD80 were identified as critical for binding to CD28 and are also important for the interaction with CTLA4. These residues are adjacent to the epitope of the BB1 antibody, which inhibits CD28-CD80 interactions. One of these residues, Y87, is conserved in all CD80 and CD86 cloned from various species. These results being to unravel the structural requirements for binding to CD28 and CTLA4.
