---
pmid: '17292836'
title: Structure of the oncoprotein gankyrin in complex with S6 ATPase of the 26S
  proteasome.
authors:
- Nakamura Y
- Nakano K
- Umehara T
- Kimura M
- Hayashizaki Y
- Tanaka A
- Horikoshi M
- Padmanabhan B
- Yokoyama S
journal: Structure
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2006.11.015
---

# Structure of the oncoprotein gankyrin in complex with S6 ATPase of the 26S proteasome.
**Authors:** Nakamura Y, Nakano K, Umehara T, Kimura M, Hayashizaki Y, Tanaka A, Horikoshi M, Padmanabhan B, Yokoyama S
**Journal:** Structure (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2006.11.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2006.11.015)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2007 Feb;15(2):179-89. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2006.11.015.

Structure of the oncoprotein gankyrin in complex with S6 ATPase of the 26S 
proteasome.

Nakamura Y(1), Nakano K, Umehara T, Kimura M, Hayashizaki Y, Tanaka A, Horikoshi 
M, Padmanabhan B, Yokoyama S.

Author information:
(1)RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi, Yokohama 
230-0045, Japan.

Comment in
    Structure. 2007 Feb;15(2):137-8. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2007.01.009.

Gankyrin is an oncoprotein commonly overexpressed in most hepatocellular 
carcinomas. Gankyrin interacts with S6 ATPase of the 19S regulatory particle of 
the 26S proteasome and enhances the degradation of the tumor suppressors pRb and 
p53. Here, we report the structure of gankyrin in complex with the C-terminal 
domain of S6 ATPase. Almost all of the seven ankyrin repeats of gankyrin 
interact, through its concave region, with the C-terminal domain of S6 ATPase. 
The intermolecular interactions occur through the complementary charged residues 
between gankyrin and S6 ATPase. Biochemical studies based on the structure of 
the complex revealed that gankyrin interacts with pRb in both the presence and 
absence of S6 ATPase; however, the E182 residue in gankyrin is essential for the 
pRb interaction. These results provide a structural basis for the involvement of 
gankyrin in the pRb degradation pathway, through its association with S6 ATPase 
of the 26S proteasome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2006.11.015
PMID: 17292836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
