---
pmid: '7883699'
title: Regulation of the hemA gene during 5-aminolevulinic acid formation in Pseudomonas
  aeruginosa.
authors:
- Hungerer C
- Troup B
- Römling U
- Jahn D
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC176757
doi: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1435-1443.1995
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Regulation of the hemA gene during 5-aminolevulinic acid formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Hungerer C, Troup B, Römling U, Jahn D
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.177.6.1435-1443.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.177.6.1435-1443.1995)
**PMC:** [PMC176757](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC176757/)

## Abstract

1. J Bacteriol. 1995 Mar;177(6):1435-43. doi: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1435-1443.1995.

Regulation of the hemA gene during 5-aminolevulinic acid formation in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Hungerer C(1), Troup B, Römling U, Jahn D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratorium für Mikrobiologie, Fachbereich Biologie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Germany.

The general tetrapyrrole precursor 5-aminolevulinic acid is formed in bacteria
via two different biosynthetic pathways. Members of the alpha group of the
proteobacteria use 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase for the condensation of
succinyl-coenzyme A and glycine, while other bacteria utilize a two-step pathway
from aminoacylated tRNA(Glu). The tRNA-dependent pathway, involving the enzymes
glutamyl-tRNA reductase (encoded by hemA) and
glutamate-1-semialdehyde-2,1-aminomutase (encoded by hemL), was demonstrated to
be used by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas putida, Pseudomonas stutzeri,
Comamonas testosteroni, Azotobacter vinelandii, and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus.
To study the regulation of the pathway, the glutamyl-tRNA reductase gene (hemA)
from P. aeruginosa was cloned by complementation of an Escherichia coli hemA
mutant. The hemA gene was mapped to the SpeI A fragment and the DpnIL fragment
of the P. aeruginosa chromosome corresponding to min 24.1 to 26.8. The cloned
hemA gene, coding for a protein of 423 amino acids with a calculated molecular
mass of 46,234 Da, forms an operon with the gene for protein release factor 1
(prf1). This translational factor mediates the termination of the protein chain
at the ribosome at amber and ochre codons. Since the cloned hemA gene did not
possess one of the appropriate stop codons, an autoregulatory mechanism such as
that postulated for the enterobacterial system was ruled out. Three open reading
frames of unknown function transcribed in the opposite direction to the hemA
gene were found. hemM/orf1 and orf2 were found to be homologous to open reading
frames located in the 5' region of enterobacterial hemA genes. Utilization of
both transcription start sites was changed in a P. aeruginosa mutant missing the
oxygen regulator Anr (Fnr analog), indicating the involvement of the
transcription factor in hemA expression. DNA sequences homologous to one half of
an Anr binding site were detected at one of the determined transcription start
sites.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.177.6.1435-1443.1995
PMCID: PMC176757
PMID: 7883699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
