---
pmid: '15733671'
title: Transcriptional control and patterning of the pho-1 gene, an essential acid
  phosphatase expressed in the C. elegans intestine.
authors:
- Fukushige T
- Goszczynski B
- Yan J
- McGhee JD
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.12.012
---

# Transcriptional control and patterning of the pho-1 gene, an essential acid phosphatase expressed in the C. elegans intestine.
**Authors:** Fukushige T, Goszczynski B, Yan J, McGhee JD
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.12.012)

## Abstract

1. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):446-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.12.012.

Transcriptional control and patterning of the pho-1 gene, an essential acid 
phosphatase expressed in the C. elegans intestine.

Fukushige T(1), Goszczynski B, Yan J, McGhee JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Genes and Development 
Research Group, University of Calgary Faculty of Medicine, Room 2205 Health 
Sciences Centre, 3330 Hospital Drive, N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

We have previously described an acid phosphatase enzyme, PHO-1, present at the 
lumenal surface of all but the anterior six cells of the Caenorhabditis elegans 
intestine. In the present paper, we identify the pho-1 structural gene, which 
encodes a histidine acid phosphatase showing highest similarity to human 
prostatic acid phosphatase. The pho-1 5'-flanking DNA is capable of directing 
reporter gene expression that is both gut specific, correctly timed and 
correctly "patterned", that is, not expressed in the gut anterior. Furthermore, 
this anterior-posterior patterning of pho-1 expression responds to the C. 
elegans Wnt pathway as if pho-1 is repressed (directly or indirectly) by high 
levels of the HMG effector protein POP-1. Transgenic analysis of the pho-1 
promoter shows that gut expression is critically dependent on a single WGATAR 
site. The gut-specific GATA factor ELT-2 binds to this site in vitro and removal 
of ELT-2 from the embryo destroys expression of the pho-1 reporter. Thus, all 
our results indicate that pho-1 is a direct downstream target of ELT-2. Finally, 
the pho-1 loss-of-function mutation shows an interesting and unexpected 
phenotype for a somatically-expressed hydrolytic enzyme: loss of pho-1 causes 
arrest of the majority of embryos but this lethality is a maternal effect. We 
suggest that pho-1 is required by the maternal intestine to assimilate some 
nutrient or cleavage product that is subsequently provided to the next 
generation of embryos.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.12.012
PMID: 15733671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
