---
pmid: '15984036'
title: 'Molecular recognition of aminoglycoside antibiotics by bacterial defence proteins:
  NMR study of the structural and conformational features of streptomycin inactivation
  by Bacillus subtilis aminoglycoside-6-adenyl transferase.'
authors:
- Corzana F
- Cuesta I
- Bastida A
- Hidalgo A
- Latorre M
- González C
- García-Junceda E
- Jiménez-Barbero J
- Asensio JL
journal: Chemistry
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/chem.200400941
---

# Molecular recognition of aminoglycoside antibiotics by bacterial defence proteins: NMR study of the structural and conformational features of streptomycin inactivation by Bacillus subtilis aminoglycoside-6-adenyl transferase.
**Authors:** Corzana F, Cuesta I, Bastida A, Hidalgo A, Latorre M, González C, García-Junceda E, Jiménez-Barbero J, Asensio JL
**Journal:** Chemistry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/chem.200400941](https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.200400941)

## Abstract

1. Chemistry. 2005 Aug 19;11(17):5102-13. doi: 10.1002/chem.200400941.

Molecular recognition of aminoglycoside antibiotics by bacterial defence 
proteins: NMR study of the structural and conformational features of 
streptomycin inactivation by Bacillus subtilis aminoglycoside-6-adenyl 
transferase.

Corzana F(1), Cuesta I, Bastida A, Hidalgo A, Latorre M, González C, 
García-Junceda E, Jiménez-Barbero J, Asensio JL.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Química Orgánica, CSIC, Juan de la Cierva 3, 28006 Madrid, 
Spain.

The molecular recognition of streptomycin by Bacillus subtilis 
aminoglycoside-6-adenyl transferase has been analysed by a combination of NMR 
techniques and molecular dynamic simulations. This protein inactivates 
streptomycin by transferring an adenyl group to position six of the streptidine 
moiety. Our combined approach provides valuable information about the bioactive 
conformation for both the antibiotic and ATP and shows that the molecular 
recognition process for streptomycin involves a conformational selection 
phenomenon. The binding epitope for both ligands has also been analysed by 
1D-STD experiments. Finally, the specificity of the recognition process with 
respect to the aminoglycoside and to the nucleotide has been studied.

DOI: 10.1002/chem.200400941
PMID: 15984036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
