---
pmid: '39321809'
title: CDK5RAP2 activates microtubule nucleator γTuRC by facilitating template formation
  and actin release.
authors:
- Serna M
- Zimmermann F
- Vineethakumari C
- Gonzalez-Rodriguez N
- Llorca O
- Lüders J
journal: Dev Cell
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.001
---

# CDK5RAP2 activates microtubule nucleator γTuRC by facilitating template formation and actin release.
**Authors:** Serna M, Zimmermann F, Vineethakumari C, Gonzalez-Rodriguez N, Llorca O, Lüders J
**Journal:** Dev Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.001)

## Abstract

1. Dev Cell. 2024 Dec 2;59(23):3175-3188.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.001. 
Epub 2024 Sep 24.

CDK5RAP2 activates microtubule nucleator γTuRC by facilitating template 
formation and actin release.

Serna M(1), Zimmermann F(2), Vineethakumari C(2), Gonzalez-Rodriguez N(1), 
Llorca O(3), Lüders J(4).

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 
Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Mechanisms of Disease Programme, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB 
Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Baldiri 
Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Structural Biology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 
Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
ollorca@cnio.es.
(4)Mechanisms of Disease Programme, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB 
Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Baldiri 
Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: 
jens.luders@irbbarcelona.org.

To organize microtubules, cells tightly control the activity of the microtubule 
nucleator γ-tubulin ring complex (γTuRC). The open ring-shaped γTuRC was 
proposed to nucleate microtubules by a template mechanism. However, its splayed 
structure does not match microtubule symmetry, leaving it unclear how γTuRC 
becomes an efficient nucleator. Here, we identify the mechanism of γTuRC 
activation by CDK5RAP2 centrosomin motif 1 (CM1). Using cryoelectron microscopy 
(cryo-EM), we find that activation involves binding of multiple CM1 dimers to 
five distinct sites around the outside of the γTuRC cone, which crucially 
depends on regulatory modules formed by MZT2 and the N-terminal extensions of 
GCP2 subunits. CM1 binding promotes lateral interactions between GCP subunits to 
facilitate microtubule-like conformations and release of luminal actin that is 
integral to non-activated γTuRC. We propose a model where generation of γTuRC 
with an expanded conformational range, rather than perfect symmetry, is 
sufficient to boost nucleation activity.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2024.09.001
PMID: 39321809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
