---
pmid: '11240639'
title: The Drosophila gene Yippee reveals a novel family of putative zinc binding
  proteins highly conserved among eukaryotes.
authors:
- Roxström-Lindquist K
- Faye I
journal: Insect Mol Biol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2583.2001.00239.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Drosophila gene Yippee reveals a novel family of putative zinc binding proteins highly conserved among eukaryotes.
**Authors:** Roxström-Lindquist K, Faye I
**Journal:** Insect Mol Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-2583.2001.00239.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2583.2001.00239.x)

## Abstract

1. Insect Mol Biol. 2001 Feb;10(1):77-86. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2583.2001.00239.x.

The Drosophila gene Yippee reveals a novel family of putative zinc binding 
proteins highly conserved among eukaryotes.

Roxström-Lindquist K(1), Faye I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Stockholm, S-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

An intracellular Drosophila protein, Yippee, was identified in a yeast 
interaction trap screen as physically interacting with Hyalophora cecropia 
Hemolin. The Yippee gene was isolated, structurally characterized, and mapped to 
the region 12A on the X-chromosome. Yippee contains a putative zinc-finger-like 
metal binding domain. It is the first characterized member of a conserved gene 
family of proteins present in diverse eukaryotic organisms, ranging from 
cellular slime mould to humans. A human cDNA clone was isolated and shown to be 
76% identical to Drosophila Yippee. Yippee is ubiquitously expressed in 
different developmental stages of Drosophila and in different fetal tissues from 
human. Although the Hemolin-Yippee interaction remains to be further elucidated, 
the high degree of Yippee sequence conservation between a wide range of species 
suggests that this protein is of general importance in eukaryotes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2583.2001.00239.x
PMID: 11240639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
