---
pmid: '17408615'
title: Fis1, DLP1, and Pex11p coordinately regulate peroxisome morphogenesis.
authors:
- Kobayashi S
- Tanaka A
- Fujiki Y
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.02.028
---

# Fis1, DLP1, and Pex11p coordinately regulate peroxisome morphogenesis.
**Authors:** Kobayashi S, Tanaka A, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.02.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.02.028)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2007 May 1;313(8):1675-86. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.02.028.
Epub  2007 Mar 12.

Fis1, DLP1, and Pex11p coordinately regulate peroxisome morphogenesis.

Kobayashi S(1), Tanaka A, Fujiki Y.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Systems Life Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 
812-8581, Japan.

Dynamin-like protein 1 (DLP1) and Pex11pbeta function in morphogenesis of 
peroxisomes. In the present work, we investigated whether Fis1 is involved in 
fission of peroxisomes. Endogenous Fis1 was morphologically detected in 
peroxisomes as well as mitochondria in wild-type CHO-K1 and DLP1-defective ZP121 
cells. Subcellular fractionation studies also revealed the presence of Fis1 in 
peroxisomes. Peroxisomal Fis1 showed the same topology, i.e., C-tail anchored 
membrane protein, as the mitochondrial one. Furthermore, ectopic expression of 
FIS1 induced peroxisome proliferation in CHO-K1 cells, while the interference of 
FIS1 RNA resulted in tubulation of peroxisomes, hence reducing the number of 
peroxisomes. Fis1 interacted with Pex11pbeta, by direct binding apparently 
involving the C-terminal region of Pex11pbeta in the interaction. Pex11pbeta 
also interacted with each other, whereas the binding of Pex11pbeta to DLP1 was 
not detectable. Moreover, ternary complexes comprising Fis1, Pex11pbeta, and 
DLP1 were detected by chemical cross-linking. We also showed that the highly 
conserved N-terminal domain of Pex11pbeta was required for the 
homo-oligomerization of Pex11pbeta and indispensable for the 
peroxisome-proliferating activity. Taken together, these findings indicate that 
Fis1 plays important roles in peroxisome division and maintenance of peroxisome 
morphology in mammalian cells, possibly in a concerted manner with Pex11pbeta 
and DLP1.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.02.028
PMID: 17408615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
