---
pmid: '17659302'
title: Molecular basis of Bcl-xL's target recognition versatility revealed by the
  structure of Bcl-xL in complex with the BH3 domain of Beclin-1.
authors:
- Feng W
- Huang S
- Wu H
- Zhang M
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.069
---

# Molecular basis of Bcl-xL's target recognition versatility revealed by the structure of Bcl-xL in complex with the BH3 domain of Beclin-1.
**Authors:** Feng W, Huang S, Wu H, Zhang M
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.069](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.069)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 7;372(1):223-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.069. Epub
2007  Jun 30.

Molecular basis of Bcl-xL's target recognition versatility revealed by the 
structure of Bcl-xL in complex with the BH3 domain of Beclin-1.

Feng W(1), Huang S, Wu H, Zhang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Neuroscience Center, The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, P. R. 
China.

Beclin-1, originally identified as a Bcl-2 binding protein, is an evolutionarily 
conserved protein required for autophagy. The direct interaction between 
Beclin-1 and Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL provides a potential convergence point for 
apoptosis and autophagy, two programmed cell death processes. Given the 
functional significance of the interaction between Beclin-1 and Bcl-2/Bcl-xL, we 
performed detailed biochemical and structural characterizations of this 
interaction. We demonstrated that the Bcl-xL-binding domain of Beclin-1 contains 
a BH3 domain. Therefore, Beclin-1 is a new member of the BH3-only family 
proteins. The structure of Bcl-xL in complex with the Beclin-1 BH3 domain was 
determined at high resolution by NMR spectroscopy. Although similar to other 
known BH3 domains, the Beclin-1 BH3 domain displays its own distinct features in 
the complex with Bcl-xL. Systematic analysis of all known Bcl-xL/BH3 domain 
complexes helped us to identify the molecular basis underlying the capacity of 
Bcl-xL to recognize diverse target sequences.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.06.069
PMID: 17659302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
