---
pmid: '17018862'
title: Bcr-Abl signaling through the PI-3/S6 kinase pathway inhibits nuclear translocation
  of the transcription factor Bach2, which represses the antiapoptotic factor heme
  oxygenase-1.
authors:
- Yoshida C
- Yoshida F
- Sears DE
- Hart SM
- Ikebe D
- Muto A
- Basu S
- Igarashi K
- Melo JV
journal: Blood
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-12-040972
---

# Bcr-Abl signaling through the PI-3/S6 kinase pathway inhibits nuclear translocation of the transcription factor Bach2, which represses the antiapoptotic factor heme oxygenase-1.
**Authors:** Yoshida C, Yoshida F, Sears DE, Hart SM, Ikebe D, Muto A, Basu S, Igarashi K, Melo JV
**Journal:** Blood (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-12-040972](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-12-040972)

## Abstract

1. Blood. 2007 Feb 1;109(3):1211-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-12-040972. Epub 2006 
Oct 3.

Bcr-Abl signaling through the PI-3/S6 kinase pathway inhibits nuclear 
translocation of the transcription factor Bach2, which represses the 
antiapoptotic factor heme oxygenase-1.

Yoshida C(1), Yoshida F, Sears DE, Hart SM, Ikebe D, Muto A, Basu S, Igarashi K, 
Melo JV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, UK.

The malignant phenotype of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is due to the abnormal 
tyrosine kinase activity of the Bcr-Abl oncoprotein. We have previously reported 
that expression of the Bach2 transcription factor, which induces apoptosis in 
response to oxidative stress, is greatly reduced in CML cells. Because these 
cells are resistant to apoptosis, we tested whether Bach2 could also be 
regulated through posttranslational mechanisms that promote inhibition of the 
apoptotic response to mutagenic stimuli in CML. We found that Bach2 is 
phosphorylated on S521 via the phosphatidylinositol-3/S6 kinase pathway, and 
substitution of this site to alanine leads to nuclear accumulation of the 
protein, indicating that this phosphorylation is important for its subcellular 
localization. Ectopic expression of the S521 mutant imparts greater impairment 
to CML cell growth than the wild-type factor. Furthermore, we showed that Bach2 
transcriptionally represses heme oxygenase-1, an antiapoptotic factor 
up-regulated in CML. Because CML cells are known to produce high levels of 
intracellular reactive oxygen species, overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 
resulting from inhibition of Bach2 activity may contribute to their genomic 
instability and leukemic phenotype.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-12-040972
PMID: 17018862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
