---
pmid: '1749427'
title: A three-base-pair deletion in the peripherin-RDS gene in one form of retinitis
  pigmentosa.
authors:
- Farrar GJ
- Kenna P
- Jordan SA
- Kumar-Singh R
- Humphries MM
- Sharp EM
- Sheils DM
- Humphries P
journal: Nature
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/354478a0
---

# A three-base-pair deletion in the peripherin-RDS gene in one form of retinitis pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Farrar GJ, Kenna P, Jordan SA, Kumar-Singh R, Humphries MM, Sharp EM, Sheils DM, Humphries P
**Journal:** Nature (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1038/354478a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/354478a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1991 Dec 12;354(6353):478-80. doi: 10.1038/354478a0.

A three-base-pair deletion in the peripherin-RDS gene in one form of retinitis 
pigmentosa.

Farrar GJ(1), Kenna P, Jordan SA, Kumar-Singh R, Humphries MM, Sharp EM, Sheils 
DM, Humphries P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.

The group of retinopathies termed retinitis pigmentosa (RP) greatly contribute 
to visual dysfunction in man with a frequency of roughly 1 in 4,000. We mapped 
the first autosomal dominant RP (adRP) gene to chromosome 3q, close to the gene 
encoding rhodopsin, a rod photoreceptor pigment protein. Subsequently, mutations 
in this gene have been implicated as responsible for some forms of adRP. Another 
adRP gene has been mapped to chromosome 8p. A third adRP gene in a large Irish 
pedigree has been mapped to chromosome 6p, showing tight linkage with the gene 
for peripherin, a photoreceptor cell-specific glycoprotein, which is thus a 
strong candidate for the defective gene. We have now identified a 
three-base-pair deletion which results in the loss of one of a pair of highly 
conserved cysteine residues in the predicted third transmembrane domain of 
peripherin. This deletion segregates with the disease phenotype but is not 
present in unaffected controls, and suggests that mutant peripherin gives rise 
to retinitis pigmentosa.

DOI: 10.1038/354478a0
PMID: 1749427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
