---
pmid: '10615133'
title: Mutations in a new photoreceptor-pineal gene on 17p cause Leber congenital
  amaurosis.
authors:
- Sohocki MM
- Bowne SJ
- Sullivan LS
- Blackshaw S
- Cepko CL
- Payne AM
- Bhattacharya SS
- Khaliq S
- Qasim Mehdi S
- Birch DG
- Harrison WR
- Elder FF
- Heckenlively JR
- Daiger SP
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2581448
doi: 10.1038/71732
---

# Mutations in a new photoreceptor-pineal gene on 17p cause Leber congenital amaurosis.
**Authors:** Sohocki MM, Bowne SJ, Sullivan LS, Blackshaw S, Cepko CL, Payne AM, Bhattacharya SS, Khaliq S, Qasim Mehdi S, Birch DG, Harrison WR, Elder FF, Heckenlively JR, Daiger SP
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/71732](https://doi.org/10.1038/71732)
**PMC:** [PMC2581448](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2581448/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Jan;24(1):79-83. doi: 10.1038/71732.

Mutations in a new photoreceptor-pineal gene on 17p cause Leber congenital 
amaurosis.

Sohocki MM(1), Bowne SJ, Sullivan LS, Blackshaw S, Cepko CL, Payne AM, 
Bhattacharya SS, Khaliq S, Qasim Mehdi S, Birch DG, Harrison WR, Elder FF, 
Heckenlively JR, Daiger SP.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, The University of 
Texas-Houston Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA, MIM 204000) accounts for at least 5% of all 
inherited retinal disease and is the most severe inherited retinopathy with the 
earliest age of onset. Individuals affected with LCA are diagnosed at birth or 
in the first few months of life with severely impaired vision or blindness, 
nystagmus and an abnormal or flat electroretinogram (ERG). Mutations in GUCY2D 
(ref. 3), RPE65 (ref. 4) and CRX (ref. 5) are known to cause LCA, but one study 
identified disease-causing GUCY2D mutations in only 8 of 15 families whose LCA 
locus maps to 17p13.1 (ref. 3), suggesting another LCA locus might be located on 
17p13.1. Confirming this prediction, the LCA in one Pakistani family mapped to 
17p13.1, between D17S849 and D17S960-a region that excludes GUCY2D. The LCA in 
this family has been designated LCA4 (ref. 6). We describe here a new 
photoreceptor/pineal-expressed gene, AIPL1 (encoding aryl-hydrocarbon 
interacting protein-like 1), that maps within the LCA4 candidate region and 
whose protein contains three tetratricopeptide (TPR) motifs, consistent with 
nuclear transport or chaperone activity. A homozygous nonsense mutation at codon 
278 is present in all affected members of the original LCA4 family. AIPL1 
mutations may cause approximately 20% of recessive LCA, as disease-causing 
mutations were identified in 3 of 14 LCA families not tested previously for 
linkage.

DOI: 10.1038/71732
PMCID: PMC2581448
PMID: 10615133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
