---
pmid: '23071313'
title: IL-10-induced microRNA-187 negatively regulates TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12p40 production
  in TLR4-stimulated monocytes.
authors:
- Rossato M
- Curtale G
- Tamassia N
- Castellucci M
- Mori L
- Gasperini S
- Mariotti B
- De Luca M
- Mirolo M
- Cassatella MA
- Locati M
- Bazzoni F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3494907
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1209100109
---

# IL-10-induced microRNA-187 negatively regulates TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12p40 production in TLR4-stimulated monocytes.
**Authors:** Rossato M, Curtale G, Tamassia N, Castellucci M, Mori L, Gasperini S, Mariotti B, De Luca M, Mirolo M, Cassatella MA, Locati M, Bazzoni F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1209100109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1209100109)
**PMC:** [PMC3494907](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3494907/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):E3101-10. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1209100109. Epub 2012 Oct 15.

IL-10-induced microRNA-187 negatively regulates TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12p40 
production in TLR4-stimulated monocytes.

Rossato M(1), Curtale G, Tamassia N, Castellucci M, Mori L, Gasperini S, 
Mariotti B, De Luca M, Mirolo M, Cassatella MA, Locati M, Bazzoni F.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Pathology, Department of Pathology and Diagnostics, 
University of Verona, I-37134 Verona, Italy.

IL-10 is a potent anti-inflammatory molecule that, in phagocytes, negatively 
targets cytokine expression at transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. 
Posttranscriptional checkpoints also represent the specific target of a recently 
discovered, evolutionary conserved class of small silencing RNAs known as 
"microRNAs" (miRNAs), which display the peculiar function of negatively 
regulating mRNA processing, stability, and translation. In this study, we report 
that activation of primary human monocytes up-regulates the expression of 
miR-187 both in vitro and in vivo. Accordingly, we identify miR-187 as an 
IL-10-dependent miRNA playing a role in IL-10-mediated suppression of TNF-α, 
IL-6, and the p40 subunit of IL-12 (IL-12p40) produced by primary human 
monocytes following activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Ectopic 
expression of miR-187 consistently and selectively reduces TNFα, IL-6, and 
IL-12p40 produced by LPS-activated monocytes. Conversely, the production of 
LPS-induced TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12p40 is increased significantly when miR-187 
expression is silenced. Our data demonstrate that miR-187 directly targets TNF-α 
mRNA stability and translation and indirectly decreases IL-6 and IL-12p40 
expression via down-modulation of IκBζ, a master regulator of the transcription 
of these latter two cytokines. These results uncover an miRNA-mediated pathway 
controlling cytokine expression and demonstrate a central role of miR-187 in the 
physiological regulation of IL-10-driven anti-inflammatory responses.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1209100109
PMCID: PMC3494907
PMID: 23071313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
