---
pmid: '21314430'
title: Actin structure and function.
authors:
- Dominguez R
- Holmes KC
journal: Annu Rev Biophys
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3130349
doi: 10.1146/annurev-biophys-042910-155359
---

# Actin structure and function.
**Authors:** Dominguez R, Holmes KC
**Journal:** Annu Rev Biophys (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-biophys-042910-155359](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys-042910-155359)
**PMC:** [PMC3130349](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3130349/)

## Abstract

1. Annu Rev Biophys. 2011;40:169-86. doi: 10.1146/annurev-biophys-042910-155359.

Actin structure and function.

Dominguez R(1), Holmes KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6085, USA. droberto@mail.med.upenn.edu

Actin is the most abundant protein in most eukaryotic cells. It is highly 
conserved and participates in more protein-protein interactions than any known 
protein. These properties, along with its ability to transition between 
monomeric (G-actin) and filamentous (F-actin) states under the control of 
nucleotide hydrolysis, ions, and a large number of actin-binding proteins, make 
actin a critical player in many cellular functions, ranging from cell motility 
and the maintenance of cell shape and polarity to the regulation of 
transcription. Moreover, the interaction of filamentous actin with myosin forms 
the basis of muscle contraction. Owing to its central role in the cell, the 
actin cytoskeleton is also disrupted or taken over by numerous pathogens. Here 
we review structures of G-actin and F-actin and discuss some of the interactions 
that control the polymerization and disassembly of actin.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-biophys-042910-155359
PMCID: PMC3130349
PMID: 21314430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
