---
pmid: '12620238'
title: Mechanism of XIAP-mediated inhibition of caspase-9.
authors:
- Shiozaki EN
- Chai J
- Rigotti DJ
- Riedl SJ
- Li P
- Srinivasula SM
- Alnemri ES
- Fairman R
- Shi Y
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00054-6
---

# Mechanism of XIAP-mediated inhibition of caspase-9.
**Authors:** Shiozaki EN, Chai J, Rigotti DJ, Riedl SJ, Li P, Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, Fairman R, Shi Y
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00054-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00054-6)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2003 Feb;11(2):519-27. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00054-6.

Mechanism of XIAP-mediated inhibition of caspase-9.

Shiozaki EN(1), Chai J, Rigotti DJ, Riedl SJ, Li P, Srinivasula SM, Alnemri ES, 
Fairman R, Shi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lewis Thomas Laboratory, Princeton 
University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) proteins potently inhibit the catalytic 
activity of caspases. While profound insight into the inhibition of the effector 
caspases has been gained in recent years, the mechanism of how the initiator 
caspase-9 is regulated by IAPs remains enigmatic. This paper reports the crystal 
structure of caspase-9 in an inhibitory complex with the third baculoviral IAP 
repeat (BIR3) of XIAP at 2.4 A resolution. The structure reveals that the BIR3 
domain forms a heterodimer with a caspase-9 monomer. Strikingly, the surface of 
caspase-9 that interacts with BIR3 also mediates its homodimerization. We 
demonstrate that monomeric caspase-9 is catalytically inactive due to the 
absence of a supporting sequence element that could be provided by 
homodimerization. Thus, XIAP sequesters caspase-9 in a monomeric state, which 
serves to prevent catalytic activity. These studies, in conjunction with other 
observations, define a unified mechanism for the activation of all caspases.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00054-6
PMID: 12620238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
