---
pmid: '17163983'
title: Aspergillus nidulans VeA subcellular localization is dependent on the importin
  alpha carrier and on light.
authors:
- Stinnett SM
- Espeso EA
- Cobeño L
- Araújo-Bazán L
- Calvo AM
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05506.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Aspergillus nidulans VeA subcellular localization is dependent on the importin alpha carrier and on light.
**Authors:** Stinnett SM, Espeso EA, Cobeño L, Araújo-Bazán L, Calvo AM
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05506.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05506.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2007 Jan;63(1):242-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05506.x. 
Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Aspergillus nidulans VeA subcellular localization is dependent on the importin 
alpha carrier and on light.

Stinnett SM(1), Espeso EA, Cobeño L, Araújo-Bazán L, Calvo AM.

Author information:
(1)Northern Illinois University, Biological Sciences, 1425 W. Lincoln Hwy 
Montgomery Hall, Dekalb, IL 60115, USA.

The veA gene is a light-dependent regulator governing development and secondary 
metabolism in Aspergillus nidulans. We have identified a putative bipartite 
nuclear localization signal (NLS) motif in the A. nidulans VeA amino acid 
sequence and demonstrated its functionality when expressed in yeast. 
Furthermore, migration of VeA to the nucleus was dependent on the importin 
alpha. This bipartite NLS is also functional when VeA is expressed in A. 
nidulans. Interestingly, we found that VeA migration to the nucleus is 
light-dependent. While in the dark VeA is located mainly in the nuclei, under 
light VeA is found abundantly in the cytoplasm. The VeA1 mutant protein (lacking 
the first 36 amino acids at the N-terminus) was found predominantly in the 
cytoplasm independent of illumination. This indicates that the truncated 
bipartite NLS in VeA1 is not functional and fails to respond to light. These 
results might explain the lack of the morphological light-dependent response in 
strains carrying the veA1 allele. We also evaluated the effect of light on 
production of the mycotoxin sterigmatocystin in a veA wild-type and the veA1 
mutant strains and found that the highest amount of toxin was produced by the 
veA+ strain growing in the dark, condition favouring accumulation of VeA in the 
nucleus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2006.05506.x
PMID: 17163983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
