---
pmid: '17307401'
title: The novel gene mus7(+) is involved in the repair of replication-associated
  DNA damage in fission yeast.
authors:
- Yokoyama M
- Inoue H
- Ishii C
- Murakami Y
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.01.005
---

# The novel gene mus7(+) is involved in the repair of replication-associated DNA damage in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Yokoyama M, Inoue H, Ishii C, Murakami Y
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.01.005)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2007 Jun 1;6(6):770-80. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.01.005. 
Epub 2007 Feb 20.

The novel gene mus7(+) is involved in the repair of replication-associated DNA 
damage in fission yeast.

Yokoyama M(1), Inoue H, Ishii C, Murakami Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoinkawahara-cho, Kyoto, 
Japan.

The progression of replication forks is often impeded by obstacles that cause 
them to stall or collapse, and appropriate responses to replication-associated 
DNA damage are important for genome integrity. Here we identified a new gene, 
mus7(+), that is involved in the repair of replication-associated DNA damage in 
the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The Deltamus7 mutant shows enhanced 
sensitivity to methyl methanesulfonate (MMS), camptothecin, and hydroxyurea, 
agents that cause replication fork stalling or collapse, but not to ultraviolet 
light or X-rays. Epistasis analysis of MMS sensitivity indicates that Mus7 
functions in the same pathway as Mus81, a subunit of the Mus81-Eme1 
structure-specific endonuclease, which has been implicated in the repair of the 
replication-associated DNA damage. In Deltamus7 and Deltamus81 cells, the repair 
of MMS-induced DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) is severely impaired. Moreover, 
some cells with either mutation are hyper-elongated or enlarged, and most of 
these cells accumulate in late G2 phase. Spontaneous Rad22 (recombination 
mediator protein RAD52 homolog) foci increase in S phase to late G2 phase in 
Deltamus7 and Deltamus81 cells. These results suggest that 
replication-associated DSBs accumulate in these cells and that Rad22 foci form 
in the absence of Mus7 or Mus81. We also found that the rate of spontaneous 
conversion-type recombination is reduced in mitotic Deltamus7 cells, suggesting 
that Rhp51- (RAD51 homolog) dependent homologous recombination is disturbed in 
this mutant. From these data, we propose that Mus7 functions in the repair of 
replication-associated DSBs by promoting RAD51-dependent conversion-type 
recombination downstream of Rad22 and Mus81.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2007.01.005
PMID: 17307401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
