---
pmid: '21127063'
title: Ancient ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) localizes to lipid droplets and binds the
  E2 ubiquitin conjugase G2 (Ube2g2) via its G2 binding region.
authors:
- Spandl J
- Lohmann D
- Kuerschner L
- Moessinger C
- Thiele C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3037673
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190785
---

# Ancient ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) localizes to lipid droplets and binds the E2 ubiquitin conjugase G2 (Ube2g2) via its G2 binding region.
**Authors:** Spandl J, Lohmann D, Kuerschner L, Moessinger C, Thiele C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.190785](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.190785)
**PMC:** [PMC3037673](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3037673/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5599-606. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190785. Epub 
2010 Dec 2.

Ancient ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) localizes to lipid droplets and binds the E2 
ubiquitin conjugase G2 (Ube2g2) via its G2 binding region.

Spandl J(1), Lohmann D, Kuerschner L, Moessinger C, Thiele C.

Author information:
(1)Life and Medical Sciences Institute, University of Bonn, Carl-Troll-Strasse 
31, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

Lipid droplets (LDs), the major intracellular storage sites for neutral lipids, 
consist of a neutral lipid core surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer membrane. 
In addition to their function in lipid storage, LDs participate in lipid 
biosynthesis and recently were implicated in proteasomal protein degradation and 
autophagy. To identify components of the protein degradation machinery on LDs, 
we studied several candidates identified in previous LD proteome analyses. Here, 
we demonstrate that the highly conserved and broadly expressed ancient 
ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) localizes to LDs, where it integrates into the LD 
surface in a monotopic fashion with both termini facing the cytosol. AUP1 
contains a C-terminal domain with strong homology to a domain known as G2BR, 
which binds E2 ubiquitin conjugases. We show that AUP1, by means of its G2BR 
domain, binds to Ube2g2. This binding is abolished by deletion or mutation of 
the G2BR domain, although the LD localization of AUP1 is not affected. The 
presence of the AUP1-Ube2g2 complex at LDs provides a direct molecular link 
between LDs and the cellular ubiquitination machinery.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.190785
PMCID: PMC3037673
PMID: 21127063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Lipid droplets (LDs), the major intracellular storage sites for neutral lipids, consist of a neutral lipid core surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer membrane. In addition to their function in lipid storage, LDs participate in lipid biosynthesis and recently were implicated in proteasomal protein degradation and autophagy. To identify components of the protein degradation machinery on LDs, we studied several candidates identified in previous LD proteome analyses. Here, we demonstrate that the highly conserved and broadly expressed ancient ubiquitous protein 1 (AUP1) localizes to LDs, where it integrates into the LD surface in a monotopic fashion with both termini facing the cytosol. AUP1 contains a C-terminal domain with strong homology to a domain known as G2BR, which binds E2 ubiquitin conjugases. We show that AUP1, by means of its G2BR domain, binds to Ube2g2. This binding is abolished by deletion or mutation of the G2BR domain, although the LD localization of AUP1 is not affected. The presence of the AUP1-Ube2g2 complex at LDs provides a direct molecular link between LDs and the cellular ubiquitination machinery.

Introduction

Specialized organelles called lipid droplets (LD) 2 ( 1 ) play a key role in intracellular turnover and storage of neutral lipids. In LDs, a hydrophobic core of neutral lipids, usually triacylglycerides and esterified sterols, is surrounded by a monolayer of phospholipids with several embedded or associated proteins, most prominently proteins of the PAT family, containing perilipin, adipophilin, and the tail-interacting protein of 47 kDa (TIP-47) ( 2 , 3 ). The compartmentalization via a monolayer of phospholipids, instead of the conventional bilayer, is the most characteristic difference of LDs to other organelles ( 4 , 5 ). LDs were originally regarded as immobile storage sites for triacylglyceride in adipocytes. LDs perform additional functions in many cell types, e.g. in signaling and transport events and as a general reservoir for hydrophobic and otherwise toxic substances ( 6 , 7 ). LDs are ubiquitous, motile, and highly dynamic organelles (reviewed in Refs. 8 , 9 ), which interact with many other organelles, e.g. the ER, mitochondria, endosomes, and peroxisomes ( 10 – 14 ). Progress in our knowledge about the cell biology of LDs was the subject of several recent reviews ( 9 , 15 – 20 ), but essential questions are still open, like the mechanism of targeting or degradation of LD proteins or the machinery for regulation of LD size.

Recent studies from several laboratories have provided comprehensive insight into the proteome of LDs of various cell types ( 21 – 26 ). Comparative analysis of these LD proteomes revealed the repeated identification of AUP1 as a component of LDs ( 22 , 23 , 26 ). Originally, the AUP1 gene was identified as a part of the mnd2 (motor neuron degeneration 2) locus in mouse, mutation of which results in a lethal neuromuscular disorder ( 27 ). Independently, AUP1 was found as a binding partner of adenoviral proteins ( 28 , 29 ). AUP1 was also reported as a cytosolic protein that binds to integrin α subunits and supports inside-out signaling in platelets ( 30 , 31 ). Very recently, AUP1 was identified as a component of the Sel1l complex at the ER ( 32 , 33 ), indicating an involvement of AUP1 in protein degradation processes.

Here, we present evidence that a major fraction of AUP1 resides on lipid droplets. We show that AUP1 is a monotopic membrane protein with both termini facing the cytosol. We demonstrate that AUP1 binds to the E2 conjugase Ube2g2 and recruits it to LDs. Thereby AUP1 provides a molecular link between LDs and ubiquitination.

DISCUSSION

We identified and characterized AUP1 as an LD protein that provides a molecular connection of LDs to the ubiquitination machinery. Although AUP1 is highly conserved and ubiquitously expressed, little is currently known about the protein. In recent years, AUP1 was found in several LD proteomes ( 22 , 23 , 26 ). Our subcellular fractionation and microscopic localization data demonstrate that AUP1 is a specific component of LDs in several different cell types. The failure to detect AUP1 localization to LDs in former studies ( 30 , 32 , 48 ) is likely due to the cell lines used in those studies and their respective metabolic state. Although some cell lines, e.g. HeLa cells, contain only few and small LDs in the absence of oleate supplementation, our standard cell lines, A431 and Huh7, contain easily detectable LDs under normal growth conditions. Because AUP1 can dually localize to LDs and ER membranes, it will be found on ER membranes in the absence of LDs. Similarly, overexpressed AUP1 tends to localize to the ER because the available LD surface cannot cope with large amounts of AUP1 protein, especially in cells with few or small LDs (see AUP1 in COS7 cells under FCS conditions in Fig. 5 A ). Another reason for the previous failure to detect AUP1 at LDs may be differences in the fixation and permeabilization procedure before microscopy. It was shown ( 49 , 50 ) that some LD proteins are not detected on LDs when cells are treated with Triton X-100 for permeabilization.

It has been reported previously that LDs are connected to ubiquitination and protein degradation. Some peripheral LD proteins such as adipophilin and perilipin are known to be ubiquitinated and degraded via the proteasome ( 51 – 53 ). Whether integral LD proteins such as caveolin, DGAT2, or NSDHL use similar mechanisms is unclear. Recently, the importance of E3 ligases for LD turnover was reported, but further molecular components or mechanistic details are lacking ( 54 ). Apolipoprotein B accumulates in crescent-shaped structures around LDs in hepatocytes after inhibition of the proteasome or autophagy ( 7 , 55 ), suggesting a role of LDs in degradation of excess apolipoproteins. In support of this function of LDs, a recent study ( 56 ) demonstrated accumulation of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase around LDs under conditions of impaired proteasomal degradation.

AUP1 provides a direct molecular connection of LDs to the ubiquitination machinery by binding and recruiting the E2 conjugase Ube2g2 ( Fig. 8 ). Remarkably, Ube2g2 is the E2 conjugase that plays a central role in the ERAD process. Whether the AUP1-Ube2g2 complexes on LDs participate in an ERAD-like process now has to be addressed by further functional studies. Being specifically concentrated on LDs, AUP1 may participate in the regulation of LDs by linking LD turnover to the proteasomal degradation machinery in a cell. Recent data support this concept of AUP1 activity, because AUP1 was found in a complex with Sel1l, a component of the Hrd1-ligase complex, participating in the dislocation of misfolded glycoproteins on the ER ( 32 ).

The assembly of a functional ubiquitination complex at the LD surface should require the presence of an E3 ligase, in addition to the AUP1-Ube2g2 complex. So far, LD proteome analyses have not revealed a candidate E3 ligase. Ube2g2 and its yeast homologue Ubc7p can assemble pre-formed polyubiquitin chains that are transferred to the substrate protein by its cognate E3 ligases AMFR/gp78 or Hrd1p, respectively ( 47 , 57 , 58 ). The formation of polyubiquitin chains on Ube2g2 depends on the G2BR of AMFR/gp78 ( 59 ), which turns out to be an allosteric activator of Ube2g2 transfer activity ( 39 ). Although the G2BR of AUP1 may functionally replace the G2BR of AMFR/gp78, there is no RING finger domain on AUP1 that might catalyze the actual ubiquitin chain transfer. The missing E3 may either be an (overlooked) LD protein or a cytoplasmic protein or a component of the ER that closely associates with LDs. Further studies are necessary to elucidate its identity.

In summary, we demonstrate that AUP1 is a monotopic membrane protein that localizes to lipid droplets. AUP1 binds the E2-conjugase Ube2g2 via its G2BR domain and recruits it to LDs. Further understanding of AUP1, its control by upstream signaling events, and its role in Ube2g2-dependent ubiquitination will improve our understanding of LD turnover and the role of LDs in protein degradation.
