---
pmid: '24363316'
title: Arabidopsis Kelch repeat F-box proteins regulate phenylpropanoid biosynthesis
  via controlling the turnover of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase.
authors:
- Zhang X
- Gou M
- Liu CJ
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3904001
doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.119644
---

# Arabidopsis Kelch repeat F-box proteins regulate phenylpropanoid biosynthesis via controlling the turnover of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Gou M, Liu CJ
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.113.119644](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.113.119644)
**PMC:** [PMC3904001](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3904001/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2013 Dec;25(12):4994-5010. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.119644. Epub 2013 
Dec 20.

Arabidopsis Kelch repeat F-box proteins regulate phenylpropanoid biosynthesis 
via controlling the turnover of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase.

Zhang X(1), Gou M, Liu CJ.

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 
11973.

Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) catalyzes the first rate-limiting step in the 
phenylpropanoid pathway, which controls carbon flux to a variety of bioactive 
small-molecule aromatic compounds, and to lignin, the structural component of 
the cell wall. PAL is regulated at both the transcriptional and translational 
levels. Our knowledge about the transcriptional regulation of PAL is relatively 
comprehensive, but our knowledge of the molecular basis of the posttranslational 
regulation of PAL remains limited. Here, we demonstrate that the Arabidopsis 
thaliana Kelch repeat F-box (KFB) proteins KFB01, KFB20, and KFB50 physically 
interact with four PAL isozymes and mediate their proteolytic turnover via the 
ubiquitination-26S proteasome pathway. The KFB genes are differentially 
expressed in Arabidopsis tissues and respond to developmental and environmental 
cues. Up- or downregulation of their expression reciprocally affects the 
stability of the PAL enzymes, consequently altering the levels of 
phenylpropanoids. These data suggest that the KFB-mediated protein 
ubiquitination and degradation regulates the proteolysis of PALs, thus 
posttranslationally regulating phenylpropanoid metabolism. Characterizing the 
KFB-mediated proteolysis of PAL enzymes may inform future strategies for 
manipulating the synthesis of bioactive phenolics.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.113.119644
PMCID: PMC3904001
PMID: 24363316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase ( PAL ) catalyzes the first rate-limiting step in the phenylpropanoid pathway, which controls carbon flux to a variety of bioactive small-molecule aromatic compounds, and to lignin, the structural component of the cell wall. PAL is regulated at both the transcriptional and translational levels. Our knowledge about the transcriptional regulation of PAL is relatively comprehensive, but our knowledge of the molecular basis of the posttranslational regulation of PAL remains limited. Here, we demonstrate that the Arabidopsis thaliana Kelch repeat F-box (KFB) proteins KFB01, KFB20, and KFB50 physically interact with four PAL isozymes and mediate their proteolytic turnover via the ubiquitination-26S proteasome pathway. The KFB genes are differentially expressed in Arabidopsis tissues and respond to developmental and environmental cues. Up- or downregulation of their expression reciprocally affects the stability of the PAL enzymes, consequently altering the levels of phenylpropanoids. These data suggest that the KFB-mediated protein ubiquitination and degradation regulates the proteolysis of PALs , thus posttranslationally regulating phenylpropanoid metabolism. Characterizing the KFB-mediated proteolysis of PAL enzymes may inform future strategies for manipulating the synthesis of bioactive phenolics.

INTRODUCTION

Phenylpropanoids comprise a large family of aromatic metabolites, including the building blocks of the cell wall structural component lignin, and myriad small molecule phenolics, such as coumarins, stilbenes, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and condensed tannins ( Vogt, 2010 ; Fraser and Chapple, 2011 ), all of which have diverse functions in plant growth and development and plant–environment interactions ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ). Many phenolics also have antioxidant activities that can prevent cancer and cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases and therefore are beneficial to human health ( Winkel-Shirley, 2001 ; Boudet, 2007 ; Martin, 2013 ). The biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids entails a sequence of central enzyme–regulated reactions, from which branch pathways emanate toward different aromatic end products. Multiple levels of regulation control these synthetic processes ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ; Martin and Paz-Ares, 1997 ; Weisshaar and Jenkins, 1998 ). At the transcriptional level, an array of transcription factors, primarily the MYB, NAC, and WRKY domain–containing proteins, act as positive or negative regulators and constitute a complex, hierarchically organized network, modulating the transcription of the phenylpropanoid-lignin biosynthetic enzymes ( Zhong and Ye, 2007 ; Zhao and Dixon, 2011 ). In addition, a MYB-basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor-WD40 complex regulates flavonoid-anthocyanin biosynthesis ( Broun, 2005 ). Substantial research has examined the transcriptional regulation of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, but less is known about the multifaceted regulatory mechanisms controlling phenolic biosynthesis beyond the transcriptional level.

l -Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase ( PAL ; E.C.4.3.1.5) is the entry point enzyme directing the flow of reduced carbon to the various branches of phenylpropanoid metabolism. It catalyzes the nonoxidative deamination of Phe, yielding trans -cinnamic acid ( Cochrane et al., 2004 ). PAL activity determines the flux through the phenylpropanoid pathway and the rate of phenylpropanoid production ( Bate et al., 1994 ). PAL is a tetrameric enzyme; in most species, its subunits are encoded by a small multigene family ( Cramer et al., 1989 ; Wanner et al., 1995 ). Arabidopsis has four PAL members ( Wanner et al., 1995 ; Raes et al., 2003 ): Three (PAL1, PAL2, and PAL4) exhibit a high binding affinity for Phe and are associated with both the soluble phenolic and tissue-specific lignin synthesis ( Rohde et al., 2004 ; Huang et al., 2010 ). By contrast, PAL3 has much lower in vitro catalytic efficacy than the other three isozymes and its biological function remains unclear ( Cochrane et al., 2004 ).

In plants, PAL activity is modulated by developmental cues and by biotic and abiotic stresses, such as wounding, UV/blue light irradiation, and infections by fungal pathogens ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ). These stimuli affect de novo synthesis of PAL ( Edwards et al., 1985 ) and the inactivation and/or turnover of PAL protein ( Tanaka and Uritani, 1977 ; Bolwell et al., 1985 ). Earlier studies revealed that environmental factors transiently increase the cellular level of PAL ; after the initial increase, PAL often rapidly declines to basal or near-basal levels ( Tanaka and Uritani, 1977 ; Lawton et al., 1980 ; Shields et al., 1982 ; Jones, 1984 ), suggesting rapid turnover of the enzyme. In addition, the high concentration of the biosynthetic intermediates of the pathway also causes feedback regulation, triggering the quick decay of PAL activity ( Lamb et al., 1979 ; Shields et al., 1982 ; Bubna et al., 2011 ). Those data imply complicated regulation of PAL activity at posttranslational and metabolic levels. However, so far, the molecular nature of the PAL degrading system remains unclear.

The selective degradation of proteins largely occurs via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Ubiquitination-26S proteasome–controlled protein degradation acts as a powerful posttranslational regulatory mechanism, finely tuning diverse eukaryotic cellular processes ( Smalle and Vierstra, 2004 ). Ubiquitin conjugation requires the sequential action of three enzyme complexes: the ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and the ubiquitin-protein ligase (E3). Members of the Skp1-Cullin-F-box ( SCF ) complex class of E3 ligases generally comprise four main subunits: SKP1, Cullin1, RBX1, and one member of the large family of F-box proteins ( del Pozo and Estelle, 2000 ; Lechner et al., 2006 ). Within this complex, cullin interacts both with SKP1 and RBX1, forming a scaffold on which different F-box proteins assemble. The F-box proteins interact selectively with the target proteins, thereby conferring specificity on the complex ( del Pozo and Estelle, 2000 ). The Arabidopsis thaliana genome contains nearly 700 genes encoding predicted F-box proteins ( Gagne et al., 2002 ); these fall into different subfamilies, according to the presence of additional protein–protein interaction domains near the C terminus. One subfamily, the Kelch motif (repeat) containing F-box (KFB) proteins, were initially identified in Drosophila melanogaster ( Bork and Doolittle, 1994 ), and more than 270 members have been annotated from Arabidopsis , poplar ( Populus trichocarpa ), rice ( Oryza sativa ), maize ( Zea mays ), pine ( Pinus taeda ), and Physcomitrella patens ( Sun et al., 2007 ). A few characterized KFBs mainly function in circadian control or in modulating flowering time ( Nelson et al., 2000 ; Han et al., 2004 ; Somers et al., 2004 ; Yasuhara et al., 2004 ; Imaizumi et al., 2005 ), but their roles in regulating plant secondary metabolism remain unclear.

To gain insights into the molecular basis of the posttranslational regulation of phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and its potential interplay with other biological processes, we systematically explored the potential protein–protein interactions of the phenylpropanoid-lignin biosynthetic enzymes by yeast two-hybrid ( Y2H ) assays and tandem affinity protein purification–mass spectrometry. Here, we show that three Arabidopsis KFB proteins physically interact with and mediate the proteolytic turnover of four PAL isozymes, disturbing KFB expression consequently affects the biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids.

DISCUSSION

As a major branch point between the primary and secondary metabolic pathways in plants, PAL directs up to 30% of the fixed carbon source from the shikimate pathway to different phenolics ( Rohde et al., 2004 ). Its activity is exquisitely regulated during the developmental phases associated with the cell type–specific synthesis of lignin and the flavonoid pigments and by an array of environmental cues associated with generating the phenylpropanoid products involved in adaptation or protection ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ). Different mechanisms control the activity of this rate-limiting enzyme ( Dixon and Paiva, 1995 ; Martin and Paz-Ares, 1997 ; Weisshaar and Jenkins, 1998 ; Vogt, 2010 ). For example, in many species and cell suspension cultures, PAL activity was induced transiently in response to biotic or abiotic stimuli. Such transient increases of PAL activity, which often constitute an early defense response leading to accumulation of phenylpropanoid-derived phytoalexins in the cell cultures, was evident as a consequence of a rapid stimulation of PAL mRNA synthesis that engenders the de novo synthesis of enzymes ( Edwards et al., 1985 ). The subsequent rapid decay of the induced activity was considered to be a posttranslational event ( Tanaka and Uritani, 1977 ; Lamb et al., 1979 ; Lawton et al., 1980 ; Shields et al., 1982 ; Jones, 1984 ). Some researchers proposed an inactivation mechanism that reversibly converts PAL to its inactive form ( Attridge and Smith, 1973 ; French and Smith, 1975 ; Creasy, 1976 ), but an immunoprecipitation experiment suggested that the decline in PAL activity might be due to its proteolytic turnover ( Tanaka and Uritani, 1977 ). In our study, evidence from in vitro and in planta experiments suggests that a group of ubiquitin E3 ligase F-box proteins specifically interact with PAL isozymes and mediate their degradation through the ubiquitination-26S proteasome pathway.
