---
reference_id: PMID:37686174
title: High Thioredoxin Domain-Containing Protein 11 Expression Is Associated with Tumour Progression in Glioma.
authors:
- Chen YT
- Chung CL
- Cheng YW
- Lin CJ
- Tseng TT
- Hsu SS
- Tsai HP
- Kwan AL
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241713367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High Thioredoxin Domain-Containing Protein 11 Expression Is Associated with Tumour Progression in Glioma.
**Authors:** Chen YT, Chung CL, Cheng YW, Lin CJ, Tseng TT, Hsu SS, Tsai HP, Kwan AL
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241713367](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241713367)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Aug 29;24(17):13367. doi: 10.3390/ijms241713367.

High Thioredoxin Domain-Containing Protein 11 Expression Is Associated with
Tumour Progression in Glioma.

Chen YT(1)(2), Chung CL(3), Cheng YW(1)(2), Lin CJ(4), Tseng TT(5), Hsu SS(1),
Tsai HP(5), Kwan AL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Veterans General
Hospital, Kaohsiung 813414, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Municipal Siaogang Hospital, Kaohsiung
81267, Taiwan.
(4)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common primary brain malignancy in adults.
Despite multimodal treatment that involves maximal safe resection, concurrent
chemoradiotherapy, and tumour treatment for supratentorial lesions, the
prognosis remains poor. The current median overall survival is only <2 years,
and the 5-year survival is only 7.2%. Thioredoxin domain-containing protein 11
(TXNDC11), also known as EF-hand binding protein 1, was reported as an
endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced protein. The present study aimed to
elucidate the prognostic role of TXNDC11 in GBM. We evaluated the clinical
parameters and TXNDC11 scores in gliomas from hospitals. Additionally,
proliferation, invasion, migration assays, apoptosis, and temozolomide
(TMZ)-sensitivity assays of GBM cells were conducted to evaluate the effects of
short interfering RNA (siRNA) on these processes. In addition, these cells were
subjected to Western blotting to detect the expression levels of N-cadherin,
E-cadherin, and Cyclin D1. High levels of TXNDC11 protein expression were
significantly associated with World Health Organization (WHO) high-grade tumour
classification and poor prognosis. Multivariate analysis revealed that in
addition to the WHO grade, TXNDC11 protein expression was also an independent
prognostic factor of glioma. In addition, TXNDC11 silencing inhibited
proliferation, migration, and invasion and led to apoptosis of GBM cells.
However, over-expression of TXNDC11 enhanced proliferation, migration, and
invasion. Further, TXNDC11 knockdown downregulated N-cadherin and cyclin D1
expression and upregulated E-cadherin expression in GBM cells. Knock-in TXNDC11
return these. Finally, in vivo, orthotopic xenotransplantation of
TXNDC11-silenced GBM cells into nude rats promoted slower tumour growth and
prolonged survival time. TXNDC11 is a potential oncogene in GBMs and may be an
emerging therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241713367
PMCID: PMC10488054
PMID: 37686174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.