---
pmid: '21518905'
title: Autophagosome targeting and membrane curvature sensing by Barkor/Atg14(L).
authors:
- Fan W
- Nassiri A
- Zhong Q
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3093500
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016472108
---

# Autophagosome targeting and membrane curvature sensing by Barkor/Atg14(L).
**Authors:** Fan W, Nassiri A, Zhong Q
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1016472108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1016472108)
**PMC:** [PMC3093500](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3093500/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 10;108(19):7769-74. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1016472108. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Autophagosome targeting and membrane curvature sensing by Barkor/Atg14(L).

Fan W(1), Nassiri A, Zhong Q.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

The class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3KC3) is crucial for 
autophagosome biogenesis. It has been long speculated to nucleate the 
autophagosome membrane, but the biochemical mechanism of such nucleation 
activity remains unsolved. We recently identified Barkor/Atg14(L) as the 
targeting factor for PI3KC3 to autophagosome membrane. Here, we show that we 
have characterized the region of Barkor/Atg14(L) required for autophagosome 
targeting and identified the BATS [Barkor/Atg14(L) autophagosome targeting 
sequence] domain at the carboxyl terminus of Barkor. Bioinformatics and 
mutagenesis analyses revealed that the BATS domain binds to autophagosome 
membrane via the hydrophobic surface of an intrinsic amphipathic alpha helix. 
BATS puncta overlap with Atg16 and LC3, and partially with DFCP1, in a 
stress-inducible manner. Ectopically expressed BATS accumulates on highly curved 
tubules that likely represent intermediate autophagic structures. PI3KC3 
recruitment and autophagy stimulation by Barkor/Atg14(L) require the BATS 
domain. Furthermore, our biochemical analyses indicate that the BATS domain 
directly binds to the membrane, and it favors membrane composed of 
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate [PtdIns(3)P] and phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-biphosphate [PtdIns(4,5)P2]. By binding preferentially to curved membranes 
incorporated with PtdIns(3)P but not PtdIns(4,5)P2, the BATS domain is capable 
of sensing membrane curvature. Thus, we propose a novel model of PI3KC3 
autophagosome membrane nucleation in which its autophagosome-specific adaptor, 
Barkor, accumulates on highly curved PtdIns(3)P enriched autophagic membrane via 
its BATS domain to sense and maintain membrane curvature.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1016472108
PMCID: PMC3093500
PMID: 21518905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
