---
pmid: '20826464'
title: AT-1 is the ER membrane acetyl-CoA transporter and is essential for cell viability.
authors:
- Jonas MC
- Pehar M
- Puglielli L
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2939804
doi: 10.1242/jcs.068841
---

# AT-1 is the ER membrane acetyl-CoA transporter and is essential for cell viability.
**Authors:** Jonas MC, Pehar M, Puglielli L
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.068841](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.068841)
**PMC:** [PMC2939804](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2939804/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2010 Oct 1;123(Pt 19):3378-88. doi: 10.1242/jcs.068841. Epub 2010 
Sep 7.

AT-1 is the ER membrane acetyl-CoA transporter and is essential for cell 
viability.

Jonas MC(1), Pehar M, Puglielli L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA.

The transient or permanent modification of nascent proteins in the early 
secretory pathway is an essential cellular function that ensures correct folding 
and maturation of membrane and secreted proteins. We have recently described a 
new form of post-translational regulation of the membrane protein β-site APP 
cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) involving transient lysine acetylation in the lumen of 
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The essential components of this process are two 
ER-based acetyl-CoA:lysine acetyltransferases, ATase1 and ATase2, and a membrane 
transporter that translocates acetyl-CoA into the lumen of the ER. Here, we 
report the functional identification of acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT-1) as the 
ER membrane acetyl-CoA transporter. We show that AT-1 regulates the acetylation 
status of ER-transiting proteins, including the membrane proteins BACE1, 
low-density lipoprotein receptor and amyloid precursor protein (APP). Finally, 
we show that AT-1 is essential for cell viability as its downregulation results 
in widespread cell death and induction of features characteristic of autophagy.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.068841
PMCID: PMC2939804
PMID: 20826464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
