---
pmid: '22492997'
title: DJ-1 induces thioredoxin 1 expression through the Nrf2 pathway.
authors:
- Im JY
- Lee KW
- Woo JM
- Junn E
- Mouradian MM
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3373246
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds131
---

# DJ-1 induces thioredoxin 1 expression through the Nrf2 pathway.
**Authors:** Im JY, Lee KW, Woo JM, Junn E, Mouradian MM
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds131](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds131)
**PMC:** [PMC3373246](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3373246/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):3013-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds131. Epub 2012
Apr  5.

DJ-1 induces thioredoxin 1 expression through the Nrf2 pathway.

Im JY(1), Lee KW, Woo JM, Junn E, Mouradian MM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative and Neuroimmunologic Diseases, Department of 
Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood 
Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

DJ-1, which is linked to recessively inherited Parkinson's disease when mutated, 
is a multi-functional protein with anti-oxidant and transcription regulatory 
activities. However, the mechanism(s) through which DJ-1 and the genes it 
regulates provide neuroprotection is not fully understood. Here, we show that 
wild-type DJ-1 induces the expression of thioredoxin 1 (Trx1), a protein 
disulfide oxidoreductase, whereas pathogenic mutant isoforms L166P and M26I 
cannot. Conversely, DJ-1 knockdown in SH-SY5Y cells and DJ-1 knockout in mice 
result in significant decrease in Trx1 protein and mRNA expression levels. The 
importance of Trx1 in the cytoprotective function of DJ-1 is confirmed using a 
pharmacological inhibitor of Trx reductase, 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, and 
Trx1 siRNA. Both approaches result in partial loss of DJ-1-mediated protection. 
Additionally, knockdown of Trx1 significantly abrogates DJ-1-dependent, hydrogen 
peroxide-induced activation of the pro-survival factor AKT. Promoter analysis of 
the human Trx1 gene identified an antioxidant response element (ARE) that is 
required for DJ-1-dependent induction of Trx1 expression. The transcription 
factor Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2), which is a critical 
inducer of ARE-mediated expression, is regulated by DJ-1. Overexpression of DJ-1 
results in increased Nrf2 protein levels, promotes its translocation into the 
nucleus and enhances its recruitment onto the ARE site in the Trx1 promoter. 
Further, Nrf2 knockdown abolishes DJ-1-mediated Trx1 induction and 
cytoprotection against hydrogen peroxide, indicating the critical role of Nrf2 
in carrying out the protective functions of DJ-1 against oxidative stress. These 
findings provide a new mechanism to support the antioxidant function of DJ-1 by 
increasing Trx1 expression via Nrf2-mediated transcriptional induction.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds131
PMCID: PMC3373246
PMID: 22492997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
