---
pmid: '17488725'
title: Two isoforms of the T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1) splicing factor
  display distinct splicing regulation activities. Control of TIA-1 isoform ratio
  by TIA-1-related protein.
authors:
- Izquierdo JM
- Valcárcel J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700688200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Two isoforms of the T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1) splicing factor display distinct splicing regulation activities. Control of TIA-1 isoform ratio by TIA-1-related protein.
**Authors:** Izquierdo JM, Valcárcel J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M700688200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M700688200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19410-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M700688200. Epub
2007  May 8.

Two isoforms of the T-cell intracellular antigen 1 (TIA-1) splicing factor 
display distinct splicing regulation activities. Control of TIA-1 isoform ratio 
by TIA-1-related protein.

Izquierdo JM(1), Valcárcel J.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo 
Ochoa, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain. 
jmizquierdo@cbm.uam.es

TIA-1 (T-cell Intracellular Antigen 1) and TIAR (TIA-1-related protein) are 
RNA-binding proteins involved in the regulation of alternative pre-mRNA splicing 
and other aspects of RNA metabolism. Various isoforms of these proteins exist in 
mammals. For example, TIA-1 presents two major isoforms (TIA-1a and TIA-1b) 
generated by alternative splicing of exon 5 that differ by eleven amino acids 
exclusive of the TIA-1a isoform. Here we show that the relative expression of 
TIA-1 and TIAR isoforms varies in different human tissues and cell lines, 
suggesting distinct functional properties and regulated isoform expression. We 
report that whereas TIA-1 isoforms show similar subcellular distribution and RNA 
binding, TIA-1b displays enhanced splicing stimulatory activity compared with 
TIA-1a, both in vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, TIAR depletion from HeLa and 
mouse embryonic fibroblasts results in an increased ratio of TIA-1b/a 
expression, suggesting that TIAR regulates the relative expression of TIA-1 
isoforms. Taken together, the results reveal distinct functional properties of 
TIA-1 isoforms and the existence of a regulatory network that controls isoform 
expression.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M700688200
PMID: 17488725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
