---
pmid: '21135211'
title: Structural basis for effectiveness of siderophore-conjugated monocarbams against
  clinically relevant strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
authors:
- Han S
- Zaniewski RP
- Marr ES
- Lacey BM
- Tomaras AP
- Evdokimov A
- Miller JR
- Shanmugasundaram V
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3009787
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1013092107
---

# Structural basis for effectiveness of siderophore-conjugated monocarbams against clinically relevant strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
**Authors:** Han S, Zaniewski RP, Marr ES, Lacey BM, Tomaras AP, Evdokimov A, Miller JR, Shanmugasundaram V
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1013092107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1013092107)
**PMC:** [PMC3009787](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3009787/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 21;107(51):22002-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1013092107. Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Structural basis for effectiveness of siderophore-conjugated monocarbams against 
clinically relevant strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Han S(1), Zaniewski RP, Marr ES, Lacey BM, Tomaras AP, Evdokimov A, Miller JR, 
Shanmugasundaram V.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT 06340, 
USA. seungil.han@pfizer.com

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic Gram-negative pathogen that causes 
nosocomial infections for which there are limited treatment options. 
Penicillin-binding protein PBP3, a key therapeutic target, is an essential 
enzyme responsible for the final steps of peptidoglycan synthesis and is 
covalently inactivated by β-lactam antibiotics. Here we disclose the first high 
resolution cocrystal structures of the P. aeruginosa PBP3 with both novel and 
marketed β-lactams. These structures reveal a conformational rearrangement of 
Tyr532 and Phe533 and a ligand-induced conformational change of Tyr409 and 
Arg489. The well-known affinity of the monobactam aztreonam for P. aeruginosa 
PBP3 is due to a distinct hydrophobic aromatic wall composed of Tyr503, Tyr532, 
and Phe533 interacting with the gem-dimethyl group. The structure of MC-1, a new 
siderophore-conjugated monocarbam complexed with PBP3 provides molecular 
insights for lead optimization. Importantly, we have identified a novel 
conformation that is distinct to the high-molecular-weight class B PBP 
subfamily, which is identifiable by common features such as a hydrophobic 
aromatic wall formed by Tyr503, Tyr532, and Phe533 and the structural 
flexibility of Tyr409 flanked by two glycine residues. This is also the first 
example of a siderophore-conjugated triazolone-linked monocarbam complexed with 
any PBP. Energetic analysis of tightly and loosely held computed hydration sites 
indicates protein desolvation effects contribute significantly to PBP3 binding, 
and analysis of hydration site energies allows rank ordering of the second-order 
acylation rate constants. Taken together, these structural, biochemical, and 
computational studies provide a molecular basis for recognition of P. aeruginosa 
PBP3 and open avenues for future design of inhibitors of this class of PBPs.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1013092107
PMCID: PMC3009787
PMID: 21135211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
