---
pmid: '14701856'
title: Transcription factors and nuclear receptors interact with the SWI/SNF complex
  through the BAF60c subunit.
authors:
- Debril MB
- Gelman L
- Fayard E
- Annicotte JS
- Rocchi S
- Auwerx J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312288200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Transcription factors and nuclear receptors interact with the SWI/SNF complex through the BAF60c subunit.
**Authors:** Debril MB, Gelman L, Fayard E, Annicotte JS, Rocchi S, Auwerx J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312288200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312288200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):16677-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312288200. Epub 
2003 Dec 29.

Transcription factors and nuclear receptors interact with the SWI/SNF complex 
through the BAF60c subunit.

Debril MB(1), Gelman L, Fayard E, Annicotte JS, Rocchi S, Auwerx J.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch cedex, France.

Transcriptional activity relies on coregulators that modify chromatin structure 
or serve as bridging factors between transcription factors and the basal 
transcription machinery. We identified a new coregulator of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma, BRG1/Brm-associated factor of 60 kDa, 
subunit c2 (BAF60c2), in a yeast two-hybrid screen of a human adipose tissue 
cDNA library. BAF60c2 represents a new isoform of BAF60c, a component of the 
SWI/SNF (mating type switching/sucrose non-fermenting) chromatin remodeling 
complex. This new isoform as well as the previously identified protein, renamed 
BAF60c1, is localized primarily in the cell nucleus and is expressed in a wide 
variety of tissues. Both BAF60c isoforms bind to several nuclear receptors and 
transcription factors of various families. BAF60c proteins interact in a 
ligand-independent manner with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
and enhance its transcriptional activity. Both isoforms are enriched in the 
central nervous system and also modulate the transcriptional activity of 
retinoic acid-related orphan receptor alpha1. In conclusion, BAF60c represents a 
new coregulator that constitutes an important anchoring point by which the 
SWI/SNF complex is recruited to nuclear receptors and other transcription 
factors.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312288200
PMID: 14701856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
