---
pmid: '11071939'
title: Cloning of a human homolog of the yeast nucleotide excision repair gene MMS19
  and interaction with transcription repair factor TFIIH via the XPB and XPD helicases.
authors:
- Seroz T
- Winkler GS
- Auriol J
- Verhage RA
- Vermeulen W
- Smit B
- Brouwer J
- Eker AP
- Weeda G
- Egly JM
- Hoeijmakers JH
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC113875
doi: 10.1093/nar/28.22.4506
---

# Cloning of a human homolog of the yeast nucleotide excision repair gene MMS19 and interaction with transcription repair factor TFIIH via the XPB and XPD helicases.
**Authors:** Seroz T, Winkler GS, Auriol J, Verhage RA, Vermeulen W, Smit B, Brouwer J, Eker AP, Weeda G, Egly JM, Hoeijmakers JH
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/28.22.4506](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/28.22.4506)
**PMC:** [PMC113875](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC113875/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Nov 15;28(22):4506-13. doi: 10.1093/nar/28.22.4506.

Cloning of a human homolog of the yeast nucleotide excision repair gene MMS19 
and interaction with transcription repair factor TFIIH via the XPB and XPD 
helicases.

Seroz T(1), Winkler GS, Auriol J, Verhage RA, Vermeulen W, Smit B, Brouwer J, 
Eker AP, Weeda G, Egly JM, Hoeijmakers JH.

Author information:
(1)MGC-Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Center for Biomedical Genetics, 
Erasmus University Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes UV-induced photoproducts and numerous 
other DNA lesions in a highly conserved 'cut-and-paste' reaction that involves 
approximately 25 core components. In addition, several other proteins have been 
identified which are dispensable for NER in vitro but have an undefined role in 
vivo and may act at the interface of NER and other cellular processes. An 
intriguing example is the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Mms19 protein that has an 
unknown dual function in NER and RNA polymerase II transcription. Here we report 
the cloning and characterization of a human homolog, designated hMMS19, that 
encodes a 1030 amino acid protein with 26% identity and 51% similarity to 
S.cerevisiae Mms19p and with a strikingly similar size. The expression profile 
and nuclear location are consistent with a repair function. 
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that hMMS19 directly interacts with 
the XPB and XPD subunits of NER-transcription factor TFIIH. These findings 
extend the conservation of the NER apparatus and the link between NER and basal 
transcription and suggest that hMMS19 exerts its function in repair and 
transcription by interacting with the XPB and XPD helicases.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.22.4506
PMCID: PMC113875
PMID: 11071939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
