---
pmid: '7568116'
title: Molecular cloning, characterization, and functional expression of rat oxidosqualene
  cyclase cDNA.
authors:
- Abe I
- Prestwich GD
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC40967
doi: 10.1073/pnas.92.20.9274
---

# Molecular cloning, characterization, and functional expression of rat oxidosqualene cyclase cDNA.
**Authors:** Abe I, Prestwich GD
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.92.20.9274](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.20.9274)
**PMC:** [PMC40967](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC40967/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Sep 26;92(20):9274-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.20.9274.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and functional expression of rat 
oxidosqualene cyclase cDNA.

Abe I(1), Prestwich GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York, Stony Brook 
11794-3400, USA.

A cDNA encoding rat oxidosqualene lanosterol-cyclase [lanosterol synthase; 
(S)-2,3-epoxysqualene mutase (cyclizing, lanosterol-forming), EC 5.4.99.7] was 
cloned and sequenced by a combination of PCR amplification, using primers based 
on internal amino acid sequence of the purified enzyme, and cDNA library 
screening by oligonucleotide hybridization. An open reading frame of 2199 bp 
encodes a M(r) 83,321 protein with 733 amino acids. The deduced amino acid 
sequence of the rat enzyme showed significant homology to the known 
oxidosqualene cyclases (OSCs) from yeast and plant (39-44% identity) and still 
retained 17-26% identity to two bacterial squalene cyclases (EC 5.4.99.-). Like 
other cyclases, the rat enzyme is rich in aromatic amino acids and contains five 
so-called QW motifs, highly conserved regions with a repetitive beta-strand turn 
motif. The binding site sequence for the 29-methylidene-2,3-oxidosqualene 
(29-MOS), a mechanism-based irreversible inhibitor specific for the vertebrate 
cyclase, is well-conserved in all known OSCs. The hydropathy plot revealed a 
rather hydrophilic N-terminal region and the absence of a hydrophobic signal 
peptide. Unexpectedly, this microsomal membrane-associated enzyme showed no 
clearly delineated transmembrane domain. A full-length cDNA was constructed and 
subcloned into a pYEUra3 plasmid, selected in Escherichia coli cells, and used 
to transform the OSC-deficient uracil-auxotrophic SGL9 strain of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. The recombinant rat OSC expressed was efficiently labeled by the 
mechanism-based inhibitor [3H]29-MOS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.20.9274
PMCID: PMC40967
PMID: 7568116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

A cDNA encoding rat oxidosqualene lanosterol-cyclase [lanosterol synthase; (S)-2,3-epoxysqualene mutase (cyclizing, lanosterol-forming), EC 5.4.99.7] was cloned and sequenced by a combination of PCR amplification, using primers based on internal amino acid sequence of the purified enzyme, and cDNA library screening by oligonucleotide hybridization. An open reading frame of 2199 bp encodes a M(r) 83,321 protein with 733 amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence of the rat enzyme showed significant homology to the known oxidosqualene cyclases (OSCs) from yeast and plant (39-44% identity) and still retained 17-26% identity to two bacterial squalene cyclases (EC 5.4.99.-). Like other cyclases, the rat enzyme is rich in aromatic amino acids and contains five so-called QW motifs, highly conserved regions with a repetitive beta-strand turn motif. The binding site sequence for the 29-methylidene-2,3-oxidosqualene (29-MOS), a mechanism-based irreversible inhibitor specific for the vertebrate cyclase, is well-conserved in all known OSCs. The hydropathy plot revealed a rather hydrophilic N-terminal region and the absence of a hydrophobic signal peptide. Unexpectedly, this microsomal membrane-associated enzyme showed no clearly delineated transmembrane domain. A full-length cDNA was constructed and subcloned into a pYEUra3 plasmid, selected in Escherichia coli cells, and used to transform the OSC-deficient uracil-auxotrophic SGL9 strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The recombinant rat OSC expressed was efficiently labeled by the mechanism-based inhibitor [3H]29-MOS.
