---
pmid: '16763195'
title: Targeting of the tail-anchored peroxisomal membrane proteins PEX26 and PEX15
  occurs through C-terminal PEX19-binding sites.
authors:
- Halbach A
- Landgraf C
- Lorenzen S
- Rosenkranz K
- Volkmer-Engert R
- Erdmann R
- Rottensteiner H
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02979
---

# Targeting of the tail-anchored peroxisomal membrane proteins PEX26 and PEX15 occurs through C-terminal PEX19-binding sites.
**Authors:** Halbach A, Landgraf C, Lorenzen S, Rosenkranz K, Volkmer-Engert R, Erdmann R, Rottensteiner H
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02979](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02979)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Jun 15;119(Pt 12):2508-17. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02979.

Targeting of the tail-anchored peroxisomal membrane proteins PEX26 and PEX15 
occurs through C-terminal PEX19-binding sites.

Halbach A(1), Landgraf C, Lorenzen S, Rosenkranz K, Volkmer-Engert R, Erdmann R, 
Rottensteiner H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abt. Systembiochemie, Ruhr-Universität 
Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany.

Tail-anchored proteins contain a single transmembrane domain (TMD) followed by a 
short C-terminal domain extending into the organellar lumen. Tail-anchored 
proteins are thought to target to the correct subcellular compartment by virtue 
of general physicochemical properties of their C-termini; however, the 
machineries that enable correct sorting remain largely elusive. Here we analyzed 
targeting of the human peroxisomal tail-anchored protein PEX26. Its 
C-terminal-targeting signal contains two binding sites for PEX19, the import 
receptor for several peroxisomal membrane proteins. One PEX19-binding site 
overlapped with the TMD, the other was contained within the luminal domain. 
Although the PEX19-binding site containing the TMD targeted to peroxisomes to 
some extent, the luminal site proved essential for correct targeting of the 
full-length protein, as it prevented PEX26 from mislocalization to mitochondria. 
Its function as a targeting motif was proved by its ability to insert a 
heterologous TMD-containing fragment into the peroxisomal membrane. Finally we 
show that PEX19 is essential for PEX26 import. Analysis of the yeast 
tail-anchored protein Pex15p revealed that it also harbors a luminal 
PEX19-binding site that acts as a peroxisomal-targeting motif. We conclude that 
C-terminal PEX19-binding sites mark tail-anchored proteins for delivery to 
peroxisomes.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02979
PMID: 16763195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
