---
pmid: '24457201'
title: Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with the NF-κB inhibitor IκBα.
authors:
- Stanborough T
- Niederhauser J
- Koch B
- Bergler H
- Pertschy B
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.034
---

# Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with the NF-κB inhibitor IκBα.
**Authors:** Stanborough T, Niederhauser J, Koch B, Bergler H, Pertschy B
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.034)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 3;588(5):659-64. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.034. Epub 
2014 Jan 20.

Ribosomal protein S3 interacts with the NF-κB inhibitor IκBα.

Stanborough T(1), Niederhauser J(1), Koch B(1), Bergler H(1), Pertschy B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Molekulare Biowissenschaften, Universität Graz, Humboldtstrasse 
50, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(2)Institut für Molekulare Biowissenschaften, Universität Graz, Humboldtstrasse 
50, 8010 Graz, Austria. Electronic address: brigitte.pertschy@uni-graz.at.

Ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3) is part of nuclear, transcriptionally active and 
cytoplasmic inhibitory complexes containing NF-κB variant p65. We show that in 
resting HEK293 cells, RPS3 interacts with NF-κB inhibitor IκBα. In contrast, 
efficient co-precipitation of p65 with RPS3 was only achieved in the presence of 
ectopic IκBα. In addition, a strong in vitro interaction was observed between 
RPS3 and IκBα, while binding between RPS3 and p65 was very weak. Furthermore, 
IκBα facilitated the reconstitution of p65 and RPS3 into one complex in vitro. 
Our results suggest that IκBα sequesters not only p65 but also RPS3 in the 
cytoplasm. This would ensure maintenance of an RPS3 pool for the NF-κB pathway 
as well as equimolar release of RPS3 and p65 upon stimulation.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.12.034
PMID: 24457201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
