---
pmid: '10514494'
title: Direct interaction of the trans-Golgi network membrane protein, TGN38, with
  the F-actin binding protein, neurabin.
authors:
- Stephens DJ
- Banting G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.42.30080
---

# Direct interaction of the trans-Golgi network membrane protein, TGN38, with the F-actin binding protein, neurabin.
**Authors:** Stephens DJ, Banting G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.42.30080](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.42.30080)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):30080-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.42.30080.

Direct interaction of the trans-Golgi network membrane protein, TGN38, with the 
F-actin binding protein, neurabin.

Stephens DJ(1), Banting G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, School of Medical 
Sciences, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, United Kingdom.

TGN38 is a type I integral membrane protein that constitutively cycles between 
the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and plasma membrane. The cytosolic domain of TGN38 
interacts with AP2 clathrin adaptor complexes via the tyrosine-containing motif 
(-SDYQRL-) to direct internalization from the plasma membrane. This motif has 
previously been shown to direct both internalization and subsequent TGN 
targeting of TGN38. We have used the cytosolic domain of TGN38 in a two-hybrid 
screen, and we have identified the brain-specific F-actin binding protein 
neurabin-I as a TGN38-binding protein. We demonstrate a direct interaction 
between TGN38 and the ubiquitous homologue of neurabin-I, neurabin-II (also 
called spinophilin). We have used a combination of yeast two-hybrid and in vitro 
protein interaction assays to show that this interaction is dependent on the 
serine (but not tyrosine) residue of the known TGN38 trafficking motif. We show 
that TGN38 interacts with the coiled coil region of neurabin in vitro and binds 
preferentially with the dimeric form of neurabin. TGN38 and neurabin also 
interact in vivo as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation from stably 
transfected PC12 cells. These data suggest that neurabin provides a direct 
physical link between TGN38-containing membranes and the actin cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.42.30080
PMID: 10514494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
