---
pmid: '17001643'
title: Intrinsically unstructured N-terminal domain of bZIP transcription factor HY5.
authors:
- Yoon MK
- Shin J
- Choi G
- Choi BS
journal: Proteins
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/prot.21089
---

# Intrinsically unstructured N-terminal domain of bZIP transcription factor HY5.
**Authors:** Yoon MK, Shin J, Choi G, Choi BS
**Journal:** Proteins (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/prot.21089](https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.21089)

## Abstract

1. Proteins. 2006 Dec 1;65(4):856-66. doi: 10.1002/prot.21089.

Intrinsically unstructured N-terminal domain of bZIP transcription factor HY5.

Yoon MK(1), Shin J, Choi G, Choi BS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and National Creative Research Initiative Center, 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 373-1 Guseong-dong, 
Yuseong-gu, Daejon 305-701, Republic of Korea.

The Arabidopsis HY5 protein is a basic leucine zipper (bZIP) transcription 
factor that promotes photomorphogenesis. HY5 binds directly to the promoters of 
light responsible element containing the G-box and thus regulates their 
transcriptional activity. The level and activity of HY5 are negatively 
regulated, in a light-dependent manner, by interaction with the COP1 protein, 
which targets HY5 for proteasome-mediated degradation in the nucleus. Despite 
its essential roles in plant development, no structural information exists for 
HY5. In this article, we report the first structural and biophysical 
characterization of HY5. Using limited proteolysis in combination with mass 
spectrometry, circular dichroism, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, 
we have deduced that the N-terminal 77 amino acids of HY5 form a premolten 
globular structure, while amino acids 78-110, which constitute the basic region 
(BR) of the protein, exist in a molten globule state. Our studies also revealed 
that the overall structural features of full-length HY5 are dominated largely by 
the disordered N-terminal domain, despite the existence of a bZIP domain at its 
C-terminus. We propose that HY5 is a member of the intrinsically unstructured 
protein (IUP) family, and that HY5 functions as an unstructured protein and 
benefits from being the same, in vivo.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.21089
PMID: 17001643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
