---
pmid: '24012479'
title: High-resolution structural analysis shows how Tah1 tethers Hsp90 to the R2TP
  complex.
authors:
- Back R
- Dominguez C
- Rothé B
- Bobo C
- Beaufils C
- Moréra S
- Meyer P
- Charpentier B
- Branlant C
- Allain FH
- Manival X
journal: Structure
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.07.024
---

# High-resolution structural analysis shows how Tah1 tethers Hsp90 to the R2TP complex.
**Authors:** Back R, Dominguez C, Rothé B, Bobo C, Beaufils C, Moréra S, Meyer P, Charpentier B, Branlant C, Allain FH, Manival X
**Journal:** Structure (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2013.07.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2013.07.024)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2013 Oct 8;21(10):1834-47. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2013.07.024. Epub
2013  Sep 5.

High-resolution structural analysis shows how Tah1 tethers Hsp90 to the R2TP 
complex.

Back R(1), Dominguez C, Rothé B, Bobo C, Beaufils C, Moréra S, Meyer P, 
Charpentier B, Branlant C, Allain FH, Manival X.

Author information:
(1)Ingénierie Moléculaire et Physiopathologie Articulaire (IMoPA), UMR 
7365 Université de Lorraine-CNRS, Biopôle de l'Université de Lorraine, Campus 
Biologie Santé, 9 Avenue de la forêt de Haye, BP 184, 54505 Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, 
France.

The ubiquitous Hsp90 chaperone participates in snoRNP and RNA polymerase 
assembly through interaction with the R2TP complex. This complex includes the 
proteins Tah1, Pih1, Rvb1, and Rvb2. Tah1 bridges Hsp90 to R2TP. Its minimal TPR 
domain includes two TPR motifs and a capping helix. We established the 
high-resolution solution structures of Tah1 free and in complex with the Hsp90 
C-terminal peptide. The TPR fold is similar in the free and bound forms and we 
show experimentally that in addition to its solvating/stabilizing role, the 
capping helix is essential for the recognition of the Hsp90 (704)EMEEVD(709) 
motif. In addition to Lys79 and Arg83 from the carboxylate clamp, this helix 
bears Tyr82 forming a π/S-CH3 interaction with Hsp90 M(705) from the peptide 310 
helix. The Tah1 C-terminal region is unfolded, and we demonstrate that it is 
essential for the recruitment of the Pih1 C-terminal domain and folds upon 
binding.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2013.07.024
PMID: 24012479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
