---
pmid: '28652325'
title: Transmembrane features governing Fc receptor CD16A assembly with CD16A signaling
  adaptor molecules.
authors:
- Blázquez-Moreno A
- Park S
- Im W
- Call MJ
- Call ME
- Reyburn HT
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC5514760
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1706483114
---

# Transmembrane features governing Fc receptor CD16A assembly with CD16A signaling adaptor molecules.
**Authors:** Blázquez-Moreno A, Park S, Im W, Call MJ, Call ME, Reyburn HT
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1706483114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1706483114)
**PMC:** [PMC5514760](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5514760/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Jul 11;114(28):E5645-E5654. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1706483114. Epub 2017 Jun 26.

Transmembrane features governing Fc receptor CD16A assembly with CD16A signaling 
adaptor molecules.

Blázquez-Moreno A(1), Park S(2)(3), Im W(2)(3), Call MJ(4)(5), Call ME(6)(5), 
Reyburn HT(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid 28049, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015.
(3)Bioengineering Program, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015.
(4)Structural Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
(5)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3052, 
Australia.
(6)Structural Biology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia; htreyburn@cnb.csic.es 
mecall@wehi.edu.au.
(7)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid 28049, 
Spain; htreyburn@cnb.csic.es mecall@wehi.edu.au.

Many activating immunoreceptors associate with signaling adaptor molecules like 
FcεR1γ or CD247. FcεR1γ and CD247 share high sequence homology and form 
disulphide-linked homodimers that contain a pair of acidic aspartic acid 
residues in their transmembrane (TM) domains that mediate assembly, via 
interaction with an arginine residue at a similar register to these aspartic 
acids, with the activating immunoreceptors. However, this model cannot hold true 
for receptors like CD16A, whose TM domains do not contain basic residues. We 
have carried out an extensive site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the CD16A 
receptor complex and now report that the association of receptor with the 
signaling adaptor depends on a network of polar and aromatic residues along the 
length of the TM domain. Molecular modeling indicates that CD16A TM residues 
F202, D205, and T206 form the core of the membrane-embedded trimeric interface 
by establishing highly favorable contacts to the signaling modules through 
rearrangement of a hydrogen bond network previously identified in the CD247 TM 
dimer solution NMR structure. Strikingly, the amino acid D205 also regulates the 
turnover and surface expression of CD16A in the absence of FcεR1γ or CD247. 
Modeling studies indicate that similar features underlie the association of 
other activating immune receptors, including CD64 and FcεR1α, with signaling 
adaptor molecules, and we confirm experimentally that equivalent F, D, and T 
residues in the TM domain of FcεR1α markedly influence the biology of this 
receptor and its association with FcεR1γ.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1706483114
PMCID: PMC5514760
PMID: 28652325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Many activating immunoreceptors associate with signaling adaptor molecules like FcεR1γ or CD247. FcεR1γ and CD247 share high sequence homology and form disulphide-linked homodimers that contain a pair of acidic aspartic acid residues in their transmembrane (TM) domains that mediate assembly, via interaction with an arginine residue at a similar register to these aspartic acids, with the activating immunoreceptors. However, this model cannot hold true for receptors like CD16A, whose TM domains do not contain basic residues. We have carried out an extensive site-directed mutagenesis analysis of the CD16A receptor complex and now report that the association of receptor with the signaling adaptor depends on a network of polar and aromatic residues along the length of the TM domain. Molecular modeling indicates that CD16A TM residues F 202 , D 205 , and T 206 form the core of the membrane-embedded trimeric interface by establishing highly favorable contacts to the signaling modules through rearrangement of a hydrogen bond network previously identified in the CD247 TM dimer solution NMR structure. Strikingly, the amino acid D 205 also regulates the turnover and surface expression of CD16A in the absence of FcεR1γ or CD247. Modeling studies indicate that similar features underlie the association of other activating immune receptors, including CD64 and FcεR1α, with signaling adaptor molecules, and we confirm experimentally that equivalent F, D, and T residues in the TM domain of FcεR1α markedly influence the biology of this receptor and its association with FcεR1γ.

Discussion

A key feature underlying the formation of activating immune receptor complexes is the formation of an interface between the TM helix of the ligand-binding receptor subunit and the paired TM helices of the dimeric adaptor module that is crucial for intracellular signaling. In this paper, we have characterized how TM helices can associate to form an activating immunoreceptor complex in the absence of complementary charge potential and have gone on to show that a subset of the residues in the receptor TM domain that mediate association with the adaptor molecules also have a marked influence on the cell biology of the receptor.

Many activating immunoreceptors associate with signaling adaptor molecules via the interaction of a basic amino acid in the TM domain of the receptor with a pair of acidic residues in the TM region of the dimeric signaling module ( 10 ). However, our studies of the complex formed between CD16A and the signaling adaptor molecules FcεR1γ and CD247 have revealed that this three-helix interface can also form via interactions between polar and aromatic residues extending over the whole length of the TM domain. In this mode of association, multiple residues located on a single aspect of the receptor TM helix contribute to the interaction with the signaling dimer. These data contrast markedly with receptor complexes such as KIR2DS2–DAP12 and NKG2D–DAP10, wherein a single, properly placed lysine or arginine residue within a polyvaline or polyleucine TM sequence is sufficient for interaction with a pair of aspartic acid residues in the signaling adaptor module and cell surface expression ( 14 ). It has been argued that focusing the interaction of signaling adaptor molecules on a single charged residue facilitates the interaction of these adaptors with multiple receptor TM domains with widely varying sequences ( 14 ), but our data demonstrate that CD247 and FcεR1γ can also enlarge the repertoire of receptors with which they interact by associating with TM domains in more than one way. Indeed, it could be argued that the mode of interaction of FcεR1γ or CD247 with CD16A might, in evolutionary terms, be more robust because there is no one pair of interacting residues that is absolutely critical and so multiple mutations would have to occur to ablate this association.

Our independent and unbiased REMD simulations are in excellent agreement with the mutagenesis analysis, identifying the polar/aromatic face of the CD16A TM domain as the key assembly surface and reaching nearly identical conformations for assembled CD16A–CD247 and CD16A–FcεR1γ complexes. Similar to the previously published solution NMR structure of the NKG2C–DAP12 trimeric TM complex ( 29 ), the receptor TM helix is predicted to bind along an extended groove formed by the interface of the two signaling module α-helices. However, where NKG2C assembly is governed by a single, centrally located lysine residue binding to the paired DxxxT motifs in DAP12, CD16A establishes a more extensive interface, dependent on polar and aromatic residues, with CD247/FcεR1γ that is anchored around the central F 202 D 205 T 206 trio but also has significant contributions at both ends of the helices. Thus, the modeling data strongly support the suggestion from the experimental data that interactions involving specific polar and aromatic residues of CD16A are critical for the association between the receptor and adaptor molecules.

The rearrangement of the previously described CD247 interface ( 24 ) to accommodate the new contacts to CD16A is striking in view of the recent report suggesting that CD247 also undergoes a significant structural alteration upon incorporation into the TCR–CD3 complex ( 30 ), and this flexibility may be particularly important for the demonstrated ability of both CD247 and FcεR1γ to form stable assemblies with many different receptor TM sequences. Interestingly, despite the apparent interchangeability of human FcεR1γ and CD247, murine CD247 is essentially unable to function in the assembly of either human or mouse CD16A so that, in murine NK cells, only FcεR1γ participates in the assembly of this receptor complex ( 4 ). This phenotype has been mapped to an isoleucine for leucine change in murine CD247 ( 16 ) at a position that is buried within the trimeric interface formed with the CD16A F 202 D 205 T 206 sequence in our models ( Fig. S5 ). This positioning suggests that the β-branched structure of isoleucine is disruptive to the central intermolecular packing motif, providing a molecular explanation for the inability of murine CD247 to associate with CD16A and additional support for our assembly model.

The observation that CD16A associates equally well with human CD247 and FcεR1γ homodimers, as well as the heterodimer ( Fig. 1 ), is consistent with the convergence of the modeling results. It therefore seems likely that the major factors influencing whether CD16A associates with CD247 or FcεR1γ are related to the relative levels of expression of the different adaptors and possible competition from other receptors that also bind CD247 and FcεR1γ. For example, a population of terminally differentiated human NK cells lose expression of FcεR1γ ( 31 ), and, in these cells, CD16A associates exclusively with CD247 ( 15 ). In contrast, the majority of circulating human NK cells express both FcεR1γ and CD247, but they also express multiple NK receptors that associate with these adaptor molecules. These receptors show little sequence similarity between their TM domains, and it is possible that they recruit CD247 and FcεR1γ unequally from the pool of available adaptors because an interaction between amino acids of complementary charge in the hydrophobic core of the lipid bilayer could differ in “affinity” from one that depends on interactions involving polar and aromatic residues. It is also possible that the specificity of the interaction could be modulated by steric hindrance between domains of the receptors flanking the TM region ( 13 , 14 ).

Apart from the mechanism of association of CD16A with FcεR1γ and CD247, the other striking observation emerging from these experiments is that D 205 within the CD16A TM, unless sequestered within the three-helix interface upon assembly with either FcεR1γ or CD247, promotes intracellular retention of the receptor. It has long been appreciated that the formation of specific polar contacts between TM domain amino acids is a key mechanism to ensure the accurate assembly of multicomponent protein complexes to be expressed on the cell surface ( 9 , 10 ) and that, in the absence of these contacts, unassembled subunits and partially formed complexes are retained intracellularly and eventually degraded ( 32 ). In the case of the TCR, it is the same charged residues providing the core assembly contacts that mediate this quality-control function. In contrast, we found that CD16A D 205 makes only a limited contribution to the receptor/adaptor interaction, but its sequestration within the assembly interface seems to act as a quality control mechanism to ensure that only complete receptor complexes can traffic to the cell surface. Thus, in CD16A, the quality-control function has been separated, at least partially, from the assembly function although both are still located in the TM domain. This FxxDT sequence is highly conserved among the predicted TM sequences of CD16A from multiple mammalian species ( Fig. 8 A ) and is also present in FcεR1α and CD64 (as FxxNT) ( Fig. 8 B ), both of which formed trimeric complexes with FcεR1γ in our assembly simulations that used CD16A-like interfaces ( Fig. 7 ). Indeed, mutation of these residues in FcεR1α caused loss of surface expression and intracellular retention of the receptor, indicating that this sequence also regulates cell-surface expression of FcεR1α, most likely through assembly with FcεR1γ. In contrast to our observations with CD16A, the FDT triple mutant of FcεR1α was not expressed at the cell surface in the absence of adaptor molecules, but the large accumulation of intracellular protein detected by Western blot suggests that mutation of the aspartic acid did indeed protect unassembled FcεR1α protein from degradation. The lack of cell surface expression of this mutant likely reflects the action of ER retention motifs present in the cytoplasmic tail of this receptor that have previously been identified as key elements regulating the trafficking of FcεR1α to the plasma membrane ( 27 , 28 ).

Overall, these data strongly suggest that the Fxx(D/N)T sequences found in three different Fc receptor TM domains form the core membrane-embedded interaction motifs that drive assembly with signaling adaptor molecules and, at least in a subset of these receptor complexes, regulate receptor protein turnover. Thus, at least two completely different solutions for TM-mediated receptor assembly with CD247/FcεR1γ signaling modules have arisen during evolution, one driven by a single basic TM residue and another based on the more complex polar/aromatic interface described here. These findings may provide more broadly useful insights into the biology of other immune receptors that do not contain charged residues in their TM domains and how they assemble into complexes with signaling adaptor molecules.
