---
pmid: '12186947'
title: A novel chk1-dependent G1/M checkpoint in fission yeast.
authors:
- Synnes M
- Nilssen EA
- Boye E
- Grallert B
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.00004
---

# A novel chk1-dependent G1/M checkpoint in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Synnes M, Nilssen EA, Boye E, Grallert B
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.00004](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.00004)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2002 Sep 15;115(Pt 18):3609-18. doi: 10.1242/jcs.00004.

A novel chk1-dependent G1/M checkpoint in fission yeast.

Synnes M(1), Nilssen EA, Boye E, Grallert B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Montebello, 0310 
Oslo, Norway.

Fission yeast cells with a temperature-sensitive Orp1 protein, a component of 
the origin recognition complex, cannot perform DNA replication at the 
restrictive temperature. Seventy percent of orp1-4 cells arrest with a 1C DNA 
content, whereas 30% proceed to mitosis ('cut'). The arrest depends upon the 
checkpoint Rad proteins and, surprisingly, the Chk1 protein, which is thought to 
act only from late S phase. The arrested cells maintain a 1C DNA content, as 
judged by flow cytometry, and the early origin ars3001 has not been initiated, 
as judged by 2D gel analysis. We show that in G1-arrested orp1-4 cells, Wee1 
phosphorylates and inactivates Cdc2. Activation of Chk1 occurs earlier than Cdc2 
phosphorylation, indicating a novel role for Chk1, namely to induce and/or 
maintain Cdc2 phosphorylation upon checkpoint activation in G1. We also show 
that commitment to cutting occurs already in early G1 phase.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.00004
PMID: 12186947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
