---
pmid: '15361138'
title: Comprehensive identification of Arabidopsis thaliana MYB transcription factors
  interacting with R/B-like BHLH proteins.
authors:
- Zimmermann IM
- Heim MA
- Weisshaar B
- Uhrig JF
journal: Plant J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02183.x
---

# Comprehensive identification of Arabidopsis thaliana MYB transcription factors interacting with R/B-like BHLH proteins.
**Authors:** Zimmermann IM, Heim MA, Weisshaar B, Uhrig JF
**Journal:** Plant J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02183.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02183.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2004 Oct;40(1):22-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02183.x.

Comprehensive identification of Arabidopsis thaliana MYB transcription factors 
interacting with R/B-like BHLH proteins.

Zimmermann IM(1), Heim MA, Weisshaar B, Uhrig JF.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 
D-50829 Koeln, Germany.

In-depth analysis of protein-protein interaction specificities of the MYB 
protein family of Arabidopsis thaliana revealed a conserved amino acid signature 
([DE]Lx(2)[RK]x(3)Lx(6)Lx(3)R) as the structural basis for interaction between 
MYB and R/B-like BHLH proteins. The motif has successfully been used to predict 
new MYB/BHLH interactions for A. thaliana proteins, it allows to discriminate 
between even closely related MYB proteins and it is conserved amongst higher 
plants. In A. thaliana, the motif is shared by fourteen R2R3 MYB proteins and 
six 1R MYB proteins. It is located on helices 1 and 2 of the R3 repeat and forms 
a characteristic surface-exposed pattern of hydrophobic and charged residues. 
Single-site mutation of any amino acid of the signature impairs the interaction. 
Two particular amino acids have been determined to account for most of the 
interaction stability. Functional specificity of MYB/BHLH complexes was 
investigated in vivo by a transient DFR promoter activation assay. Residues 
stabilizing the MYB/BHLH interaction were shown to be critical for promoter 
activation. By virtue of proved and predicted interaction specificities, this 
study provides a comprehensive survey of the MYB proteins that interact with 
R/B-like BHLH proteins potentially involved in the TTG1-dependent regulatory 
interaction network. The results are discussed with respect to 
multi-functionality, specificity and redundancy of MYB and BHLH protein 
function.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02183.x
PMID: 15361138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
