---
pmid: '9560288'
title: Association of the Arabidopsis CTR1 Raf-like kinase with the ETR1 and ERS ethylene
  receptors.
authors:
- Clark KL
- Larsen PB
- Wang X
- Chang C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC20273
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.5401
---

# Association of the Arabidopsis CTR1 Raf-like kinase with the ETR1 and ERS ethylene receptors.
**Authors:** Clark KL, Larsen PB, Wang X, Chang C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.9.5401](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.9.5401)
**PMC:** [PMC20273](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC20273/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 28;95(9):5401-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.95.9.5401.

Association of the Arabidopsis CTR1 Raf-like kinase with the ETR1 and ERS 
ethylene receptors.

Clark KL(1), Larsen PB, Wang X, Chang C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, H. J. Patterson Hall, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998 Jul 21;95(15):9060.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, signal transduction of the hormone ethylene involves at 
least two receptors, ETR1 and ERS, both of which are members of the 
two-component histidine protein kinase family that is prevalent in prokaryotes. 
The pathway also contains a negative regulator of ethylene responses, CTR1, 
which closely resembles members of the Raf protein kinase family. CTR1 is 
thought to act at or downstream of ETR1 and ERS based on double mutant analysis; 
however, the signaling mechanisms leading from ethylene perception to the 
regulation of CTR1 are unknown. By using the yeast two-hybrid assay, we detected 
a specific interaction between the CTR1 amino-terminal domain and the predicted 
histidine kinase domain of ETR1 and ERS. We subsequently verified these 
interactions by using an in vitro protein association assay(s). In addition, we 
determined that the amino-terminal domain of CTR1 can associate with the 
predicted receiver domain of ETR1 in vitro. Based on deletion analysis, the 
portion of CTR1 that interacts with ETR1 roughly aligns with the regulatory 
region of Raf kinases. These physical associations support the genetic evidence 
that CTR1 acts in the pathway of ETR1 and ERS and suggest that these 
interactions could be involved in the regulation of CTR1 activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.9.5401
PMCID: PMC20273
PMID: 9560288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In Arabidopsis thaliana , signal transduction of the hormone ethylene involves at least two receptors, ETR1 and ERS, both of which are members of the two-component histidine protein kinase family that is prevalent in prokaryotes. The pathway also contains a negative regulator of ethylene responses, CTR1, which closely resembles members of the Raf protein kinase family. CTR1 is thought to act at or downstream of ETR1 and ERS based on double mutant analysis; however, the signaling mechanisms leading from ethylene perception to the regulation of CTR1 are unknown. By using the yeast two-hybrid assay, we detected a specific interaction between the CTR1 amino-terminal domain and the predicted histidine kinase domain of ETR1 and ERS. We subsequently verified these interactions by using an in vitro protein association assay(s). In addition, we determined that the amino-terminal domain of CTR1 can associate with the predicted receiver domain of ETR1 in vitro . Based on deletion analysis, the portion of CTR1 that interacts with ETR1 roughly aligns with the regulatory region of Raf kinases. These physical associations support the genetic evidence that CTR1 acts in the pathway of ETR1 and ERS and suggest that these interactions could be involved in the regulation of CTR1 activity.

RESULTS

To test whether the Arabidopsis ETR1 and CTR1 proteins can associate physically, we used a LexA version of the yeast two-hybrid assay ( 25 ). The following protein fusions were expressed simultaneously in the yeast L40 reporter strain: a fusion of the bacterial repressor LexA DB with either the ETR1 histidine kinase domain (DB–ETR1 293–610 ) or the ETR1 histidine kinase domain plus receiver domain (DB–ETR1 293–729 ) and a fusion of the yeast Gal4 AD to almost the entire amino-terminal domain of CTR1 (AD–CTR1 53–568 ). The ETR1 and CTR1 protein domains are depicted in Fig. 1 A . The detection of protein interactions was based on the expression of two chromosomally located reporter genes: HIS3 , which confers growth in the absence of histidine, and lacZ , which produces β-galactosidase. We found that yeast transformants containing either of the DB–ETR1 constructs together with the AD–CTR1 53–568 construct were His + (histidine prototrophs) and produced blue color in the presence of the β-galactosidase substrate X-Gal, indicating that the histidine kinase region of ETR1 can interact with the amino-terminal domain of CTR1 (Fig. 1 B ). The interaction was specific because transformants expressing the DB–ETR1 fusions and either AD alone or AD fused to the CTR1 serine/threonine kinase domain (AD–CTR1 538–821 ) were His − (histidine auxotrophs) (for example, Fig. 1 B ). In addition, transformants expressing the DB–ETR1 fusions and AD fused to the S. cerevisiae G β protein Ste4p ( 22 ) (which was included as a negative control) were also His − (data not shown). Similarly, there was no detectable interaction among AD–CTR1 53–568 and either a human lamin negative control ( 16 ) (Fig. 1 B ), the Arabidopsis protein phosphatase TOPPZ (ref. 26 and data not shown), or the amino-terminal region of ETR1 (residues 1–293 fused to the amino terminus of LexA) (data not shown). An interaction test using the reciprocal two-hybrid fusions of ETR1 and CTR1 could not be performed because yeast transformants expressing DB–CTR1 53–568 alone were found to exhibit reporter gene activity.

The interaction of AD–CTR1 53–568 with DB–ETR1 293–729 (which contains the receiver domain) was much stronger than that with DB–ETR1 293–610 (which lacks the receiver domain); transformants carrying AD–CTR1 53–568 and DB–ETR1 293–729 grew faster in the absence of histidine, produced blue color sooner in the X-Gal filter assay (5 min vs. 3–4 hr), and contained much higher β-galactosidase activity than transformants carrying AD–CTR1 53–568 and DB–ETR1 293–610 (Fig. 1 B ). This difference is unlikely to be caused by variation in the amount of DB–ETR1 protein because immunoblotting revealed similar levels of the various DB fusion proteins in the yeast cells (Fig. 1 C ). One possible explanation is that the ETR1 receiver domain itself might interact with AD–CTR1 53–568 . We were unable to test for this interaction in the two-hybrid assay because, as with DB–CTR1 53–568 , transformants expressing only DB fused with the ETR1 receiver domain exhibited reporter gene activity. To test for an interaction between CTR1 and the ETR1 receiver domain, we used an in vitro assay, which is described later.

Next, we asked whether AD–CTR1 53–568 can interact similarly with the putative ethylene receptor ERS. ERS has 58% amino acid sequence identity with ETR1 in the histidine kinase domain, but ERS lacks a receiver domain ( 3 ) (Fig. 1 A ). We tested for a two-hybrid interaction between AD–CTR1 53–568 and a fusion of DB to the ERS histidine kinase domain (DB–ERS 261–613 ) as described for ETR1. Again, the yeast transformants were His + and blue (Fig. 1 B ). The ability of the cells to grow in the absence of histidine and to turn blue in the X-Gal filter assay was indistinguishable from that observed with the DB–ETR1 293–729 transformants. However, comparison of β-galactosidase activity indicated that the interaction with DB–ERS 261–613 is weaker than that with DB–ETR1 293–729 , perhaps because of the absence of a receiver domain. As before, the level of DB–ERS 261–613 fusion protein expressed in the yeast cells was similar to that of the DB–ETR1 fusions (Fig. 1 C ). CTR1 therefore can associate with both ethylene receptors, ETR1 and ERS, in the yeast two-hybrid assay.

We attempted to define the interacting region of CTR1 by testing truncated versions of AD–CTR1 53–568 in the two-hybrid assay with DB–ETR1 293–729 (Fig. 2 ). We found that a truncated version (CTR1 residues 171–521) and smaller CTR1 fusions were expressed poorly in the yeast cells, so we switched from using the pGAD424 two-hybrid vector to using pACTII, which has a stronger promoter ( 19 ). When highly expressed, the AD–CTR1 171–521 fusion protein interacted strongly, and AD–CTR1 308–569 interacted weakly with DB–ETR1 293–729 based on measurements of β-galactosidase activity (Fig. 2 ). Little to no interaction was detected with smaller fusions (Fig. 2 ). Based on the less stringent assay of cell growth in the absence of histidine, AD–CTR1 308–569 interacted with DB–ETR1 293–729 nearly as well as did AD–CTR1 171–521 , in that both gave rise to thick patches of yeast cells within 2 days on selective medium lacking histidine. Very little growth was observed for fusions with CTR1 residues 171–357 or 171–307 (data not shown). Taken together, these results suggest that the minimal interacting region of CTR1 has an amino-terminal border between residues 171 and 308 and a carboxyl-terminal border between residues 521 and 569.

To verify the two-hybrid results, we used two different in vitro protein association assays. In the first assay, we tested whether purified, bacterially expressed MBP fusions could associate with DB or AD fusion proteins present in yeast cell extracts. We found that the purified MBP–CTR1 53–568 fusion could associate with DB–ETR1 293–610 , DB–ETR1 293–729 , and DB–ERS 261–613 , but not with the DB domain alone (Fig. 3 ). In the inverse experiment, we found that purified MBP–ETR1 293–610 and MBP–ETR1 293–729 could associate with AD–CTR1 53–568 but not with AD–CTR1 538–821 (Fig. 4 ) nor with the AD domain alone (data not shown). Additionally, we confirmed that both MBP–ETR1 293–610 and MBP–ETR1 293–729 could associate with one of the smaller AD–CTR1 fusions (CTR1 residues 171–521) (Fig. 4 ). In each case, we verified that MBP alone did not associate with any of the yeast-expressed fusion proteins and that the amount of added MBP fusion was similar for each of the extracts tested (as shown in Figs. 3 and 4 ). Thus, the interactions we observed in the presence of yeast cell extracts were specific and consistent with the two-hybrid results.

Lastly, we used a second in vitro association assay to demonstrate that CTR1 and ETR1 can interact in the absence of yeast cell extracts. In addition, we determined that the CTR1 amino-terminal domain can associate with the ETR1 receiver domain (an interaction that could not be tested in the two-hybrid assay because of background activation of the reporter genes by either the amino-terminal portion of CTR1 or the receiver domain of ETR1). The assay was performed by mixing in vitro- translated [ 35 S]methionine-labeled CTR1 polypeptides with purified, bacterially expressed MBP fusions attached to amylose-containing beads and then determining whether the radiolabeled proteins were associated with the MBP fusions. To examine the specificity of the interaction, we included MBP fused with the receiver domain (residues 981-1122) of the putative cytokinin receptor CKI1 ( 13 ). We found that the radiolabeled CTR1 amino-terminal domain (residues 53–568) could associate with MBP–ETR1 293–610 and MBP–ETR1 604–738 and only weakly with MBP–CKI1 981–1122 and MBP alone (Fig. 5 A ). Of note, when the amount of added radiolabeled CTR1 protein was increased 5-fold (from 5 to 25 μl), the interaction with MBP–ETR1 293–610 and MBP–ETR1 604–738 increased whereas the apparent weak association with MBP alone was not enhanced significantly (Fig. 5 A ). The absence of association with the CKI1 receiver is indicative of the specificity of the CTR1 association with the ETR1 receiver. Furthermore, when we used radiolabeled kinase domain of CTR1 (residues 538–821) as the test protein, there was no substantial interaction with any of the MBP fusions (Fig. 5 B ). These results indicate that the amino-terminal domain of CTR1 can interact specifically with the ETR1 receiver domain in addition to the ETR1 histidine kinase domain and that endogenous yeast proteins (yeast cell extracts) are not required in these associations.

DISCUSSION

We have detected a physical association between the presumed regulatory domain of the CTR1 protein kinase and the predicted histidine protein kinase domain of the ETR1 and ERS ethylene receptors in both the yeast two-hybrid assay and in vitro . We also observed an in vitro association between the amino-terminal domain of CTR1 and the receiver domain of ETR1. These findings support previous genetic data indicating that CTR1 acts at or downstream of both ETR1 and ERS in the ethylene signal transduction pathway of Arabidopsis . Furthermore, our results suggest that CTR1 might be part of an ethylene receptor complex(es) in Arabidopsis and that the regulation of CTR1 activity by ethylene may involve direct interactions with the two-component receptors.

Based on sequence analysis, CTR1 is a member of the Raf family of serine/threonine protein kinases identified in Caenorhabditis , Drosophila, and mammals ( 4 ). Activation of mammalian Raf is known to involve a number of factors: interaction with the small GTP-binding protein Ras ( 27 , 28 ), oligomerization on recruitment to the plasma membrane, tyrosine phosphorylation, and/or association with other components ( 29 – 34 ). Also, 14–3-3 proteins play a role in activating Raf, possibly by facilitating dimerization ( 35 – 37 ). From our studies, the minimal interacting region of CTR1 has an amino-terminal border between residues 171 and 308 and a carboxyl-terminal border between residues 521 and 569. Throughout this region, CTR1 displays weak sequence similarity to Raf ( 4 ). This region corresponds to the noncatalytic portion of Raf, which is important for Raf kinase activity and is involved in the association of Raf with Ras ( 27 , 28 ) and 14–3-3 proteins ( 35 , 36 ). Therefore, this portion of CTR1 may play a regulatory role analogous to that of Raf but involving association with membrane-associated two-component ethylene receptors. Of interest, the tertiary structure of the prototypical bacterial receiver CheY (which is the inferred structure of all receiver domains) is very similar to that of Ras ( 38 , 39 ), and there are functional similarities at the atomic level between Ras and CheY activation ( 40 ). Apart from this, the regulation of CTR1 activity could have other parallels with Raf. ETR1 has been localized to plant membrane fractions and has been shown to exist as a dimer in Arabidopsis ( 41 ). Thus, the ethylene receptors conceivably could facilitate membrane association and/or dimerization of CTR1. Assuming a conformational change in the receptor on ethylene binding, the formation or stability of the receptor–CTR1 complex might be conditionally dependent on the presence or absence of ethylene. (We do not know whether the fusion proteins in our experiments resemble an ethylene bound or unbound state.) Another possibility is that the receptors regulate CTR1 by phosphorylation. Finally, although we have shown that the receptor–CTR1 associations can occur in vitro with purified proteins, other components could well be involved in the formation of the receptor–CTR1 complex in Arabidopsis.

The only pathway currently known to contain both a two-component phosphorelay system and a complete MAP kinase cascade is the S. cerevisiae osmolarity-response pathway. [A similar pathway may exist for a stress-activated MAP kinase pathway in Schizosaccharomyces pombe (e.g., ref. 12 ).] In the yeast omolarity-response pathway, the Ypd1p protein serves as a histidine phosphorelay intermediate between the histidine protein kinase osmolarity sensor Sln1p and the response regulator Ssk1p ( 42 ). Through an undefined mechanism, Ssk1p activates a MAP kinase cascade comprised of two MAPKKKs (Ssk2p and Ssk22p), a MAPKK (Pbs2p), and a MAPK (Hog1p) ( 43 ). Although two-hybrid interactions have been demonstrated between the sequential components of the two-component phosphorelay portion of this pathway ( 42 ), including between the response regulator Ssk1p and the MAPKKKs Ssk2p and Ssk22p ( 43 ), it has not been determined whether Sln1p physically interacts with Ssk2p and/or Ssk22p (F. Posas and H. Saito, personal communication). To date, there is no evidence that the ethylene-response pathway in plants contains a phosphorelay system similar to that of the yeast osmolarity-response pathway, which has parallels with several bacterial two-component pathways ( 11 , 44 ). The protein–protein interactions we have presented in this paper may be indicative of a distinct two-component signaling mechanism.
