---
pmid: '28389568'
title: Hepatitis C virus triggers Golgi fragmentation and autophagy through the immunity-related
  GTPase M.
authors:
- Hansen MD
- Johnsen IB
- Stiberg KA
- Sherstova T
- Wakita T
- Richard GM
- Kandasamy RK
- Meurs EF
- Anthonsen MW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5410803
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1616683114
---

# Hepatitis C virus triggers Golgi fragmentation and autophagy through the immunity-related GTPase M.
**Authors:** Hansen MD, Johnsen IB, Stiberg KA, Sherstova T, Wakita T, Richard GM, Kandasamy RK, Meurs EF, Anthonsen MW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1616683114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1616683114)
**PMC:** [PMC5410803](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5410803/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Apr 25;114(17):E3462-E3471. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1616683114. Epub 2017 Apr 7.

Hepatitis C virus triggers Golgi fragmentation and autophagy through the 
immunity-related GTPase M.

Hansen MD(1)(2), Johnsen IB(1), Stiberg KA(1), Sherstova T(1), Wakita T(3), 
Richard GM(4), Kandasamy RK(4), Meurs EF(2), Anthonsen MW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Faculty of 
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7006 Trondheim, 
Norway.
(2)Hepacivirus and Innate Immunity, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)Department of Virology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo 
162-8640, Japan.
(4)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), Department of Cancer 
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
(NTNU), 7491 Trondheim, Norway.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Faculty of 
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7006 Trondheim, 
Norway; marit.w.anthonsen@ntnu.no.

Positive-stranded RNA viruses, such as hepatitis C virus (HCV), assemble their 
viral replication complexes by remodeling host intracellular membranes to a 
membranous web. The precise composition of these replication complexes and the 
detailed mechanisms by which they are formed are incompletely understood. Here 
we show that the human immunity-related GTPase M (IRGM), known to contribute to 
autophagy, plays a previously unrecognized role in this process. We show that 
IRGM is localized at the Golgi apparatus and regulates the fragmentation of 
Golgi membranes in response to HCV infection, leading to colocalization of Golgi 
vesicles with replicating HCV. Our results show that IRGM controls 
phosphorylation of GBF1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Arf-GTPases, 
which normally operates in Golgi membrane dynamics and vesicle coating in 
resting cells. We also find that HCV triggers IRGM-mediated phosphorylation of 
the early autophagy initiator ULK1, thereby providing mechanistic insight into 
the role of IRGM in HCV-mediated autophagy. Collectively, our results identify 
IRGM as a key Golgi-situated regulator that links intracellular membrane 
remodeling by autophagy and Golgi fragmentation with viral replication.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1616683114
PMCID: PMC5410803
PMID: 28389568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
