---
pmid: '11981756'
title: The p21(Cip1) protein, a cyclin inhibitor, regulates the levels and the intracellular
  localization of CDC25A in mice regenerating livers.
authors:
- Jaime M
- Pujol MJ
- Serratosa J
- Pantoja C
- Canela N
- Casanovas O
- Serrano M
- Agell N
- Bachs O
journal: Hepatology
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1053/jhep.2002.32678
---

# The p21(Cip1) protein, a cyclin inhibitor, regulates the levels and the intracellular localization of CDC25A in mice regenerating livers.
**Authors:** Jaime M, Pujol MJ, Serratosa J, Pantoja C, Canela N, Casanovas O, Serrano M, Agell N, Bachs O
**Journal:** Hepatology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1053/jhep.2002.32678](https://doi.org/10.1053/jhep.2002.32678)

## Abstract

1. Hepatology. 2002 May;35(5):1063-71. doi: 10.1053/jhep.2002.32678.

The p21(Cip1) protein, a cyclin inhibitor, regulates the levels and the 
intracellular localization of CDC25A in mice regenerating livers.

Jaime M(1), Pujol MJ, Serratosa J, Pantoja C, Canela N, Casanovas O, Serrano M, 
Agell N, Bachs O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Liver cells from p21(Cip1-/-) mice subjected to partial hepatectomy (PH) 
progress into DNA synthesis faster than those from wild-type mice. These cells 
also show a premature induction of cyclin E/cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 2 
activity. We studied the mechanisms whereby cells lacking p21(Cip1) showed a 
premature induction of this activity. Whereas the levels of CDK2, cyclin E, and 
p27(Kip1) were similar in both wild-type and p21(Cip1-/-) mice, those of the 
activator CDC25A were much higher in p21(Cip1-/-) quiescent and regenerating 
livers than in wild-type animals. Moreover, p21(Cip1-/-) cells also showed a 
premature translocation of CDC25A from cytoplasm into the nucleus. The ectopic 
expression of p21(Cip1) into mice embryo fibroblasts from p21(Cip1-/-) mice 
decreased the levels of CDC25A and delayed its nuclear translocation. The levels 
of CDC25A messenger RNA in p21(Cip1-/-) cells were higher than in wild-type 
cells, suggesting that this increase might be responsible, at least in part, for 
the high levels of CDC25A protein in these cells. Thus, the results reported 
here indicate that p21(Cip1) regulates the levels and the intracellular 
localization of CDC25A. We also found a good correlation between CDC25A nuclear 
translocation and cyclin E/CDK2 activation. In conclusion, premature 
translocation of CDC25A to the nucleus might be involved in the advanced 
induction of cyclin E/CDK2 activity and DNA replication in cells from animals 
lacking p21(Cip1).

DOI: 10.1053/jhep.2002.32678
PMID: 11981756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
