---
pmid: '26675238'
title: WDR8 is a centriolar satellite and centriole-associated protein that promotes
  ciliary vesicle docking during ciliogenesis.
authors:
- Kurtulmus B
- Wang W
- Ruppert T
- Neuner A
- Cerikan B
- Viol L
- Dueñas-Sánchez R
- Gruss OJ
- Pereira G
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.179713
---

# WDR8 is a centriolar satellite and centriole-associated protein that promotes ciliary vesicle docking during ciliogenesis.
**Authors:** Kurtulmus B, Wang W, Ruppert T, Neuner A, Cerikan B, Viol L, Dueñas-Sánchez R, Gruss OJ, Pereira G
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.179713](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.179713)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2016 Feb 1;129(3):621-36. doi: 10.1242/jcs.179713. Epub 2015 Dec
16.

WDR8 is a centriolar satellite and centriole-associated protein that promotes 
ciliary vesicle docking during ciliogenesis.

Kurtulmus B(1), Wang W(2), Ruppert T(3), Neuner A(3), Cerikan B(3), Viol L(1), 
Dueñas-Sánchez R(4), Gruss OJ(5), Pereira G(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), Im Neuenheimer Feld 230, Heidelberg 
69120, Germany Division of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research Centre 
(DKFZ), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(2)Division of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), 
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, Heidelberg 69120, Germany Zentrum 
für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(3)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH 
Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(4)Division of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research Centre (DKFZ), 
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(5)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie der Universität Heidelberg (ZMBH), DKFZ-ZMBH 
Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, Heidelberg 69120, Germany 
gislene.pereira@cos.uni-heidelberg.de o.gruss@uni-bonn.de.
(6)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), Im Neuenheimer Feld 230, Heidelberg 
69120, Germany Division of Centrosomes and Cilia, German Cancer Research Centre 
(DKFZ), DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, Heidelberg 69120, Germany 
gislene.pereira@cos.uni-heidelberg.de o.gruss@uni-bonn.de.

Ciliogenesis initiates at the mother centriole through a series of events that 
include membrane docking, displacement of cilia-inhibitory proteins and axoneme 
elongation. Centriolar proteins, in particular at distal and subdistal 
appendages, carry out these functions. Recently, cytoplasmic complexes named 
centriolar satellites have also been shown to promote ciliogenesis. Little is 
known about the functional and molecular relationship between appendage 
proteins, satellites and cilia biogenesis. Here, we identified the WD-repeat 
protein 8 (WDR8, also known as WRAP73) as a satellite and centriolar component. 
We show that WDR8 interacts with the satellite proteins SSX2IP and PCM1 as well 
as the centriolar proximal end component Cep135. Cep135 is required for the 
recruitment of WDR8 to centrioles. Depletion experiments revealed that WDR8 and 
Cep135 have strongly overlapping functions in ciliogenesis. Both are 
indispensable for ciliary vesicle docking to the mother centriole and for 
unlocking the distal end of the mother centriole from the ciliary inhibitory 
complex CP110-Cep97. Our data thus point to an important function of centriolar 
proximal end proteins in ciliary membrane biogenesis, and establish WDR8 and 
Cep135 as two factors that are essential for the initial steps of ciliation.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.179713
PMID: 26675238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
