---
pmid: '20628368'
title: Tom70 mediates activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 on mitochondria.
authors:
- Liu XY
- Wei B
- Shi HX
- Shan YF
- Wang C
journal: Cell Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.103
---

# Tom70 mediates activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 on mitochondria.
**Authors:** Liu XY, Wei B, Shi HX, Shan YF, Wang C
**Journal:** Cell Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2010.103](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2010.103)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2010 Sep;20(9):994-1011. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.103. Epub 2010 Jul 13.

Tom70 mediates activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 on mitochondria.

Liu XY(1), Wei B, Shi HX, Shan YF, Wang C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Intracellular RNA viruses are sensed by receptors retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 
(RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) that trigger the 
formation of MAVS signal complex on mitochondria. Consequently, this leads to 
the activation of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and phosphorylation of interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), both of which constitutively associate with 
cytosolic chaperone Hsp90. It remains largely unknown how MAVS activates 
TBK1/IRF3. In this study, we identified translocases of outer membrane 70 
(Tom70), a mitochondrial import receptor, to interact with MAVS upon RNA virus 
infection. Ectopic expression or knockdown of Tom70 could enhance or impair 
IRF3-mediated gene expression, respectively. Mechanistically, the clamp domain 
(R192) of Tom70 interacts with the C-terminal motif (EEVD) of Hsp90, thus 
recruiting TBK1/IRF3 to mitochondria. Disruption of this interaction or 
mislocation of Tom70 sharply impairs activation of TBK1 and IRF3. Furthermore, 
host antiviral responses are significantly boosted or crippled in the presence 
or absence of Tom70. Collectively, our study characterizes Tom70 as a critical 
adaptor linking MAVS to TBK1/IRF3, revealing that mitochondrion is 
evolutionarily integrated with innate immunity.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2010.103
PMID: 20628368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
