---
pmid: '2649894'
title: Yeast translation initiation suppressor sui2 encodes the alpha subunit of eukaryotic
  initiation factor 2 and shares sequence identity with the human alpha subunit.
authors:
- Cigan AM
- Pabich EK
- Feng L
- Donahue TF
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC287003
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.8.2784
---

# Yeast translation initiation suppressor sui2 encodes the alpha subunit of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 and shares sequence identity with the human alpha subunit.
**Authors:** Cigan AM, Pabich EK, Feng L, Donahue TF
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.86.8.2784](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.86.8.2784)
**PMC:** [PMC287003](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC287003/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Apr;86(8):2784-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.8.2784.

Yeast translation initiation suppressor sui2 encodes the alpha subunit of 
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 and shares sequence identity with the human alpha 
subunit.

Cigan AM(1), Pabich EK, Feng L, Donahue TF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
Chicago, IL 60611.

Genetic reversion of HIS4 initiator codon mutations in yeast has identified 
three unlinked genes, sui1, sui2, and SUI3 (suppressors of initiator codon 
mutations), which when mutated confer the ability to initiate translation at 
HIS4 despite the absence of an AUG start codon. We have previously demonstrated 
that the SUI3 gene encodes the beta subunit of the eukaryotic initiation factor 
2 (eIF-2) and that mutations at a Zn(II) finger motif of SUI3 alter the start 
site selection process in yeast. In this report, molecular and biochemical 
characterizations show that the sui2 suppressor gene encodes the alpha subunit 
of eIF-2. The amino acid sequence of sui2 is 58% homologous to that encoded by 
the cDNA of the human eIF-2 alpha. Mutations in the sui2 suppressor alleles 
occur in the amino-terminal portion of the protein and change amino acids that 
are identical at the same relative position in the yeast and human proteins. 
Protein sequence analysis shows that a sui2 mutant yeast strain allows 
initiation at a UUG codon in the absence of an AUG codon at HIS4. These data 
further suggest that eIF-2 is an important component of the preinitiation 
complex that mediates ribosomal recognition of a start codon during the scanning 
process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.86.8.2784
PMCID: PMC287003
PMID: 2649894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
