---
pmid: '9352085'
title: Cloning of the human cDNA sequence encoding the NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase
  MLRQ subunit.
authors:
- Kim JW
- Lee Y
- Kang HB
- Chose YK
- Chung TW
- Chang SY
- Lee KS
- Choe IS
journal: Biochem Mol Biol Int
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1080/15216549700204471
---

# Cloning of the human cDNA sequence encoding the NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase MLRQ subunit.
**Authors:** Kim JW, Lee Y, Kang HB, Chose YK, Chung TW, Chang SY, Lee KS, Choe IS
**Journal:** Biochem Mol Biol Int (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15216549700204471](https://doi.org/10.1080/15216549700204471)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1997 Oct;43(3):669-75. doi: 10.1080/15216549700204471.

Cloning of the human cDNA sequence encoding the NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase 
MLRQ subunit.

Kim JW(1), Lee Y, Kang HB, Chose YK, Chung TW, Chang SY, Lee KS, Choe IS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Research Division, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Taejon, Korea.

A cDNA clone encoding human NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I of 
mitochondrial respiratory chain) MLRQ subunit was isolated from human fetal 
liver cDNA library. The clone contained an open reading frame of 246 by which 
predicted a protein comprising 81 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight 
of 9,370 Da. The deduced amino acid sequence exhibited 95% homology (88% 
identity and 7% favored substitution) to that of bovine MLRQ subunit. Northern 
analysis revealed that the cDNA clone hybridized with a 0.7 kb mRNA species 
which was present in all tissues examined. The expression level of the 0.7 kb 
mRNA in heart, skeletal muscle, and brain was higher than in other organs. Human 
MLRQ cDNA could cross-hybridize with the genomic DNAs from various species.

DOI: 10.1080/15216549700204471
PMID: 9352085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
