---
pmid: '19706470'
title: Model for eukaryotic tail-anchored protein binding based on the structure of
  Get3.
authors:
- Suloway CJ
- Chartron JW
- Zaslaver M
- Clemons WM Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2736419
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907522106
---

# Model for eukaryotic tail-anchored protein binding based on the structure of Get3.
**Authors:** Suloway CJ, Chartron JW, Zaslaver M, Clemons WM Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907522106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907522106)
**PMC:** [PMC2736419](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2736419/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 1;106(35):14849-54. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907522106. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

Model for eukaryotic tail-anchored protein binding based on the structure of 
Get3.

Suloway CJ(1), Chartron JW, Zaslaver M, Clemons WM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

The Get3 ATPase directs the delivery of tail-anchored (TA) proteins to the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). TA-proteins are characterized by having a single 
transmembrane helix (TM) at their extreme C terminus and include many essential 
proteins, such as SNAREs, apoptosis factors, and protein translocation 
components. These proteins cannot follow the SRP-dependent co-translational 
pathway that typifies most integral membrane proteins; instead, 
post-translationally, these proteins are recognized and bound by Get3 then 
delivered to the ER in the ATP dependent Get pathway. To elucidate a molecular 
mechanism for TA protein binding by Get3 we have determined three crystal 
structures in apo and ADP forms from Saccharomyces cerevisae (ScGet3-apo) and 
Aspergillus fumigatus (AfGet3-apo and AfGet3-ADP). Using structural information, 
we generated mutants to confirm important interfaces and essential residues. 
These results point to a model of how Get3 couples ATP hydrolysis to the binding 
and release of TA-proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907522106
PMCID: PMC2736419
PMID: 19706470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
