---
pmid: '12895003'
title: Characterization of human keratin-associated protein 1 family members.
authors:
- Shimomura Y
- Aoki N
- Rogers MA
- Langbein L
- Schweizer J
- Ito M
journal: J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12180.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# Characterization of human keratin-associated protein 1 family members.
**Authors:** Shimomura Y, Aoki N, Rogers MA, Langbein L, Schweizer J, Ito M
**Journal:** J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12180.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12180.x)

## Abstract

1. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc. 2003 Jun;8(1):96-9. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12180.x.

Characterization of human keratin-associated protein 1 family members.

Shimomura Y(1), Aoki N, Rogers MA, Langbein L, Schweizer J, Ito M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Niigata University School of Medicine, Niigata, 
Japan. yshimo@med.niigata-u.ac.jp

Keratin-associated proteins are involved in the formation of the cross-linked 
network of the keratin-intermediate filament proteins that support hair fibers. 
In recent years, several keratin-associated protein genes have been identified 
and become an attractive topic in hair research. More recently, we isolated two 
cDNA encoding novel members of the human keratin-associated protein 1 family 
(human keratin-associated protein 1.6 and human keratin-associated protein 1.7), 
and described their expression in the hair follicle by RNA in situ 
hybridization. A comparison of human keratin-associated protein 1.6 and human 
keratin-associated protein 1.7 with other human keratin-associated protein 1 
members revealed that keratin-associated protein 1 proteins are fundamentally 
composed of five distinct domains, and that they can be classified primarily by 
a striking variation in double cysteine-containing pentapeptide repeats in the 
repetitive I domain. The sum of the data analyzed suggests that human 
keratin-associated protein 1 family genes may have arisen mainly through gene 
duplication of the cysteine-repeat motifs during evolution.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2003.12180.x
PMID: 12895003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
