---
pmid: '16648142'
title: Neurofibroma-associated growth factors activate a distinct signaling network
  to alter the function of neurofibromin-deficient endothelial cells.
authors:
- Munchhof AM
- Li F
- White HA
- Mead LE
- Krier TR
- Fenoglio A
- Li X
- Yuan J
- Yang FC
- Ingram DA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl108
---

# Neurofibroma-associated growth factors activate a distinct signaling network to alter the function of neurofibromin-deficient endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Munchhof AM, Li F, White HA, Mead LE, Krier TR, Fenoglio A, Li X, Yuan J, Yang FC, Ingram DA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddl108](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddl108)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jun 1;15(11):1858-69. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl108. Epub 2006
Apr  28.

Neurofibroma-associated growth factors activate a distinct signaling network to 
alter the function of neurofibromin-deficient endothelial cells.

Munchhof AM(1), Li F, White HA, Mead LE, Krier TR, Fenoglio A, Li X, Yuan J, 
Yang FC, Ingram DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B. Wells Center for Pediatric Research, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, 1044 W. Walnut Street, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA.

Genetic inactivation of tumor suppressor genes initiates human cancers. However, 
interaction of accessory cells with the tumor-initiating cell within the 
microenvironment is often required for tumor progression. This paradigm is 
relevant to understanding neurofibroma development in neurofibromatosis type I 
patients. Somatic inactivation of the Nf1 tumor suppressor gene, which encodes 
neurofibromin, is necessary but not sufficient to initiate neurofibroma 
development. In contrast, neurofibromas occur with high penetrance in mice in 
which Nf1 is ablated in Schwann cells in the context of a heterozygous mutant 
(Nf1+/-) microenvironment. Neurofibromas are highly vascularized, and recent 
studies suggest that Nf1+/- mice have increased angiogenesis in vivo. However, 
the function of neurofibromin in human endothelial cells (ECs) and the 
biochemical mechanism by which neurofibromin regulates neoangiogenesis are not 
known. Utilizing Nf1+/- mice, primary human ECs and endothelial progenitor cells 
harvested from NF1 patients, we identified a discrete Ras effector pathway, 
which alters the proliferation and migration of neurofibromin-deficient ECs in 
response to neurofibroma-derived growth factors both in vitro and in vivo. Thus, 
these studies identify a unique biochemical pathway in Nf1+/- ECs as a potential 
therapeutic target in the neurofibroma microenvironment.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl108
PMID: 16648142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
