---
pmid: '18485871'
title: Epigenetic control of rDNA loci in response to intracellular energy status.
authors:
- Murayama A
- Ohmori K
- Fujimura A
- Minami H
- Yasuzawa-Tanaka K
- Kuroda T
- Oie S
- Daitoku H
- Okuwaki M
- Nagata K
- Fukamizu A
- Kimura K
- Shimizu T
- Yanagisawa J
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.030
---

# Epigenetic control of rDNA loci in response to intracellular energy status.
**Authors:** Murayama A, Ohmori K, Fujimura A, Minami H, Yasuzawa-Tanaka K, Kuroda T, Oie S, Daitoku H, Okuwaki M, Nagata K, Fukamizu A, Kimura K, Shimizu T, Yanagisawa J
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.030)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 May 16;133(4):627-39. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.030.

Epigenetic control of rDNA loci in response to intracellular energy status.

Murayama A(1), Ohmori K, Fujimura A, Minami H, Yasuzawa-Tanaka K, Kuroda T, Oie 
S, Daitoku H, Okuwaki M, Nagata K, Fukamizu A, Kimura K, Shimizu T, Yanagisawa 
J.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell. 2008 May 16;133(4):577-80. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.04.026.

Intracellular energy balance is important for cell survival. In eukaryotic 
cells, the most energy-consuming process is ribosome biosynthesis, which adapts 
to changes in intracellular energy status. However, the mechanism that links 
energy status and ribosome biosynthesis is largely unknown. Here, we describe 
eNoSC, a protein complex that senses energy status and controls rRNA 
transcription. eNoSC contains Nucleomethylin, which binds histone H3 
dimethylated Lys9 in the rDNA locus, in a complex with SIRT1 and SUV39H1. Both 
SIRT1 and SUV39H1 are required for energy-dependent transcriptional repression, 
suggesting that a change in the NAD(+)/NADH ratio induced by reduction of energy 
status could activate SIRT1, leading to deacetylation of histone H3 and 
dimethylation at Lys9 by SUV39H1, thus establishing silent chromatin in the rDNA 
locus. Furthermore, eNoSC promotes restoration of energy balance by limiting 
rRNA transcription, thus protecting cells from energy deprivation-dependent 
apoptosis. These findings provide key insight into the mechanisms of energy 
homeostasis in cells.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.03.030
PMID: 18485871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
