---
pmid: '22521434'
title: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D together stimulate
  human bone marrow-derived stem cells toward the osteogenic phenotype by HGF-induced
  up-regulation of VDR.
authors:
- Chen K
- Aenlle KK
- Curtis KM
- Roos BA
- Howard GA
journal: Bone
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.04.002
---

# Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D together stimulate human bone marrow-derived stem cells toward the osteogenic phenotype by HGF-induced up-regulation of VDR.
**Authors:** Chen K, Aenlle KK, Curtis KM, Roos BA, Howard GA
**Journal:** Bone (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2012.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2012.04.002)

## Abstract

1. Bone. 2012 Jul;51(1):69-77. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.04.002. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D together stimulate 
human bone marrow-derived stem cells toward the osteogenic phenotype by 
HGF-induced up-regulation of VDR.

Chen K(1), Aenlle KK, Curtis KM, Roos BA, Howard GA.

Author information:
(1)GRECC and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL 33125, 
USA. Ketian_Chen@hotmail.com

Bone formation and remodeling require generation of osteoprogenitors from bone 
marrow stem cells (MSC), which are regulated by growth factors and hormones, 
with putative roles in mesenchymal cell differentiation. Hepatocyte growth 
factor (HGF) is a pleiotropic growth factor, and together with its high affinity 
receptor cMet are widely expressed in normal tissues. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 
(1,25OHD) is the most active metabolite of vitamin D; produced mainly in the 
kidney, but also by osteoblasts. We previously reported that HGF and 1,25OHD act 
together to increase osteogenic differentiation of human MSC (hMSC) potentially 
through increasing p53. Although p53 does not induce the vitamin D receptor 
(VDR), p63, a member of the p53 family of transcription factors has been 
reported to up-regulate VDR expression in some tumor cell lines, and thus might 
play a part in HGF-regulated VDR expression. Our hypothesis is that the 
combination of HGF and 1,25OHD can induce hMSC differentiation by up-regulation 
of 1,25OHD and/or VDR expression to increase cell response(s) to 1,25OHD. Using 
real-time RT-qPCR, Western blots, luciferase reporter assays, and siRNAs, as 
well as antibodies to specific signaling molecules we showed that HGF induced 
VDR gene expression, as well as up-regulated p63 gene expression. p63 gene 
knockdown by siRNA eliminated the effects of HGF on VDR gene expression as 
measured by RT-qPCR, Western blots and luciferase reporter assay, and downstream 
on osteogenic differentiation markers, including alkaline phosphatase staining. 
Differentiation is a coordinated process of cell cycle exit and tissue-specific 
gene expression. These results suggest HGF might be a good candidate to 
coordinate the regulation of these two processes during hMSC osteogenic 
differentiation. p63 could be a key connecting molecule on the pathway of 
HGF-induced VDR expression. Understanding the role of these factors and their 
actions could have important clinical implications for the use of hMSC in the 
development of novel stem cell therapies.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.04.002
PMID: 22521434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
