---
pmid: '19549685'
title: Caspase cleavage of Atg4D stimulates GABARAP-L1 processing and triggers mitochondrial
  targeting and apoptosis.
authors:
- Betin VM
- Lane JD
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2009'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2704886
doi: 10.1242/jcs.046250
---

# Caspase cleavage of Atg4D stimulates GABARAP-L1 processing and triggers mitochondrial targeting and apoptosis.
**Authors:** Betin VM, Lane JD
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.046250](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.046250)
**PMC:** [PMC2704886](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2704886/)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Jul 15;122(Pt 14):2554-66. doi: 10.1242/jcs.046250. Epub 2009
 Jun 23.

Caspase cleavage of Atg4D stimulates GABARAP-L1 processing and triggers 
mitochondrial targeting and apoptosis.

Betin VM(1), Lane JD.

Author information:
(1)Cell Biology Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical 
Sciences, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

Autophagy is an important catabolic process with roles in cell survival and cell 
death. It sequesters cytosol and organelles within double-membrane 
autophagosomes that deliver their contents to lysosomes for degradation. 
Autophagosome biogenesis is coordinated by the autophagy-related protein 4 
(Atg4) family of C54 endopeptidases (Atg4A-Atg4D). These enzymes prime and then 
later delipidate the autophagosome marker, Atg8. Here, we show that one family 
member, Atg4D, is cleaved by caspase-3 in vitro and in apoptotic cells. Atg4D is 
a poor priming and delipidation enzyme in vitro, but truncated DeltaN63 Atg4D 
displays increased activity against the Atg8 paralogue, gamma-aminobutyric acid 
receptor-associated protein-like 1 (GABARAP-L1). In living cells, DeltaN63 Atg4D 
stimulates the delipidation of GABARAP-L1, whereas siRNA silencing of the gene 
expressing Atg4D abrogates GABARAP-L1 autophagosome formation and sensitises 
cells to starvation and staurosporine-induced cell death. Interestingly, Atg4D 
overexpression induces apoptosis, which is preceded by the caspase-independent 
recruitment of Atg4D to mitochondria and is facilitated by a putative C-terminal 
Bcl-2 homology 3 (BH3) domain. Atg4D also acquires affinity for damaged 
mitochondria in cells treated with hydrogen peroxide. These data suggest that 
Atg4D is an autophagy regulator that links mitochondrial dysfunction with 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.046250
PMCID: PMC2704886
PMID: 19549685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Macroautophagy (autophagy, hereafter) is an important catabolic process
 that promotes cell survival during episodes of nutrient or growth-factor
 stress ( Lum et al., 2005 ).
 Autophagy has important roles in development and homeostasis
 ( Levine and Klionsky, 2004 ; Lockshin and Zakeri, 2004 ; Qu et al., 2007 ). It recycles
 toxic or redundant components by sequestering cytoplasm within double-membrane
 autophagosomes that deliver their contents to lysosomes
 ( Yorimitsu and Klionsky,
 2005 ). Autophagy prevents disease by removing damaged organelles,
 misfolded protein aggregates and some pathogens
 ( Shintani and Klionsky, 2004 ).
 Under certain conditions, autophagy also contributes to cell death [type II or
 autophagic cell death ( Leist and Jaattela,
 2001 )], by causing cellular vacuolisation and cellular dysfunction
 ( Lum et al., 2005 ; Yu et al., 2004 ). Notably, the
 regulation of autophagy is directly coupled to apoptosis
 ( Lum et al., 2005 ; Pattingre and Levine, 2006 ),
 and its capacity both to protect and to kill cells suggests that autophagy
 will prove to be an important therapeutic target for neurodegenerative
 diseases and cancer ( Botti et al.,
 2006 ; Jin and White,
 2007 ; Kondo and Kondo,
 2006 ; Shintani and Klionsky,
 2004 ).

Autophagosome biogenesis is coordinated by the Beclin-1/class III
 phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) complex [autophagy-related protein 6
 (Atg6) or vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34) in yeast]
 ( Lee et al., 2007 ), and
 requires parallel, ubiquitin-like conjugation pathways. The first pathway
 forms an isopeptide bond between Atg5 and Atg12 [Atg7 is the E1-type enzyme
 ( Kim et al., 1999 ); Atg10 is
 the E2-type conjugation enzyme ( Shintani
 et al., 1999 )]. In the second pathway, Atg8 is a modifier of the
 lipid phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) [here, Atg7 is referred to as E1, and Atg3
 as E2 ( Ichimura et al.,
 2000 )]. Atg5-Atg12 binds to Atg16
 ( Suzuki et al., 2001 ), and
 associates transiently with membranes to target lipidated Atg8 to the nascent
 autophagosome. Atg8 remains attached throughout autophagosome biogenesis, but
 is removed from the outer autophagosomal membrane before fusion with the
 lysosome ( Mizushima et al.,
 2001 ). The C54 endopeptidase, Atg4, is a crucial regulatory
 component of the autophagosome biogenesis pathway
 ( Scherz-Shouval et al., 2007 ):
 it cleaves the C-terminus of newly synthesised Atg8 to reveal a glycine
 residue (priming) required for covalent attachment to PE (lipidation), and
 later removes PE from outer-membrane-bound Atg8 (delipidation) to facilitate
 autophagosome-lysosome fusion and Atg8 recycling.

Yeast express single genes encoding Atg4 and Atg8; however, in mammals
 there are four assumed Atg4 paralogues [autophagins Atg4A-Atg4D
 ( Marino et al., 2003 )] and
 several Atg8-related proteins [e.g. MAP1A/B light chain 3 (LC3),
 γ-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein (GABARAP), GABARAP-like
 1 (GABARAP-L1, also known as Atg8L) and GABARAP-like 2 (GABARAP-L2, also known
 as Golgi-associated ATPase enhancer GATE-16)]. Studies suggest that Atg4B is
 likely to be the principle human Atg4 paralogue: it rescues the inability of
 yeast Δ ATG4 strains to process aminopeptidase I
 ( Marino et al., 2003 ), it
 primes each of the human Atg8-related proteins tested so far in vitro [LC3;
 GABARAP; GABARAP-L1; GATE-16 ( Hemelaar et
 al., 2003 ; Tanida et al.,
 2004 )], and is an efficient delipidation enzyme for LC3 and
 GABARAP in living cells ( Tanida et al.,
 2004 ). Human ATG4C can rescue the yeast
 Δ ATG4 aminopeptidase I processing deficiency, suggesting that
 it might also be a bone fide mammalian Atg4 paralogue
 ( Marino et al., 2003 ).
 However, Tanida and colleagues have demonstrated that Atg4C lacks LC3 and
 GABARAP-L1 priming activity in vitro
 ( Tanida et al., 2004 ).
 Accordingly, the mouse knockout of Atg4C has only a minor autophagy deficiency
 ( Marino et al., 2007 ).
 Interestingly, although both Atg4A and Atg4D were unable to rescue the yeast
 Δ ATG4 mutant [data not shown in Marino et al.
 ( Marino et al., 2003 )], human
 Atg4A has been shown independently to be an efficient priming enzyme for
 GATE-16 in vitro ( Scherz-Shouval et al.,
 2003 ; Scherz-Shouval et al.,
 2007 ), but to be ineffective towards LC3 [data not shown in
 Scherz-Shouval et al. ( Scherz-Shouval et
 al., 2003 )]. Together these data suggest that Atg4B may be a
 universal regulator of Atg8 in mammalian cells, but that other Atg4 family
 members may be specific for individual Atg8 paralogues. Clearly there is a
 need for a more complete understanding of mammalian Atg4 family regulation and
 Atg8 substrate specificity and for information regarding the relative roles of
 Atg4 and Atg8 during development, homeostasis and disease prevention.

Evidence suggests that there is significant regulatory interplay between
 autophagy and apoptosis (e.g. Baehrecke,
 2005 ; Holler et al.,
 2000 ; Martin et al.,
 2007 ; Scott et al.,
 2007 ; Shimizu et al.,
 2004 ). Intriguingly, caspases have been found to be required for
 autophagy in Drosophila ( Hou et
 al., 2008 ; Martin et al.,
 2007 ), suggesting a direct link between protein cleavage and
 autophagic stimulation. Evidence also suggests that some autophagy regulators
 can signal to the apoptotic machinery. Atg5 overexpression is toxic to human
 cells ( Pyo et al., 2005 ), and
 toxicity is enhanced following calpain-cleavage, which releases an N-terminal
 fragment that induces apoptosis by triggering mitochondrial cytochrome c release ( Yousefi et al.,
 2006 ). Initially identified as a binding partner for
 anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 ( Liang et al.,
 1998 ), Beclin-1 contains a Bcl-2 homology-3 (BH3) domain,
 facilitating binding to the crucial hydrophobic cleft of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
 or Bcl-X L ( Maiuri et al.,
 2007 ; Oberstein et al.,
 2007 ). Binding inhibits autophagy and potentially lowers the
 apoptotic threshold ( Maiuri et al.,
 2007 ; Pattingre et al.,
 2005 ). Hence, de-repressor BH3-only proteins and BH3 mimetics are
 predicted to co-stimulate apoptosis and autophagy by competing with Beclin-1
 for binding to Bcl-2 or Bcl-X L ( Maiuri et al., 2007 ), further
 emphasising the close regulatory links between these distinct pathways.

We have carried out the first functional characterisation of human Atg4D.
 This study was prompted by the identification of a canonical DEVD (aspartic
 acid, glutamic acid, valine, aspartic acid) caspase motif within the divergent
 N-terminus of Atg4D, suggesting that this enzyme might be regulated by
 caspases in healthy cells and/or in cells undergoing apoptosis. We have found
 that Atg4D is indeed a substrate for caspase-3 during apoptosis, and that
 truncated Atg4D displays increased priming and delipidation activities towards
 GABARAP-L1 in vitro. Our data also show that Atg4D is an important
 cell-survival factor because silencing Atg4D expression sensitises cells to
 starvation and staurosporine-induced cell death. Our studies also suggest that
 caspase cleavage renders Atg4D toxic to mammalian cells. Atg4D-mediated
 apoptosis is facilitated by a putative C-terminal BH3 domain and is preceded
 by recruitment of Atg4D to mitochondria, suggesting that Atg4D plays an
 important role at the interface between autophagy and apoptosis.

Discussion

Autophagy protects cells from environmental stress
 ( Cuervo, 2004 ; Levine and Klionsky, 2004 ),
 and is regulated by the Atg gene family. Here, we have studied the roles of
 the endopeptidase Atg4D as a regulator of autophagy and apoptosis. Our data
 reveal that Atg4D contributes to starvation-induced autophagy, with activity
 demonstrated towards the Atg8 paralogue GABARAP-L1 (Atg8L). Importantly, Atg4D
 contains a caspase site within its N-terminus, meaning that Atg4D acts at the
 regulatory interface between autophagy and apoptosis.

We have used a combination of in vitro biochemical assays with recombinant
 proteins, and experiments in living cells to investigate the specificity of
 Atg4D for Atg8 substrates, and to evaluate the effects of Atg4D cleavage upon
 autophagy and cell viability. Our data suggest that recombinant full-length
 Atg4D has little or no priming or delipidation activity against LC3, GATE-16
 and GABARAP-L1 in vitro, and has minimal impact on LC3 or GABARAP-L1
 processing in living cells. However, unlike its native counterpart,
 caspase-cleaved Atg4D (ΔN63 Atg4D) can prime and delipidate GABARAP-L1
 effectively. One possibility is that full-length Atg4D is auto-inhibited. In
 this regard, the publication of the crystal structure of Atg4B in complex with
 LC3 while this manuscript was in final revision is particularly significant
 ( Satoo et al., 2009 ): most
 notably, the N-terminus of free Atg4B was shown to occlude the catalytic site
 of the enzyme ( Satoo et al.,
 2009 ). Accordingly, and in common with Atg4D, an N-terminal
 truncation of Atg4B displays enhanced Atg8-priming activity in vitro
 ( Satoo et al., 2009 ). This
 would provide a plausible mechanistic explanation for the gain of priming and
 delipidation activity that we have observed following caspase-cleavage of
 Atg4D. Our data therefore imply that caspases have the potential to stimulate
 autophagy via Atg4D cleavage, an observation in keeping with evidence linking
 caspases to the induction of autophagy programmes in Drosophila ( Hou et al., 2008 ; Martin et al., 2007 ).

We have also assessed the impact of siRNA silencing of autophagy regulators
 upon autophagy and cell survival during starvation and staurosporine-induced
 apoptosis. Consistent with the proposed roles for Atg4D in GABARAP-L1
 processing, Atg4D silencing had a major impact upon GABARAP-L1 puncta
 formation (basal and starvation conditions). If the primary role of autophagy
 is protection from cellular stress, then one would predict that its inhibition
 would advance cell death during withdrawal of nutrients or growth factors.
 Importantly, Atg4D (but not Atg4B) silencing markedly sensitised HeLa cells to
 starvation-induced cell death, suggesting that Atg4D-mediated autophagy
 contributes to the survival response in starved cells. We have also shown that
 silencing genes expressing Atg5 and Atg4D markedly sensitises cells to
 staurosporine-induced apoptosis, suggesting that autophagy acts as a
 protective mechanism during staurosporine treatment. Interestingly, HeLa cells
 silenced for Atg5 have been reported elsewhere to be resistant to
 staurosporine ( Yousefi et al.,
 2006 ), and while we cannot currently explain why our data differ
 from those of Yousefi et al. ( Yousefi et
 al., 2006 ), we note that Atg5 silencing has been shown in an
 independent study to sensitise HeLa cells to staurosporine
 ( Pyo et al., 2005 ).

One unexpected finding here was that overexpression of caspase-cleaved
 ΔN63 Atg4D was potently cytotoxic. Live-cell imaging suggested that
 Atg4D-mediated toxicity is associated with recruitment to mitochondria before
 induction of apoptosis. Importantly, recruitment was not blocked by zVAD.fmk,
 and was still observed in cells expressing caspase-resistant Atg4D (data not
 shown), suggesting that mitochondrial targeting is independent of caspase
 cleavage of Atg4D. Two obvious questions arise from these observations: (i)
 Does Atg4D cause release of mitochondrial factors, perhaps by targeting the
 Bax or Bak pathways to trigger outer mitochondrial membrane permeabilisation?
 (ii) Is Atg4D responding to mitochondrial damage, perhaps in a futile attempt
 to target dysfunctional mitochondria for autophagy? Close inspection of the
 C-terminus of Atg4D revealed the presence of a putative BH3 domain, and
 removal or mutagenesis of this domain reduced, but did not eliminate,
 ΔN63-Atg4D-mediated cytotoxicity. BH3-related domains have been
 identified in several other proteins that are not otherwise related to the
 Bcl-2 family, suggesting the potential for interactions between apoptotic
 Bcl-2 proteins and a wide range of regulatory factors [examples include BRCC2
 ( Broustas et al., 2004 ), BNIP3
 and BNIP3L (also known as Nix) ( Chen et
 al., 1999 ), and HER-2
 ( Strohecker et al., 2008 )].
 Importantly, cell death mediated by Atg4D overexpression did not result from a
 change in levels of autophagy, because dominant-negative active site (C144A)
 mutants did not alter Atg4D-mediated cytotocixity. Importantly, treatment of
 cells with low concentrations of H 2 O 2 stimulated
 mitochondrial recruitment of Atg4D, suggesting that Atg4D may have affinity
 for factor(s) associated with or released from damaged mitochondria.
 Interestingly, the ubiquitin ligase Parkin has been shown to demarcate damaged
 mitochondria for autophagic clearance
 ( Narendra et al., 2008 ). We
 are currently investigating the molecular basis for Atg4D mitochondrial
 recruitment, and whether Atg4D contributes to the elimination of dysfunctional
 mitochondria.

Here, we have shown that human Atg4D contributes to autophagy by targeting
 the Atg8 paralogue, GABARAP-L1, and in doing so protects cells from starvation
 and staurosporine-induced cell death. Atg4D is a caspase substrate whose
 cleavage generates a truncated product that has enhanced GABARAP-L1 priming
 activity in vitro, and induces cell death when overexpressed in human cells.
 Intriguingly, Atg4D-mediated cell death is preceded by the rapid recruitment
 of Atg4D to the surface of mitochondria, and is facilitated by a putative
 C-terminal BH3 domain. Together, these data suggest that Atg4D is an important
 factor at the regulatory interface between autophagy and apoptosis.
