---
pmid: '12477715'
title: Role of prodomain in importin-mediated nuclear localization and activation
  of caspase-2.
authors:
- Baliga BC
- Colussi PA
- Read SH
- Dias MM
- Jans DA
- Kumar S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M211512200
---

# Role of prodomain in importin-mediated nuclear localization and activation of caspase-2.
**Authors:** Baliga BC, Colussi PA, Read SH, Dias MM, Jans DA, Kumar S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M211512200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M211512200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):4899-905. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M211512200. Epub
2002  Dec 10.

Role of prodomain in importin-mediated nuclear localization and activation of 
caspase-2.

Baliga BC(1), Colussi PA, Read SH, Dias MM, Jans DA, Kumar S.

Author information:
(1)Hanson Institute, Frome Road, Adelaide 5000, Australia.

Caspase-2 is unique among mammalian caspases because it localizes to the nucleus 
in a prodomain-dependent manner. The caspase-2 prodomain also regulates 
caspase-2 activity via a caspase recruitment domain that mediates 
oligomerization of procaspase-2 molecules and their subsequent autoactivation. 
In this study we sought to map specific functional regions in the caspase-2 
prodomain that regulate its nuclear transport and also its activation. Our data 
indicate that caspase-2 contains a classical nuclear localization signal (NLS) 
at the C terminus of the prodomain which is recognized by the importin 
alpha/beta heterodimer. The mutation of a conserved Lys residue in the NLS 
abolishes nuclear localization of caspase-2 and binding to the importin 
alpha/beta heterodimer. Although caspase-2 is imported into the nucleus, mutants 
lacking the NLS were still capable of inducing apoptosis upon overexpression in 
transfected cells. We define a region in the prodomain that regulates the 
ability of caspase-2 to form dot- and filament-like structures when ectopically 
expressed, which in turn promotes cell killing. Our data provides a mechanism 
for caspase-2 nuclear import and demonstrate that association of procaspase-2 
into higher order structures, rather than its nuclear localization, is required 
for caspase-2 activation and its ability to induce apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M211512200
PMID: 12477715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
