---
pmid: '17267502'
title: 'Structures of a human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 polypeptide bound to MAGUK proteins:
  mechanisms of targeting tumor suppressors by a high-risk HPV oncoprotein.'
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Dasgupta J
- Ma RZ
- Banks L
- Thomas M
- Chen XS
journal: J Virol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1866053
doi: 10.1128/JVI.02044-06
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structures of a human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 polypeptide bound to MAGUK proteins: mechanisms of targeting tumor suppressors by a high-risk HPV oncoprotein.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Dasgupta J, Ma RZ, Banks L, Thomas M, Chen XS
**Journal:** J Virol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.02044-06](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.02044-06)
**PMC:** [PMC1866053](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1866053/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3618-26. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02044-06. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Structures of a human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 polypeptide bound to MAGUK 
proteins: mechanisms of targeting tumor suppressors by a high-risk HPV 
oncoprotein.

Zhang Y(1), Dasgupta J, Ma RZ, Banks L, Thomas M, Chen XS.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology, University of Southern California, 1050 
Childs Way, MCB201, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) E6 oncoprotein targets certain tumor suppressors such 
as MAGI-1 and SAP97/hDlg for degradation. A short peptide at the C terminus of 
E6 interacts specifically with the PDZ domains of these tumor suppressors, which 
is a property unique to high-risk HPVs that are associated with cervical cancer. 
The detailed recognition mechanisms between HPV E6 and PDZ proteins are unclear. 
To understand the specific binding of cellular PDZ substrates by HPV E6, we have 
solved the crystal structures of the complexes containing a peptide from HPV18 
E6 bound to three PDZ domains from MAGI-1 and SAP97/Dlg. The complex crystal 
structures reveal novel features of PDZ peptide recognition that explain why 
high-risk HPV E6 can specifically target these cellular tumor suppressors for 
destruction. Moreover, a new peptide-binding loop on these PDZs is identified as 
interacting with the E6 peptide. Furthermore, we have identified an arginine 
residue, unique to high-risk HPV E6 but outside the canonical core PDZ 
recognition motif, that plays an important role in the binding of the PDZs of 
both MAGI-I and SAP97/Dlg, the mutation of which abolishes E6's ability to 
degrade the two proteins. Finally, we have identified a dimer form of MAGI-1 PDZ 
domain 1 in the cocrystal structure with E6 peptide, which may have functional 
relevance for MAGI-1 activity. In addition to its novel insights into the 
biochemistry of PDZ interactions, this study is important for understanding 
HPV-induced oncogenesis; this could provide a basis for developing antiviral and 
anticancer compounds.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.02044-06
PMCID: PMC1866053
PMID: 17267502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
