---
pmid: '3034271'
title: 'Human creatine kinase: isolation and sequence analysis of cDNA clones for
  the B subunit, development of subunit specific probes and determination of gene
  copy number.'
authors:
- Villarreal-Levy G
- Ma TS
- Kerner SA
- Roberts R
- Perryman MB
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0006-291x(87)91427-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human creatine kinase: isolation and sequence analysis of cDNA clones for the B subunit, development of subunit specific probes and determination of gene copy number.
**Authors:** Villarreal-Levy G, Ma TS, Kerner SA, Roberts R, Perryman MB
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0006-291x(87)91427-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-291x(87)91427-6)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1987 May 14;144(3):1116-27. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(87)91427-6.

Human creatine kinase: isolation and sequence analysis of cDNA clones for the B 
subunit, development of subunit specific probes and determination of gene copy 
number.

Villarreal-Levy G, Ma TS, Kerner SA, Roberts R, Perryman MB.

cDNA clones for human B creatine kinase were isolated from human brain and 
placenta libraries. The entire coding and 3' untranslated regions, as well as 23 
bp of the 5' untranslated region were sequenced. Complete sequence identity was 
found among the clones, with the exception of an area of heterogeneity among the 
3' untranslated region of the brain and placenta clones. A 77.7% nucleotide 
sequence identity was found between the coding region of human B creatine kinase 
and our previously reported human M creatine kinase. In contrast, no homology 
was found in the 3' untranslated regions. Probes were constructed from the 
nonconserved 3' untranslated regions of human M and B creatine kinase and were 
shown to be highly specific. Southern transfers of total genomic DNA derived 
from human placenta and digested to completion with several restriction enzymes 
were probed with the MCK and BCK specific probes producing single hybridization 
bands. These results suggest that creatine kinase M and B are single copy genes 
in the human genome.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(87)91427-6
PMID: 3034271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
