---
pmid: '7563251'
title: Differential regulation of bcl-2, bax, c-fos, junB, and krox-24 expression
  in the cerebellum of Purkinje cell degeneration mutant mice.
authors:
- Gillardon F
- Bäurle J
- Wickert H
- Grüsser-Cornehls U
- Zimmermann M
journal: J Neurosci Res
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/jnr.490410517
---

# Differential regulation of bcl-2, bax, c-fos, junB, and krox-24 expression in the cerebellum of Purkinje cell degeneration mutant mice.
**Authors:** Gillardon F, Bäurle J, Wickert H, Grüsser-Cornehls U, Zimmermann M
**Journal:** J Neurosci Res (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jnr.490410517](https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.490410517)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci Res. 1995 Aug 1;41(5):708-15. doi: 10.1002/jnr.490410517.

Differential regulation of bcl-2, bax, c-fos, junB, and krox-24 expression in 
the cerebellum of Purkinje cell degeneration mutant mice.

Gillardon F(1), Bäurle J, Wickert H, Grüsser-Cornehls U, Zimmermann M.

Author information:
(1)Universität Heidelberg, II. Physiologisches Institut, Germany.

Purkinje cell degeneration (pcd) is an autosomal recessive mutation in the mouse 
characterized by an almost complete loss of cerebellar Purkinje neurons between 
postnatal days 22 and 28. The pcd gene has not been identified, however, a 
relationship between activation of specific genes and cell death has been 
suggested in other models of neuronal cell death. In the present study we 
analyzed the expression of several candidate cell death effector genes (bax, 
c-fos, junB, krox-24) and a cell death repressor gene (bcl-2) in the cerebellum 
of pcd homozygotes and wild-type mice. At postnatal day 22, when Purkinje cells 
start to degenerate, levels of c-fos, junB, and krox-24 mRNA increased about 
5-fold in mutants. To the contrary, the amount of bcl-2 mRNA declined and bax 
transcripts remained unchanged compared to wild-type animals. Immunoreactivity 
for c-Fos and Jun could be detected exclusively in cerebellar Purkinje neurons 
of pcd mice but not in wild-types, whereas the number of Bcl-2 immunopositive 
Purkinje cells decreased significantly in mutants. Both double labeling 
experiments and immunostaining of consecutive sections revealed lack of 
colocalization of Jun with Bcl-2. These results demonstrate an induction of 
members of the fos and jun family and a downregulation of antiapoptotic bcl-2 in 
cerebellar Purkinje neurons that are destined to die. Fos and Jun transcription 
factor proteins may be implicated in the regulation of bcl-2 expression and in 
the signal cascade leading to Purkinje cell death.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.490410517
PMID: 7563251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
