---
reference_id: PMID:35368589
title: Mannose Binding Lectin Is Hydroxylated by Collagen Prolyl-4-hydroxylase and Inhibited by Some PHD Inhibitors.
authors:
- Bhute VJ
- Harte J
- Houghton JW
- Maxwell PH
journal: Kidney360
year: '2020'
doi: 10.34067/KID.0000092020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mannose Binding Lectin Is Hydroxylated by Collagen Prolyl-4-hydroxylase and Inhibited by Some PHD Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Bhute VJ, Harte J, Houghton JW, Maxwell PH
**Journal:** Kidney360 (2020)
**DOI:** [10.34067/KID.0000092020](https://doi.org/10.34067/KID.0000092020)

## Content

1. Kidney360. 2020 Apr 3;1(6):447-457. doi: 10.34067/KID.0000092020. eCollection
2020 Jun 25.

Mannose Binding Lectin Is Hydroxylated by Collagen Prolyl-4-hydroxylase and
Inhibited by Some PHD Inhibitors.

Bhute VJ(1), Harte J(2)(3), Houghton JW(1), Maxwell PH(1).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Cork Institute of Technology, Cork,
Ireland.
(3)School of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is an important component of innate
immune defense. MBL undergoes oligomerization to generate high mol weight (HMW)
forms which act as pattern recognition molecules to detect and opsonize various
microorganisms. Several post-translational modifications including prolyl
hydroxylation are known to affect the oligomerization of MBL. Yet, the enzyme(s)
which hydroxylate proline in the collagen-like domain residues have not been
identified and the significance of prolyl hydroxylation is incompletely
understood.
METHODS: To investigate post-translational modifications of MBL, we stably
expressed Myc-DDK tagged MBL in HEK293S cells. We used pharmacologic and genetic
inhibition of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases (2OGDD) to identify the
enzyme required for prolyl hydroxylation of MBL. We performed mass spectrometry
to determine the effects of various inhibitors on MBL modifications.
RESULTS: Secretion of HMW MBL was impaired by inhibitors of the superfamily of
2OGDD, and was dependent on prolyl-4-hydroxylase subunit α1. Roxadustat and
vadadustat, but not molidustat, led to significant suppression of hydroxylation
and secretion of HMW forms of MBL.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that prolyl hydroxylation in the collagen-like
domain of MBL is mediated by collagen prolyl-4-hydroxylase. Reduced MBL activity
is likely to be an off-target effect of some, but not all, prolyl hydroxylase
domain (PHD) inhibitors. There may be advantages in selective PHD inhibitors
that would not interfere with MBL production.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.34067/KID.0000092020
PMCID: PMC8809307
PMID: 35368589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P. Maxwell is a scientific founder and holds
equity in ReOx Ltd. He has received a speaker honorarium from Fibrogen. He is
head of the School of Clinical Medicine at the University of Cambridge, which
has strategic partnerships with AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, both of which
are developing PHD inhibitors for the treatment of renal anemia. All remaining
authors have nothing to disclose.