---
pmid: '17077123'
title: Influx of extracellular Ca2+ is necessary for electrotaxis in Dictyostelium.
authors:
- Shanley LJ
- Walczysko P
- Bain M
- MacEwan DJ
- Zhao M
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.03248
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Influx of extracellular Ca2+ is necessary for electrotaxis in Dictyostelium.
**Authors:** Shanley LJ, Walczysko P, Bain M, MacEwan DJ, Zhao M
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.03248](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.03248)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2006 Nov 15;119(Pt 22):4741-8. doi: 10.1242/jcs.03248. Epub 2006
Oct  31.

Influx of extracellular Ca2+ is necessary for electrotaxis in Dictyostelium.

Shanley LJ(1), Walczysko P, Bain M, MacEwan DJ, Zhao M.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Intracellular free Ca2+ ([Ca2+](i)) is a pivotal signalling element in cell 
migration and is thought to be required for chemotaxis of Dictyostelium. Ca2+ 
signalling may also be important for electrotaxis. However this suggestion has 
been controversial. We show that electric fields direct Dictyostelium cells to 
migrate cathodally and increase [Ca2+](i) in Dictyostelium cells, as determined 
by Fluo-3 AM imaging and (45)Ca2+ uptake. Omission of extracellular 
Ca2+([Ca2+](e)) and incubation with EGTA abolished the electric-field-stimulated 
[Ca2+](i) rise and directional cell migration. This suggests a requirement for 
[Ca2+](e) in the electrotactic response. Deletion of iplA, a gene responsible 
for chemoattractant-induced [Ca2+](i) increase, had only a minor effect on the 
electric-field-induced [Ca2+](i) rise. Moreover, iplA-null Dictyostelium cells 
showed the same electrotactic response as wild-type cells. Therefore, 
iplA-independent Ca2+ influx is necessary for electrotactic cell migration. 
These results suggest that the [Ca2+](i) regulatory mechanisms induced by 
electric fields are different from those induced by cAMP and folic acid in 
Dictyostelium cells. Different roles of the iplA gene in chemoattractant-induced 
and electrically induced Ca2+ signalling, and different effects of [Ca2+](i) 
elevation on chemotaxis and electrotaxis indicate that the chemoattractant and 
electric cues activate distinctive initial signalling elements.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.03248
PMID: 17077123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
