---
pmid: '18206972'
title: A TFTC/STAGA module mediates histone H2A and H2B deubiquitination, coactivates
  nuclear receptors, and counteracts heterochromatin silencing.
authors:
- Zhao Y
- Lang G
- Ito S
- Bonnet J
- Metzger E
- Sawatsubashi S
- Suzuki E
- Le Guezennec X
- Stunnenberg HG
- Krasnov A
- Georgieva SG
- Schüle R
- Takeyama K
- Kato S
- Tora L
- Devys D
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.011
---

# A TFTC/STAGA module mediates histone H2A and H2B deubiquitination, coactivates nuclear receptors, and counteracts heterochromatin silencing.
**Authors:** Zhao Y, Lang G, Ito S, Bonnet J, Metzger E, Sawatsubashi S, Suzuki E, Le Guezennec X, Stunnenberg HG, Krasnov A, Georgieva SG, Schüle R, Takeyama K, Kato S, Tora L, Devys D
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.011)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2008 Jan 18;29(1):92-101. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.011.

A TFTC/STAGA module mediates histone H2A and H2B deubiquitination, coactivates 
nuclear receptors, and counteracts heterochromatin silencing.

Zhao Y(1), Lang G, Ito S, Bonnet J, Metzger E, Sawatsubashi S, Suzuki E, Le 
Guezennec X, Stunnenberg HG, Krasnov A, Georgieva SG, Schüle R, Takeyama K, Kato 
S, Tora L, Devys D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Nuclear Signaling, Institute of Molecular and Cellular 
Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):152-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.01.007.

Transcriptional activators, several different coactivators, and general 
transcription factors are necessary to access specific loci in the dense 
chromatin structure to allow precise initiation of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) 
transcription. Histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes were implicated in 
loosening the chromatin around promoters and thus in gene activation. Here we 
demonstrate that the 2 MDa GCN5 HAT-containing metazoan TFTC/STAGA complexes 
contain a histone H2A and H2B deubiquitinase activity. We have identified three 
additional subunits of TFTC/STAGA (ATXN7L3, USP22, and ENY2) that form the 
deubiquitination module. Importantly, we found that this module is an enhancer 
of position effect variegation in Drosophila. Furthermore, we demonstrate that 
ATXN7L3, USP22, and ENY2 are required as cofactors for the full transcriptional 
activity by nuclear receptors. Thus, the deubiquitinase activity of the 
TFTC/STAGA HAT complex is necessary to counteract heterochromatin silencing and 
acts as a positive cofactor for activation by nuclear receptors in vivo.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.12.011
PMID: 18206972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
