---
pmid: '16326706'
title: Shp-1 mediates the antiproliferative activity of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2
  in human microvascular endothelial cells.
authors:
- Seo DW
- Li H
- Qu CK
- Oh J
- Kim YS
- Diaz T
- Wei B
- Han JW
- Stetler-Stevenson WG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1361361
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509932200
---

# Shp-1 mediates the antiproliferative activity of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 in human microvascular endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Seo DW, Li H, Qu CK, Oh J, Kim YS, Diaz T, Wei B, Han JW, Stetler-Stevenson WG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M509932200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M509932200)
**PMC:** [PMC1361361](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1361361/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3711-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509932200. Epub
2005  Dec 2.

Shp-1 mediates the antiproliferative activity of tissue inhibitor of 
metalloproteinase-2 in human microvascular endothelial cells.

Seo DW(1), Li H, Qu CK, Oh J, Kim YS, Diaz T, Wei B, Han JW, Stetler-Stevenson 
WG.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1500, USA.

The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) regulate matrix 
metalloproteinase activity required for cell migration/invasion associated with 
cancer progression and angiogenesis. TIMPs also modulate cell proliferation in 
vitro and angiogenesis in vivo independent of their matrix metalloproteinase 
inhibitory activity. Here, we show that TIMP-2 mediates G1 growth arrest in 
human endothelial cells through de novo synthesis of the cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor p27Kip1. TIMP-2-mediated inhibition of Cdk4 and Cdk2 activity is 
associated with increased binding of p27Kip1 to these complexes in vivo. 
Protein-tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors or expression of a dominant negative 
Shp-1 mutant ablates TIMP-2 induction of p27Kip1. Finally, angiogenic responses 
to fibroblast growth factor-2 and vascular endothelial growth factor-A in 
"motheaten viable" Shp-1-deficient mice are resistant to TIMP-2 inhibition, 
demonstrating that Shp-1 is an important negative regulator of angiogenesis in 
vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509932200
PMCID: PMC1361361
PMID: 16326706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) regulate matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity required for cell migration/invasion associated with cancer progression and angiogenesis. TIMPs also modulate cell proliferation in vitro and angiogenesis in vivo independent of their MMP-inhibitory activity. Here, we show that TIMP-2 mediates G 1 growth arrest in human endothelial cells through de novo synthesis of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 Kip1 . TIMP-2-mediated inhibition of Cdk4 and Cdk2 activity is associated with increased binding of p27 Kip1 to these complexes in vivo . Protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors or expression of a dominant negative Shp-1 mutant ablates TIMP-2 induction of p27 Kip1 . Finally, angiogenic responses to FGF-2 and VEGF-A in ‘motheaten viable’ Shp-1 deficient mice are resistant to TIMP-2 inhibition, demonstrating that Shp-1 is an important negative regulator of angiogenesis in vivo .

TIMP-2 treatment results in pRb hypo-phosphorylation and inhibits G1to S phase transition

In previous studies we demonstrate that TIMP-2 treatment of hMVECs prior to stimulation with angiogenic growth factors, such as FGF-2 or VEGF-A, inhibits both 3 H-thymidine incorporation and cell growth ( 6 , 17 ). These studies suggest that TIMP-2 prevents entry of cells into the S phase of the cell cycle, which is usually associated with mitogenic growth factor stimulation. In the G 1 phase of the cell cycle, retinoblastoma protein (pRb) is sequentially phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) activities, and this hyper-phosphorylation of pRb controls the transition from G 1 to S phase of the cell cycle ( 18 ). We examined the effect of TIMP-2 pretreatment on the pRb phosphorylation status in hMVECs. Specifically, we analyzed the phosphorylation of pRb on residues S780 and S807/811, sites specific for Cdk4 and Cdk2 phosphorylation, respectively ( 19 ). As anticipated, FGF-2 stimulation for 24 h significantly increases pRb phosphorylation at both sites when compared with quiescent hMVECs. However, pretreatment with TIMP-2 or the Ala+TIMP-2 mutant, lacking MMP inhibitory activity, completely blocks FGF-2-induced pRb phosphorylation to levels observed in untreated cells, Figure 1A . This finding is consistent with TIMP-2 preventing S phase entry, possibly through inhibition of Cdk activities.

In addition, we studied the effects of TIMP-2 or Ala+TIMP-2 pretreatment on cell cycle by DNA content flow cytometry. Cell cycle analysis of hMVECs following FGF-2 stimulation for 24 h increases the percentage of cells in S phase approximately two-fold compared with untreated cells (6.6 % vs. 12.2%), along with a concomitant reduction of cells in G 1 phase (70 % vs. 62 %), Figure 1B . This twofold increase in S phase is consistent with our previous cell growth experiments ( 6 ). However, pretreatment with TIMP-2 or Ala+TIMP-2 prior to FGF-2 stimulation prevents the anticipated increase in S phase associated with FGF-2 mitogenic stimulation and leads to a corresponding increase in cells in G 1 phase (70%) compared to hMVECs treated with FGF-2 alone (62 % in G 1 ). Pretreatment with either TIMP-2 or Ala+TIMP-2 alone did not alter the cell cycle pattern of hMVECs when compared with untreated cells (data not shown). These data are consistent with the pRb phosphorylation studies ( Figure 1A ), as well as previous reports demonstrating that TIMP-2 inhibits 3 H-thymidine incorporation upon FGF-2 stimulation ( 17 ). Collectively, these data suggest that TIMP-2 pretreatment inhibits the G 1 to S phase transition of the cell cycle, resulting in G 1 arrest.

Discussion

In this study we demonstrate that TIMP-2 prevents endothelial cell growth in vitro by induction of de novo synthesis of p27 Kip1 . Enhanced levels of p27 Kip1 are consistent with the observations that TIMP-2-induced growth arrest of hMVECs is characterized by decreased 3 H-thymidine uptake ( 17 ), inactivation of growth factor receptors and enhanced PTP activity ( 6 ), as well as hypo-phosphorylation of pRb and a decrease in cells entering S phase. Collectively, these data support the concept that TIMP-2 inhibition of endothelial cell growth is the result of G 1 cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, TIMP-2 growth arrest and induction of p27 Kip1 are both mediated by α3β1 integrin, and inhibited by PTP inhibitors or expression of dn Shp-1. Finally, TIMP-2 anti-angiogenic activities against FGF-2/VEGF-A-mediated responses in vivo are ablated in Shp-1-deficient ( me v / me v ) mice, demonstrating that Shp-1 is important for regulation of angiogenesis.

The role of integrins in the regulation of cell attachment, migration, proliferation and survival are well established. Recent studies have described several systems in which reciprocal crosstalk between growth factor receptors and integrins may influence cell behavior and stimulate cell growth in a growth factor-independent manner. However, few examples of negative growth regulation or heterologous receptor inactivation (growth suppression) by integrin receptors have been reported. In our previous report we demonstrate that TIMP-2 interaction with α3β1 results in inactivation of both FGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 ( 6 ). This inactivation was associated with a decrease in integrin associated PTP activity and an increase in the association of Shp-1 with receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). These findings led us to suggest that this mechanism is an example of integrin-mediated heterologous receptor inactivation. A recent report demonstrates the association of the PTP known as T cell PTP, or TCPTP, with the α1 subunit of the collagen-binding integrin α1β1 ( 30 ). These authors demonstrate that the cytoplasmic tail of the α1 integrin subunit selectively interacts with TCPTP and activates this PTP activity following cell adhesion to collagen. Integrin-mediated activation of TCPTP results in reduced EGFR phosphorylation following EGF stimulation ( 30 ). Thus, integrin initiated, PTP-mediated inactivation of RTK appears to be an emerging concept. However, little is known about down-stream signaling events that may also accompany this new mechanism of RTK suppression.

Few examples of negative regulation of cell growth mediated by integrin receptors have been reported. These include suppression of cell growth following expression of α5β1 in human colorectal carcinoma cells ( 31 ), or expression of specific isoforms of the integrin β1 subunits, such as β1c or β1d, in fibroblasts, myoblasts or tumor cells ( 32 , 33 ). Many of these studies were directed at identifying the growth inhibitory domains in the cytoplasmic tail of these integrins and details of the signaling mechanisms involved were not investigated. One report implicates p27 Kip1 as a downstream effector of β1c growth inhibition of prostate cells via suppression of cyclin A-dependent kinase activity ( 34 ). This study reports a strong correlation between expression of β1c and increased p27 Kip1 expression in cells from human prostate carcinoma tissues. However, the mechanism of enhanced p27 Kip1 expression was not investigated.

In the present investigation we extend the observations of Matilla et al. ( 30 ) and Fornaro et al. ( 34 ), as well as those of our previous reports on TIMP-2 suppression of hMVEC growth ( 6 ) and inhibition of hMVEC migration ( 5 ). We demonstrate a critical role for both α3 and β1 integrin subunits, and Shp-1 activity in mediating the induction of p27 Kip1 during hMVEC growth arrest in vitro , and conclude that TIMP-2-mediated suppressive effect on cell cycle progression is exerted through up-regulation of p27 Kip1 . Enhanced p27 Kip1 localization in the nucleus inactivates Cdk4/cyclin D and Cdk2/cyclin E complexes, resulting in pRb hypo-phosphorylation. This effect is mediated by orthovanadate-sensitive PTP activity and is independent of MMP inhibition. Furthermore, studies using expression of dn Shp-1 specifically implicate this PTP activity in mediating TIMP-2 inhibition of mitogenic responses.

Shp-1 is a member of the family of non-transmembrane PTPs that contain SH2 domains known as the Shps. There are two mammalian Shps, Shp-1 and Shp-2, each having two N-terminal SH2 domains, a classic PTP domain and C-terminal tail containing a nuclear localization signal. Both Shp-1 and Shp-2 are expressed in a variety of cell types including hematopoeitic, epithelial and endothelial cells ( 25 ). Shp-2 activity is primarily associated with enhanced cell growth, however, Shp-1 activity is associated with specific negative growth regulatory pathways ( 25 ). In endothelial cells Shp-1 activation by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) inhibits proliferative responses to growth factors such as VEGF and EGF, whereas expression of dn SHP-1 prevented TNF-a inhibition of endothelial cell growth ( 35 ). Similarly, our previous report implicates Shp-1 in mediating the observed inactivation of FGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 ( 6 ). However, these reports did not examine potential downstream signaling mechanisms by Shp-1 in mediating cell growth arrest. In fact, identification of downstream targets of Shp-1 has been difficult in many systems, although identification of potential targets has been an objective of investigations in this area for several years ( 25 ). Furthermore, potential involvement of Shp-1 in integrin-mediated signaling has not been examined in depth. It is reported that bone-marrow macrophages from Shp-1-deficient mice are strongly adherent to ß1- and ß2-integrin ligands, suggesting that Shp-1 is necessary for cell detachment from these substrates ( 36 ). Shp-1 deficient macrophages demonstrate a 2-5-fold increase in membrane-associated phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase activity and inhibition of this activity resulted in dramatic detachment of adherent cells. These studies suggest that Shp-1 regulates PI 3-kinase activity, specifically membrane-associated PI 3-kinase, which in turn modulates integrin-mediated attachment. These findings are consistent with reports demonstrating PI 3-kinase involvement in integrin inside-out signaling that regulates integrin receptor affinity ( 37 ), however, this study did not specifically identify the target of Shp-1 activity.

The motheaten viable mouse model ( m e v / me v ) is deficient in Shp-1 activity, has multiple hematopoietic cell defects that result in inflammatory processes that affect multiple organ systems, and result in premature death of these animals secondary to severe interstitial pneumonia at 9-12 weeks of age ( 26 ). However, to our knowledge there are no prior reports on altered angiogenic responses in m e v / me v animals. Furthermore, the failure of m e v / me v to limit angiogenic responses in the presence of TIMP-2 is consistent with the loss of Shp-1 function in these mice.

The results of the present study implicate the TIMP-2 interaction with α3β1 resulting in Shp-1 activation. However, our focus in this report is on the downstream effects following activation of Shp-1 following the binding of TIMP-2 toα3β1. We demonstrate that TIMP-2 interaction with α3β1 results in concomitant induction of p27 Kip1 transcriptional activation, de novo synthesis of p27 Kip1 and enhanced p27 Kip1 nuclear localization. These effects are dependent on PTP activity, and are lost upon forced expression of dn Shp-1. Finally angiogenic responses to VEGF-A and FGF-2 in the Shp-1 deficient mouse model (motheaten viable mice) are resistant to inhibition by TIMP-2, demonstrating that Shp-1 is a principal mediator of the anti-angiogenic activity of TIMP-2 in vivo .

This is the first demonstration that interaction of TIMP-2 with its cognate receptor, α3β1 integrin, mediates the induction of Cdk inhibitor p27 Kip1 via an Shp-1-dependent mechanism. Collectively, the data support the concept that TIMP-2 interaction with α3β1 initiates a signaling cascade mediated by the PTP Shp-1 ( Figure 7 ). Activation of this signal cascade results in three distinct mechanisms that function to resist endothelial cell ‘activation’ and preserve endothelial cell homeostasis. These three mechanisms are: 1) Shp-1-mediated inactivation of ‘angiogenic’ receptors such as FGFR-1 and VEGFR-2 ( 6 ); 2) Shp-1 activation of Rap1 signaling resulting in enhanced expression of RECK and suppression of endothelial cell migration ( 5 ); 3) Shp-1-dependent induction of p27 Kip1 which results in pRb hypo-phosphorylation and prevents entry to the S phase of the cell cycle. These findings suggest that TIMP-2 is a key regulator of endothelial cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis, and that Shp-1 is a new potential therapeutic target in angiogenesis that warrants further investigation.
