---
pmid: '18596038'
title: Unique D box and KEN box sequences limit ubiquitination of Acm1 and promote
  pseudosubstrate inhibition of the anaphase-promoting complex.
authors:
- Choi E
- Dial JM
- Jeong DE
- Hall MC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3259782
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803695200
---

# Unique D box and KEN box sequences limit ubiquitination of Acm1 and promote pseudosubstrate inhibition of the anaphase-promoting complex.
**Authors:** Choi E, Dial JM, Jeong DE, Hall MC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803695200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803695200)
**PMC:** [PMC3259782](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3259782/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 29;283(35):23701-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803695200. Epub 
2008 Jul 2.

Unique D box and KEN box sequences limit ubiquitination of Acm1 and promote 
pseudosubstrate inhibition of the anaphase-promoting complex.

Choi E(1), Dial JM, Jeong DE, Hall MC.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Department and Purdue Cancer Center, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

The anaphase-promoting complex (APC) regulates cell division in eukaryotes by 
targeting specific proteins for destruction. APC substrates generally contain 
one or more short degron sequences that help mediate their recognition and 
poly-ubiquitination by the APC. The most common and well characterized degrons 
are the destruction box (D box) and the KEN box. The budding yeast Acm1 protein, 
an inhibitor of Cdh1-activated APC (APC(Cdh1)) also contains several conserved D 
and KEN boxes, and here we report that two of these located in the central 
region of Acm1 constitute a pseudosubstrate sequence required for APC(Cdh1) 
inhibition. Acm1 interacted with and inhibited substrate binding to the WD40 
repeat domain of Cdh1. Combined mutation of the central D and KEN boxes strongly 
reduced both binding to the Cdh1 WD40 domain and APC(Cdh1) inhibition. Despite 
this, the double mutant, but not wild-type Acm1, was poly-ubiquitinated by 
APC(Cdh1) in vitro. Thus, unlike substrates in which D and KEN boxes promote 
ubiquitination, these same elements in the central region of Acm1 prevent 
ubiquitination. We propose that this unique property of the Acm1 degron 
sequences results from an unusually high affinity interaction with the substrate 
receptor site on the WD40 domain of Cdh1 that may serve both to promote APC 
inhibition and protect Acm1 from destruction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803695200
PMCID: PMC3259782
PMID: 18596038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
