---
pmid: '25288802'
title: Compromised catalysis and potential folding defects in in vitro studies of
  missense mutants associated with hereditary phosphoglucomutase 1 deficiency.
authors:
- Lee Y
- Stiers KM
- Kain BN
- Beamer LJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4231678
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597914
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Compromised catalysis and potential folding defects in in vitro studies of missense mutants associated with hereditary phosphoglucomutase 1 deficiency.
**Authors:** Lee Y, Stiers KM, Kain BN, Beamer LJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.597914](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.597914)
**PMC:** [PMC4231678](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4231678/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 14;289(46):32010-32019. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597914.
Epub  2014 Oct 6.

Compromised catalysis and potential folding defects in in vitro studies of 
missense mutants associated with hereditary phosphoglucomutase 1 deficiency.

Lee Y(1), Stiers KM(1), Kain BN(1), Beamer LJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Department, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211.
(2)Biochemistry Department, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211. 
Electronic address: beamerl@missouri.edu.

Recent studies have identified phosphoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) deficiency as an 
inherited metabolic disorder in humans. Affected patients show multiple disease 
phenotypes, including dilated cardiomyopathy, exercise intolerance, and 
hepatopathy, reflecting the central role of the enzyme in glucose metabolism. We 
present here the first in vitro biochemical characterization of 13 missense 
mutations involved in PGM1 deficiency. The biochemical phenotypes of the PGM1 
mutants cluster into two groups: those with compromised catalysis and those with 
possible folding defects. Relative to the recombinant wild-type enzyme, certain 
missense mutants show greatly decreased expression of soluble protein and/or 
increased aggregation. In contrast, other missense variants are well behaved in 
solution, but show dramatic reductions in enzyme activity, with kcat/Km often 
<1.5% of wild-type. Modest changes in protein conformation and flexibility are 
also apparent in some of the catalytically impaired variants. In the case of the 
G291R mutant, severely compromised activity is linked to the inability of a key 
active site serine to be phosphorylated, a prerequisite for catalysis. Our 
results complement previous in vivo studies, which suggest that both protein 
misfolding and catalytic impairment may play a role in PGM1 deficiency.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597914
PMCID: PMC4231678
PMID: 25288802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
