---
pmid: '11434930'
title: Thermodynamic analysis of the binding of galactose and poly-N-acetyllactosamine
  derivatives to human galectin-3.
authors:
- Bachhawat-Sikder K
- Thomas CJ
- Surolia A
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02586-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Thermodynamic analysis of the binding of galactose and poly-N-acetyllactosamine derivatives to human galectin-3.
**Authors:** Bachhawat-Sikder K, Thomas CJ, Surolia A
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02586-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02586-8)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 29;500(1-2):75-9. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02586-8.

Thermodynamic analysis of the binding of galactose and poly-N-acetyllactosamine 
derivatives to human galectin-3.

Bachhawat-Sikder K(1), Thomas CJ, Surolia A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Bioiphysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India.

Galectin-3, with a wide tissue distribution and marked developmental regulation, 
provides significant insights into the progression of various disease and 
developmental stages. Recognized by its specificity for galactose, a detailed 
characterization of its sugar binding ability has been investigated by 
isothermal titration calorimetry. The results presented here complement well 
with the earlier studies utilizing hapten inhibition assays. Among the various 
lactose derivatives studied, A-tetrasaccharide emerged with the highest affinity 
for binding to galectin-3 combining site. This blood group saccharide exhibited 
a binding affinity 37-fold higher and a 102 kJ/mol more favorable change in 
enthalpy over lactose at 280 K indicating the existence of additional subsites 
for both the alpha1-3-linked N-acetylgalactosamine at the non-reducing end and 
the alpha1-2-linked L-fucosyl residue. The thermodynamic parameters evaluated 
for other ligands substantiate further the carbohydrate recognition domain to be 
part of an extended binding site. Binding thermodynamics of galectin-3 with the 
galactose derivatives are essentially enthalpically driven and exhibit 
compensatory changes in DeltaH degrees and TDeltaS owing to solvent 
reorganization.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02586-8
PMID: 11434930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
