---
reference_id: PMID:16580629
title: "SGT, a Hsp90beta binding partner, is accumulated in the nucleus during cell apoptosis."
authors:
- Yin H
- Wang H
- Zong H
- Chen X
- Wang Y
- Yun X
- Wu Y
- Wang J
- Gu J
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.090
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# SGT, a Hsp90beta binding partner, is accumulated in the nucleus during cell apoptosis.
**Authors:** Yin H, Wang H, Zong H, Chen X, Wang Y, Yun X, Wu Y, Wang J, Gu J
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.090](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.090)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 19;343(4):1153-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.090. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

SGT, a Hsp90beta binding partner, is accumulated in the nucleus during cell
apoptosis.

Yin H(1), Wang H, Zong H, Chen X, Wang Y, Yun X, Wu Y, Wang J, Gu J.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology Ministry of Education and
Health, Gene Research Center, Shanghai Medical College and Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, PR China.

In this study, we reported that small glutamine-rich TPR-containing protein
(SGT) interacted with not only Hsp90alpha but also Hsp90beta. Confocal analysis
showed that treatment of cells with Hsp90-specific inhibitor geldanamycin (GA)
disrupted the interaction of SGT with Hsp90beta and this contributed to the
increase of nuclear localization of SGT in HeLa cells. The increased nuclear
localization of SGT was further confirmed by the Western blotting in GA-treated
HeLa cells and H1299 cells. In our previous study, SGT was found to be a new
pro-apoptotic factor, so we wondered whether the sub-cellular localization of
SGT was related with cell apoptosis. By confocal analysis we found that the
nuclear import of SGT was significantly increased in STS-induced apoptotic HeLa
cells, which implied that the sub-cellular localization of SGT was closely
associated with Hsp90beta and apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.03.090
PMID: 16580629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]