---
pmid: '11136687'
title: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a novel alpha-tropomyosin mutation (V95A)
  is associated with mild cardiac phenotype, abnormal calcium binding to troponin,
  abnormal myosin cycling, and poor prognosis.
authors:
- Karibe A
- Tobacman LS
- Strand J
- Butters C
- Back N
- Bachinski LL
- Arai AE
- Ortiz A
- Roberts R
- Homsher E
- Fananapazir L
journal: Circulation
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.65
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a novel alpha-tropomyosin mutation (V95A) is associated with mild cardiac phenotype, abnormal calcium binding to troponin, abnormal myosin cycling, and poor prognosis.
**Authors:** Karibe A, Tobacman LS, Strand J, Butters C, Back N, Bachinski LL, Arai AE, Ortiz A, Roberts R, Homsher E, Fananapazir L
**Journal:** Circulation (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1161/01.cir.103.1.65](https://doi.org/10.1161/01.cir.103.1.65)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2001 Jan 2;103(1):65-71. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.65.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a novel alpha-tropomyosin mutation (V95A) 
is associated with mild cardiac phenotype, abnormal calcium binding to troponin, 
abnormal myosin cycling, and poor prognosis.

Karibe A(1), Tobacman LS, Strand J, Butters C, Back N, Bachinski LL, Arai AE, 
Ortiz A, Roberts R, Homsher E, Fananapazir L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: We report hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in a Spanish-American 
family caused by a novel alpha-tropomyosin (TPM1) mutation and examine the 
pathogenesis of the clinical disease by characterizing functional defects in the 
purified mutant protein.
METHODS AND RESULTS: HCM was linked to the TPM1 gene (logarithm of the odds 
[LOD] score 3.17). Sequencing and restriction digestion analysis demonstrated a 
TPM1 mutation V95A that cosegregated with HCM. The mutation has been associated 
with 13 deaths in 26 affected members (11 sudden deaths and 2 related to heart 
failure), with a cumulative survival rate of 73+/-10% at the age of 40 years. 
Left ventricular wall thickness (mean 16+/-6 mm) and disease penetrance (53%) 
were similar to those for the ss-myosin mutations L908V and G256E previously 
associated with a benign prognosis. Left ventricular hypertrophy was milder than 
with the ss-myosin mutation R403Q, but the prognosis was similarly poor. With 
the use of recombinant tropomyosins, we identified several functional 
alterations at the protein level. The mutation caused a 40% to 50% increase in 
calcium affinity in regulated thin filament-myosin subfragment-1 (S1) MgATPase 
assays, a 20% decrease in MgATPase rates in the presence of saturating calcium, 
a 5% decrease in unloaded shortening velocity in in vitro motility assays, and 
no change in cooperative myosin S1 binding to regulated thin filaments.
CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to other reported TPM1 mutations, V95A-associated HCM 
exhibits unusual features of mild phenotype but poor prognosis. Both myosin 
cycling and calcium binding to troponin are abnormal in the presence of the 
mutant tropomyosin. The genetic diagnosis afforded by this mutation will be 
valuable in the management of HCM.

DOI: 10.1161/01.cir.103.1.65
PMID: 11136687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
