---
pmid: '11130076'
title: IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation
  of membrane ruffling.
authors:
- Miki H
- Yamaguchi H
- Suetsugu S
- Takenawa T
journal: Nature
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35047107
---

# IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling.
**Authors:** Miki H, Yamaguchi H, Suetsugu S, Takenawa T
**Journal:** Nature (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35047107](https://doi.org/10.1038/35047107)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2000 Dec 7;408(6813):732-5. doi: 10.1038/35047107.

IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of 
membrane ruffling.

Miki H(1), Yamaguchi H, Suetsugu S, Takenawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Science, University of 
Tokyo, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation.

Neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (N-WASP) functions in several 
intracellular events including filopodium formation, vesicle transport and 
movement of Shigella frexneri and vaccinia virus, by stimulating rapid actin 
polymerization through the Arp2/3 complex. N-WASP is regulated by the direct 
binding of Cdc42 (refs 7, 8), which exposes the domain in N-WASP that activates 
the Arp2/3 complex. A WASP-related protein, WAVE/Scar, functions in Rac-induced 
membrane ruffling; however, Rac does not bind directly to WAVE, raising the 
question of how WAVE is regulated by Rac. Here we demonstrate that IRSp53, a 
substrate for insulin receptor with unknown function, is the 'missing link' 
between Rac and WAVE. Activated Rac binds to the amino terminus of IRSp53, and 
carboxy-terminal Src-homology-3 domain of IRSp53 binds to WAVE to form a 
trimolecular complex. From studies of ectopic expression, we found that IRSp53 
is essential for Rac to induce membrane ruffling, probably because it recruits 
WAVE, which stimulates actin polymerization mediated by the Arp2/3 complex.

DOI: 10.1038/35047107
PMID: 11130076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
