---
pmid: '12429846'
title: 'Clint: a novel clathrin-binding ENTH-domain protein at the Golgi.'
authors:
- Kalthoff C
- Groos S
- Kohl R
- Mahrhold S
- Ungewickell EJ
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC133614
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e02-03-0171
---

# Clint: a novel clathrin-binding ENTH-domain protein at the Golgi.
**Authors:** Kalthoff C, Groos S, Kohl R, Mahrhold S, Ungewickell EJ
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e02-03-0171](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e02-03-0171)
**PMC:** [PMC133614](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC133614/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Nov;13(11):4060-73. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e02-03-0171.

Clint: a novel clathrin-binding ENTH-domain protein at the Golgi.

Kalthoff C(1), Groos S, Kohl R, Mahrhold S, Ungewickell EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center of Anatomy, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.

We have characterized a novel clathrin-binding 68-kDa epsin N-terminal homology 
domain (ENTH-domain) protein that we name clathrin interacting protein localized 
in the trans-Golgi region (Clint). It localizes predominantly to the Golgi 
region of epithelial cells as well as to more peripheral vesicular structures. 
Clint colocalizes with AP-1 and clathrin only in the perinuclear area. 
Recombinantly expressed Clint interacts directly with the gamma-appendage domain 
of AP-1, with the clathrin N-terminal domain through the peptide motif 
(423)LFDLM, with the gamma-adaptin ear homology domain of Golgi-localizing, 
gamma-adaptin ear homology domain 2, with the appendage domain of beta2-adaptin 
and to a lesser extent with the appendage domain of alpha-adaptin. Moreover, the 
Clint ENTH-domain asssociates with phosphoinositide-containing liposomes. A 
significant amount of Clint copurifies with rat liver clathrin-coated vesicles. 
In rat kidney it is preferentially expressed in the apical region of epithelial 
cells that line the collecting duct. Clathrin and Clint also colocalize in the 
apical region of enterocytes along the villi of the small intestine. Apart from 
the ENTH-domain Clint has no similarities with the epsins AP180/CALM or Hip1/1R. 
A notable feature of Clint is a carboxyl-terminal methionine-rich domain 
(Met(427)-Met(605)), which contains >17% methionine. Our results suggest that 
Clint might participate in the formation of clathrin-coated vesicles at the 
level of the trans-Golgi network and remains associated with the vesicles longer 
than clathrin and adaptors.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e02-03-0171
PMCID: PMC133614
PMID: 12429846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
