---
pmid: '22293988'
title: Cellular prion protein participates in amyloid-β transcytosis across the blood-brain
  barrier.
authors:
- Pflanzner T
- Petsch B
- André-Dohmen B
- Müller-Schiffmann A
- Tschickardt S
- Weggen S
- Stitz L
- Korth C
- Pietrzik CU
journal: J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3318156
doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.7
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cellular prion protein participates in amyloid-β transcytosis across the blood-brain barrier.
**Authors:** Pflanzner T, Petsch B, André-Dohmen B, Müller-Schiffmann A, Tschickardt S, Weggen S, Stitz L, Korth C, Pietrzik CU
**Journal:** J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jcbfm.2012.7](https://doi.org/10.1038/jcbfm.2012.7)
**PMC:** [PMC3318156](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3318156/)

## Abstract

1. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012 Apr;32(4):628-32. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.7.
Epub  2012 Feb 1.

Cellular prion protein participates in amyloid-β transcytosis across the 
blood-brain barrier.

Pflanzner T(1), Petsch B, André-Dohmen B, Müller-Schiffmann A, Tschickardt S, 
Weggen S, Stitz L, Korth C, Pietrzik CU.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurodegeneration, Institute of Pathobiochemistry, University 
Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) facilitates amyloid-β (Aβ) exchange between the 
blood and the brain. Here, we found that the cellular prion protein (PrP(c)), a 
putative receptor implicated in mediating Aβ neurotoxicity in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), participates in Aβ transcytosis across the BBB. Using an in vitro 
BBB model, [(125)I]-Aβ(1-40) transcytosis was reduced by genetic knockout of 
PrP(c) or after addition of a competing PrP(c)-specific antibody. Furthermore, 
we provide evidence that PrP(c) is expressed in endothelial cells and, that 
monomeric Aβ(1-40) binds to PrP(c). These observations provide new mechanistic 
insights into the role of PrP(c) in AD.

DOI: 10.1038/jcbfm.2012.7
PMCID: PMC3318156
PMID: 22293988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
