---
pmid: '8855266'
title: Association of a novel human FE65-like protein with the cytoplasmic domain
  of the beta-amyloid precursor protein.
authors:
- Guénette SY
- Chen J
- Jondro PD
- Tanzi RE
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC38241
doi: 10.1073/pnas.93.20.10832
---

# Association of a novel human FE65-like protein with the cytoplasmic domain of the beta-amyloid precursor protein.
**Authors:** Guénette SY, Chen J, Jondro PD, Tanzi RE
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.93.20.10832](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.20.10832)
**PMC:** [PMC38241](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC38241/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):10832-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.93.20.10832.

Association of a novel human FE65-like protein with the cytoplasmic domain of 
the beta-amyloid precursor protein.

Guénette SY(1), Chen J, Jondro PD, Tanzi RE.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital-East, Harvard Medical 
School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

We identified a novel human homologue of the rat FE65 gene, hFE65L, by screening 
the cytoplasmic domain of beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta PP) with the 
"interaction trap." The cytoplasmic domains of the beta PP homologues, APLP1 and 
APLP2 (amyloid precursor-like proteins), were also tested for interaction with 
hFE65L. APLP2, but not APLP1, was found to interact with hFE65L. We confirmed 
these interactions in vivo by successfully coimmunoprecipatating endogenous beta 
PP and APLP2 from mammalian cells overexpressing a hemagglutinin-tagged fusion 
of the C-terminal region of hFE65L. We report the existence of a human FE65 gene 
family and evidence supporting specific interactions between members of the beta 
PP and FE65 protein families. Sequence analysis of the FE65 human gene family 
reveals the presence of two phosphotyrosine interaction (PI) domains. Our data 
show that a single PI domain is sufficient for binding of hFE65L to the 
cytoplasmic domain of beta PP and APLP2. The PI domain of the protein, Shc, is 
known to interact with the NPXYp motif found in the cytoplasmic domain of a 
number of different growth factor receptors. Thus, it is likely that the PI 
domains present in the C-terminal moiety of the hFE65L protein bind the NPXY 
motif located in the cytoplasmic domain of beta PP and APLP2.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.93.20.10832
PMCID: PMC38241
PMID: 8855266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
