---
pmid: '9718372'
title: Evidence for a novel MAPKKK-independent pathway controlling the stress activated
  Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase in fission yeast.
authors:
- Shieh JC
- Martin H
- Millar JB
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.18.2799
---

# Evidence for a novel MAPKKK-independent pathway controlling the stress activated Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Shieh JC, Martin H, Millar JB
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.111.18.2799](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.111.18.2799)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 1998 Sep;111 ( Pt 18):2799-807. doi: 10.1242/jcs.111.18.2799.

Evidence for a novel MAPKKK-independent pathway controlling the stress activated 
Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase in fission yeast.

Shieh JC(1), Martin H, Millar JB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Yeast Genetics, National Institute for Medical Research, The 
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The fission yeast Sty1/Spc1 MAP kinase, like the mammalian JNK/SAPK and 
p38/CSBP1 kinases, is activated by a range of environmental insults including 
osmotic stress, hydrogen peroxide, heat shock, UV light and the protein 
synthesis inhibitor anisomycin. Sty1 is activated by a single MAPKK, Wis1. We 
demonstrate that the conserved MAPKKK phosphorylation sites Ser 469 and Thr 473 
in the catalytic domain of Wis1 are normally essential for Sty1 activation. 
However, when mildly overexpressed, a mutant Wis1 kinase lacking these conserved 
phosphorylation sites is able to support stress inducible gene expression and 
activation of the Sty1 MAP kinase in response to an oxidative or osmotic stress 
or to a mild heat shock. We show that phosphorylation and activation of Sty1 
under these conditions is not due to inactivation of the Pyp1 MAP kinase 
phosphatase. These results reveal a novel MAPKKK-independent pathway by which 
the Wis1 MAPKK can activate the Sty1 MAPK in response to stress in fission 
yeast.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.111.18.2799
PMID: 9718372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
