---
pmid: '15466887'
title: Demonstration of BACE (beta-secretase) phosphorylation and its interaction
  with GGA1 in cells by fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy.
authors:
- von Arnim CA
- Tangredi MM
- Peltan ID
- Lee BM
- Irizarry MC
- Kinoshita A
- Hyman BT
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01422
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Demonstration of BACE (beta-secretase) phosphorylation and its interaction with GGA1 in cells by fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy.
**Authors:** von Arnim CA, Tangredi MM, Peltan ID, Lee BM, Irizarry MC, Kinoshita A, Hyman BT
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01422](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01422)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Oct 15;117(Pt 22):5437-45. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01422. Epub 2004 
Oct 5.

Demonstration of BACE (beta-secretase) phosphorylation and its interaction with 
GGA1 in cells by fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy.

von Arnim CA(1), Tangredi MM, Peltan ID, Lee BM, Irizarry MC, Kinoshita A, Hyman 
BT.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Disease Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, 114 16th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

beta-Secretase (BACE) carries out the first of two proteolysis steps to generate 
the amyloid-beta peptides that accumulate in the senile plaques in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Because most BACE activity occurs in endosomes, signals regulating 
its trafficking to these compartments are important to an understanding of AD 
pathogenesis. A DISLL sequence near the BACE C-terminus mediates binding of BACE 
to the VHS domains of Golgi-localized gamma-ear-containing ARF-binding (GGA) 
proteins, which are involved in the sorting of proteins to endosomes. 
Phosphorylation of the motif's serine residue regulates BACE recycling back to 
the cell surface from early endosomes and enhances the interaction of BACE with 
GGA proteins in isolated protein assays. We found that BACE phosphorylation 
influences BACE-GGA interactions in cells using a new 
fluorescence-resonance-energy-transfer-based assay of protein proximity, 
fluorescence lifetime imaging. Although serine-phosphorylated BACE was 
distributed throughout the cell, interaction of GGA1 with the wild-type protein 
occurred in juxtanuclear compartments. Pseudo-phosphorylated and 
non-phosphorylated BACE mutants remained localized with GGA1 in the Golgi body, 
but the latter mutation diminished the two proteins' FRET signal. Because BACE 
phosphorylated at serine residues can be identified in human brain, these data 
suggest that serine phosphorylation of BACE is a physiologically relevant 
post-translational modification that regulates trafficking in the juxtanuclear 
compartment by interaction with GGA1.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01422
PMID: 15466887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
