---
pmid: '32502403'
title: Selective Nuclear Pore Complex Removal Drives Nuclear Envelope Division in
  Fission Yeast.
authors:
- Expósito-Serrano M
- Sánchez-Molina A
- Gallardo P
- Salas-Pino S
- Daga RR
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.066
---

# Selective Nuclear Pore Complex Removal Drives Nuclear Envelope Division in Fission Yeast.
**Authors:** Expósito-Serrano M, Sánchez-Molina A, Gallardo P, Salas-Pino S, Daga RR
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.066](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.066)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2020 Aug 17;30(16):3212-3222.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.066.
Epub  2020 Jun 4.

Selective Nuclear Pore Complex Removal Drives Nuclear Envelope Division in 
Fission Yeast.

Expósito-Serrano M(1), Sánchez-Molina A(1), Gallardo P(1), Salas-Pino S(2), Daga 
RR(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Junta de Andalucía, 
Carretera de Utrera, km1, 41013 Seville, Spain.
(2)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Junta de Andalucía, 
Carretera de Utrera, km1, 41013 Seville, Spain. Electronic address: 
ssalpin@upo.es.
(3)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Junta de Andalucía, 
Carretera de Utrera, km1, 41013 Seville, Spain. Electronic address: 
rroddag@upo.es.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2020 Aug 17;30(16):R942-R944. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.06.067.

An important question in cell biology is how cellular organelles partition 
during cell division. In organisms undergoing closed mitosis, the elongation of 
an intranuclear spindle drives nuclear division, generating two identically 
sized nuclei [1, 2]. However, how the site of nuclear division is determined and 
the underlying mechanism driving nuclear envelope (NE) fission remain largely 
unknown. Here, using the fission yeast, we show that the microtubule bundler 
Ase1/PRC1 at the spindle midzone is required for the local concentration of 
nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) in the region of the NE in contact with the 
central spindle. As the spindle elongates during anaphase B, components of these 
NPCs are sequentially eliminated, and this is accompanied by the local 
remodeling of the NE. These two events lead to the eventual removal of NPCs and 
nuclear division. In the absence of importin α, NPCs remain stable in this 
region and no event of NE remodeling is observed. Consequently, cells fail to 
undergo nuclear division. Thus, our results highlight a new role of the central 
spindle as a spatial cue that determines the site of nuclear division and point 
to NPC removal as the triggering event.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.05.066
PMID: 32502403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.
