---
pmid: '25660456'
title: Identification of ERAD components essential for dislocation of the null Hong
  Kong variant of α-1-antitrypsin (NHK).
authors:
- Zhong Y
- Shen H
- Wang Y
- Yang Y
- Yang P
- Fang S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.133
---

# Identification of ERAD components essential for dislocation of the null Hong Kong variant of α-1-antitrypsin (NHK).
**Authors:** Zhong Y, Shen H, Wang Y, Yang Y, Yang P, Fang S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.133](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.133)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 6;458(2):424-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.133. Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Identification of ERAD components essential for dislocation of the null Hong 
Kong variant of α-1-antitrypsin (NHK).

Zhong Y(1), Shen H(2), Wang Y(2), Yang Y(3), Yang P(4), Fang S(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Physiology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic 
address: yzhong@umaryland.edu.
(2)Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Physiology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(3)Department of Colorectal Cancer and Center for Medical Research, Xinhua 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 20025, 
China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
(5)Center for Biomedical Engineering and Technology, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department of Physiology, 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA; Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. Electronic address: sfang@umaryland.edu.

Misfolded proteins or orphan subunits of protein complexes are removed from the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by ER-associated degradation (ERAD). ERAD requires 
dislocation, also known as retrotranslocation, of those unwanted proteins from 
the ER lumen to the cytosol for destruction by the proteasomes. Over one hundred 
ERAD component proteins have been identified but their role in dislocation 
remain poorly understood. Here we assessed the requirement of ERAD components 
for dislocation of NHK in live cells using our recently developed 
dislocation-induced reconstituted GFP (drGFP) assay. RNAi revealed that 12 out 
of 21 ERAD components examined are required for efficient dislocation of NHK 
among which Hrd1, Sel1L, GRP94 and p97/VCP are critically required. In addition, 
knockdown of 7 of the 21 components enhanced NHK dislocation. This study 
uncovers a complex functional network of proteins required for NHK dislocation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.133
PMID: 25660456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
