---
pmid: '15692462'
title: 'Zebrafish alpha-crystallins: protein structure and chaperone-like activity
  compared to their mammalian orthologs.'
authors:
- Dahlman JM
- Margot KL
- Ding L
- Horwitz J
- Posner M
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
---

# Zebrafish alpha-crystallins: protein structure and chaperone-like activity compared to their mammalian orthologs.
**Authors:** Dahlman JM, Margot KL, Ding L, Horwitz J, Posner M
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2005)

## Abstract

1. Mol Vis. 2005 Jan 26;11:88-96.

Zebrafish alpha-crystallins: protein structure and chaperone-like activity 
compared to their mammalian orthologs.

Dahlman JM(1), Margot KL, Ding L, Horwitz J, Posner M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Ashland University, Ashland, OH 44805, USA.

PURPOSE: The vertebrate small heat shock proteins alphaA- and alphaB-crystallin 
contribute to the transparency and refractive power of the lens and may also 
prevent the aggregation of non-native proteins that would otherwise lead to 
cataracts. We previously showed that zebrafish (Danio rerio) and human 
alphaB-crystallin have diverged far more in primary structure and expression 
pattern than the orthologous alphaA-crystallins. In this current study we 
further compare the structure and function of zebrafish and mammalian 
alpha-crystallins.
METHODS: Near UV CD spectroscopy was used to analyze the tertiary structure and 
thermal stability of recombinant zebrafish alpha-crystallins. The chaperone-like 
activities of zebrafish and human alpha-crystallins were compared by assaying 
their ability to prevent the chemically induced aggregation of several target 
proteins at temperatures between 25 degrees C and 40 degrees C.
RESULTS: Zebrafish and human alphaA-crystallin showed very similar tertiary 
structures, while the alphaB-crystallin orthologs showed differences related to 
the presence of additional aromatic amino acids in the zebrafish protein. The 
denaturation temperatures of zebrafish crystallins were lower than those of 
mammals. The chaperone-like activities of the two zebrafish alpha-crystallins 
were highly divergent, with alphaA-crystallin showing much greater activity than 
alphaB-crystallin.
CONCLUSIONS: alphaA-crystallin serves a similar physiological function in both 
zebrafish and mammals as a lens specific chaperone-like molecule. The reduced 
chaperone-like function of zebrafish alphaB-crystallin and its lack of 
extralenticular expression indicates that it plays a different physiological 
role from its mammalian ortholog. Future comparative studies of alpha-crystallin 
from closely related vertebrate species can help identify specific structural 
changes that lead to alterations in chaperone-like activity.

PMID: 15692462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
