---
pmid: '10920331'
title: Differential localization of placental extracellular superoxide dismutase as
  pregnancy progresses.
authors:
- Boggess KA
- Kay HH
- Crapo JD
- Moore WF
- Suliman HB
- Oury TD
journal: Am J Obstet Gynecol
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1067/mob.2000.105426
---

# Differential localization of placental extracellular superoxide dismutase as pregnancy progresses.
**Authors:** Boggess KA, Kay HH, Crapo JD, Moore WF, Suliman HB, Oury TD
**Journal:** Am J Obstet Gynecol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mob.2000.105426](https://doi.org/10.1067/mob.2000.105426)

## Abstract

1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2000 Jul;183(1):199-205. doi: 10.1067/mob.2000.105426.

Differential localization of placental extracellular superoxide dismutase as 
pregnancy progresses.

Boggess KA(1), Kay HH, Crapo JD, Moore WF, Suliman HB, Oury TD.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine placental localization and 
activity of extracellular superoxide dismutase, a nitric oxide modulator, during 
early gestation and to correlate these characteristics with fetal vascular 
development.
STUDY DESIGN: First-trimester (n = 10) and second-trimester (n = 10) villi were 
obtained at elective pregnancy termination. Extracellular superoxide dismutase 
was localized by means of an immunoperoxidase method. Activity was measured by 
determining the inhibition of cytochrome c reduction at pH 10 and messenger 
ribonucleic acid expression by in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: Extracellular superoxide dismutase was intracellular within villous 
trophoblasts until 17 weeks' gestation, when it relocated to the villous 
extracellular matrix. Activities were similar between first- and 
second-trimester villi. In situ hybridization confirmed extracellular superoxide 
dismutase messenger ribonucleic acid within trophoblasts throughout gestation.
CONCLUSION: Extracellular superoxide dismutase is produced by trophoblasts early 
in pregnancy, but it remains intracellular until 17 weeks' gestation, which may 
be related to fetal vascular development.

DOI: 10.1067/mob.2000.105426
PMID: 10920331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
