---
pmid: '26724867'
title: Cryptochromes Interact Directly with PIFs to Control Plant Growth in Limiting
  Blue Light.
authors:
- Pedmale UV
- Huang SC
- Zander M
- Cole BJ
- Hetzel J
- Ljung K
- Reis PAB
- Sridevi P
- Nito K
- Nery JR
- Ecker JR
- Chory J
journal: Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4721562
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.018
---

# Cryptochromes Interact Directly with PIFs to Control Plant Growth in Limiting Blue Light.
**Authors:** Pedmale UV, Huang SC, Zander M, Cole BJ, Hetzel J, Ljung K, Reis PAB, Sridevi P, Nito K, Nery JR, Ecker JR, Chory J
**Journal:** Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.018)
**PMC:** [PMC4721562](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4721562/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2016 Jan 14;164(1-2):233-245. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.018. Epub 2015
 Dec 24.

Cryptochromes Interact Directly with PIFs to Control Plant Growth in Limiting 
Blue Light.

Pedmale UV(1), Huang SC(2), Zander M(3), Cole BJ(4), Hetzel J(4), Ljung K(5), 
Reis PAB(6), Sridevi P(7), Nito K(3), Nery JR(8), Ecker JR(9), Chory J(10).

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic 
address: upedmale@salk.edu.
(2)Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Genomic Analysis Laboratory, Salk 
Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.
(3)Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(5)Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Forest Genetics and Plant 
Physiology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, SE-901 83 Umeå, Sweden.
(6)Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Departamento de Bioquímica e 
Biologia Molecular/BIOAGRO, National Institute of Science and Technology in 
Plant-Pest Interactions, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, 36570.000 Viçosa, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil.
(7)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(8)Genomic Analysis Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 
North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(9)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Genomic 
Analysis Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey 
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic 
address: chory@salk.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2016 Jan 14;164(1-2):15-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.043.
    Nat Plants. 2016 Mar 02;2:16019. doi: 10.1038/nplants.2016.19.

Sun-loving plants have the ability to detect and avoid shading through sensing 
of both blue and red light wavelengths. Higher plant cryptochromes (CRYs) 
control how plants modulate growth in response to changes in blue light. For 
growth under a canopy, where blue light is diminished, CRY1 and CRY2 perceive 
this change and respond by directly contacting two bHLH transcription factors, 
PIF4 and PIF5. These factors are also known to be controlled by phytochromes, 
the red/far-red photoreceptors; however, transcriptome analyses indicate that 
the gene regulatory programs induced by the different light wavelengths are 
distinct. Our results indicate that CRYs signal by modulating PIF activity 
genome wide and that these factors integrate binding of different plant 
photoreceptors to facilitate growth changes under different light conditions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.018
PMCID: PMC4721562
PMID: 26724867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Plants are incapable of long-distance migration, and therefore must respond appropriately to ever changing environmental challenges. Numerous environmental factors influence plant development, including temperature, light, touch, water, and gravity. Plants use this information to determine the time of day and season, to assess and anticipate temporal fluctuations in resource availability, and to determine whether they will soon be in the shade of another plant ( Casal, 2011 ). Of the many environmental input pathways, light is understood the best. Light is perceived by a complex array of photoreceptors, which are defined by the color of light they absorb. In Arabidopsis , phytochromes (phyA–E) absorb red/far-red light; cryptochromes (CRY1–2), phototropins (phot1–2), and three ZTL-type receptors absorb blue/UV-A light; and one receptor (UVR8) absorbs UV-B light ( Casal, 2011 ; Chory, 2010 ). Combinatorial analysis of these thirteen photoreceptor genes indicate that they have complex synergistic, antagonistic, and redundant relationships ( Mazzella and Casal, 2001 ). Photoreceptor signaling pathways primarily regulate the expression of a large number of genes involved in light responses, which then lead to the differential growth of specific cells and organs within the plant.

Plants have developed adaptive responses to detect and interpret changes in light quantity, quality, and directionality. In sun-loving plants, one such adaptive response is the ability to sense and avoid shading by neighboring plants. To avoid shading, plants utilize a suite of responses that are collectively known as the shade avoidance response (SAR) ( Smith, 1982 ). During SAR, energy resources are re-allocated from storage organs to enable the rapid elongation of stems and petioles (leafstalk) allowing a shaded plant to outcompete its neighbors. Prolonged exposure to shade is costly. Shaded plants have accelerated reproductive development, leading to lower biomass and seed yield ( Casal, 2011 ).

SAR is triggered not only by a reduction in total amount of visible light (400–700nm; known as photosynthetically active radiation (PAR)), but also changes in spectral composition ( Ballaré, 1999 ; Smith, 1982 ). Photosynthetic pigments within the plants absorb most of the visible light (red and blue), whereas FR light is poorly absorbed and most is transmitted through or reflected by leaves. For instance, the red to far-red ratio (R:FR) of light is ~1.15 during midday and varying little with the weather or season. However, R:FR can be as low as 0.09 underneath a vegetational canopy ( Smith, 1982 ). Underneath a canopy there is simultaneous reductions in red (low R:FR) and blue light and plants likely monitor these spectra to evaluate shading. Low R:FR has long been associated with all shade avoidance responses, however, studies in a variety of species and settings have shown that reduced or low blue light (LBL) can also invoke shade avoidance responses. S eedlings grown at a constant fluence rate of red light, but specifically deprived of blue light, resemble in many ways plants exposed to low R:FR ( Ballaré, 1999 ; Keller et al., 2011 ; Keuskamp et al., 2010b ).

A mechanism for how phytochromes (PHYs) regulate shade-induced growth in response to low R:FR light has been proposed. The detection of low R:FR by PHYs leads to the dephosphorylation of phytochrome interacting factor (PIF7), a bHLH TF that directly interacts with phyB ( Li et al., 2012 ). This allows PIF7 to bind E-boxes in the promoters of a subset of YUCCA genes that encode the rate limiting enzymes in auxin biosynthesis. This leads to increased levels of auxin, upregulation of auxin-regulated genes and transport ( Keuskamp et al., 2010a ; Tao et al., 2008 ). When grown in low R:FR, loss of function mutations in TAA1 or PIF7 do not upregulate auxin levels and therefore do not exhibit SAR ( Li et al., 2012 ). Thus a role for the newly synthesized auxin that is both temporally and spatially distributed in early shade avoidance responses has been well documented.

In contrast, the molecular mechanisms by which the CRYs regulate hypocotyl growth in response to the LBL canopy signal ( Bouly et al., 2007 ; Pierik et al., 2009 ; Sellaro et al., 2010 ) are less clear. Several phytohormones have been implicated in LBL-induced elongation responses, including auxin ( Keuskamp et al., 2011 ; Pierik et al., 2009 ). However, auxin transport inhibitors that block low R:FR-induced elongation do not completely block hypocotyl elongation in response to LBL, indicating that R:FR and LBL growth responses maybe mediated by separate mechanisms ( Keuskamp et al., 2011 ). Here we demonstrate that the bHLH transcription factors (TFs) PIF4 and PIF5 are necessary for LBL-induced hypocotyl growth, and that they act downstream of CRY1 and CRY2. We also show that CRY1 and CRY2 physically interact with PIF4 and PIF5. Transcriptome analysis indicates that the LBL response does not involve overrepresentation of auxin-regulated genes. Finally, we show by ChIP-seq that PIF4/5 and CRY2 occupy overlapping promoter regions, indicating that CRYs signal by modulating PIF4 and PIF5 activities to promote growth under LBL. As PIF4/5 act downstream of CRYs and PHYs to transduce blue- and red-light signals, respectively, these proteins represent a molecular basis for cross talk between these photosensory pathways. This work provides mechanistic detail to our understanding of how CRYs regulate plant growth.

DISCUSSION

The mechanisms by which the final body plans of multicellular organisms are established have mostly been elusive. Plants are sessile, and their organs emerge post-embryonically, making them ideal for studying multicellularity, growth and the control of organ size. The final shape and size of genetically identical plants can vary substantially, as each organism adopts a morphology that is optimal for their particular environment ( Depuydt and Hardtke, 2011 ). SAR of sun-loving plants is an excellent example of this plasticity. SAR is a rapid response that includes quantitative increases and decreases in growth rates of different organs ( Casal, 2011 ).

PHYs and CRYs detect and mediate responses to red/far-red light and blue/UV-A light, respectively. These receptors are broadly expressed in plant tissues and have overlapping and distinct roles in environment-mediated growth and development ( Tóth et al., 2001 ). PhyA physically interacts with CRY1, and phyB binds CRY2 ( Más et al., 2000 ). Here we show that CRYs also physically interact with PIFs, which are downstream signaling partners of PHYs. CRYs and PHYs both regulate flowering, but in different cell types: CRY2 in the vascular bundles and phyB in the mesophyll cells ( Endo et al., 2007 ; 2005 ). Light is also known to regulate tissue-autonomous promotion of palisade cell development by phot2 ( Kozuka et al., 2011 ). These examples and our study further underscore the importance of examining spatial and temporal changes in gene expression, protein levels/localization and metabolism to understand how growth is regulated within specific cells and tissues especially when signalling components are shared. As such, only limited conclusions can be drawn from the many published studies because they only examine phenotypic endpoints. Future studies should make an attempt to separate cell-type-specific responses.

To date, PIF1, 3, 4, 5, and 7 have been shown to bind phyB, while PIF 1 and 3 also bind phyA ( Leivar and Monte, 2014 ). Some of these PIFs are functionally redundant but there are reports of their independent roles. For example, specific PIFs mediate growth responses to LBL (PIF4 and PIF5), low R:FR (PIF7), high temperature (PIF4), as well as freezing tolerance (PIF4 and PIF7) ( Koini et al., 2009 ; Lee and Thomashow, 2012 ; Li et al., 2012 ). In addition, because PIFs are bHLH TFs, they bind E-boxes as both homo- and hetero-dimers and they also bind other TFs such as DELLAs ( Oh et al., 2014 ). As different heterodimers of bHLH TFs can cause very distinct phenotypes during murine limb development ( Firulli et al., 2007 ), it is conceivable that PIF4-PIF5 dimers or as heterodimers with other factors could dictate the functional outcome of the LBL response. It appears that PIFs are bound to DNA (at least in some conditions) when they interact with PHYs ( Martínez-García et al., 2000 ) and our results suggest that CRY2 interacts with PIF4/5 when they are bound to chromatin. Since CRY2 and phyB contact PIF5 at distinct domains ( Figure S3D,E ), it is possible that these three types of proteins bind chromatin as a multimeric complex. Thus in light of many possible combinations of protein-protein interactions, we suggest that the concentration of individual PIFs, CRYs, and PHYs dictate the output of the light response in a particular cell type. For instance, constitutive overexpression of CRY1 and CRY2 in all cells led to increased growth inhibition of hypocotyls under monochromatic blue light ( Lin et al., 1998 ) but selective increase in CRY protein levels is seen under LBL ( Figure 2B ). It is likely that in LBL, CRYs accumulate in cells that promote growth and it is tempting to speculate that CRYs could have opposite roles in different cells. Thus, the quantity of individual signaling components and molecular outputs in specific cells, coupled with knowledge of the affinities of individual PIFs for E-boxes within promoters of light-regulated genes, likely determine the organismal response.

We chose to study shade avoidance because it is a phenotypically simple, quantitative and manipulatable growth response that involves changes in the cell expansion rate of hypocotyl cells by changes in light quality (low R:FR or LBL) or quantity (PAR). Recent studies have suggested that hypocotyl cell elongation is driven by a central growth-regulation program (e.g., Oh et al. 2014 ). To our surprise and contrary to these reports, our data indicate that hypocotyl elongation is driven by several parallel pathways acting independently in response to different environmental stimuli involving multiple photoreceptors acting in different tissues via different hormone pathways. While we agree that PIFs likely play a general role in growth under many conditions, we suggest that the upstream pathways acting on PIFs are diverse and condition-specific rather than linear. During phyB mediated shade avoidance, auxin and auxin-regulated genes are upregulated for growth ( Keuskamp et al., 2010a ). Low PAR is likely perceived by CRYs, phototropins, and PHYs, but the signal is transmitted via an unknown mechanism that involves an increased sensitivity to auxin, rather than the synthesis of new auxin ( Hersch et al., 2014 ). We show here that depletion of blue light (LBL) triggers yet another growth pathway that does not involve changes in detectable auxin levels or sensitivity ( Figure S7 ). These results argue that there is more than one pathway leading to growth of the hypocotyl in response to different colors or the amount of light.

Why are there multiple and redundant growth pathways in SAR? It is likely that for a noisy and constantly changing environment like that present in a canopy ( Keller et al., 2011 ), redundant systems are necessary to accurately process all the information provided by light. A plant does not want to initiate SAR if a cloud passes overhead or there is a flash of lightning in the middle of the night.

TFs can rapidly re-program the transcriptome to alter cellular architecture. It is intriguing to note that the downstream genes regulated by the CRYs and phyB are quite different despite involvement of the same bHLH TFs in these pathways ( Figure 5 ). In low R:FR, 50% of the upregulated genes are genes known to be regulated by auxin ( Sessa et al., 2005 ; Tao et al., 2008 ). In LBL, our transcriptome analysis showed that PIF4 and PIF5 largely controlled cell wall re-modelling and expansion genes ( Figure 5C,D ). We did not detect auxin-regulated transcripts in LBL ( Figure 5F ), although auxin generated by the TAA1/SAV3 enzyme and transported by PIN efflux transporters is required for full-induction of hypocotyl elongation in LBL ( Figure 1B,C and S5D ) ( Keuskamp et al., 2011 ). It is possible that auxin production and distribution have different kinetics in a spatially and temporally distinct manner in LBL and our current time points did not detect it. In our LBL conditions, there may be increased hormone sensitivity by a route of action different from that seen under low PAR and R:FR. A second paradox concerns the initial slow rate of hypocotyl elongation in LBL when compared to low R:FR ( Figure S1B ), even though their phenotypic end points are similar ( Figure 1C ). One might have predicted that the LBL pathway has faster kinetics than low R:FR, a pathway that seems to be more complex.

Light might control the activity of a CRY-PIF complex by regulating its protein level or by other modifications. CRY2 protein is degraded under high fluence rates of light ( Yu et al., 2007 ) and likewise PIF5 protein levels are low in WL ( Figure 2A ). Therefore, it can be anticipated that under limiting blue light conditions (like LBL), PIF5 levels are high, which then leads to its interaction with CRY1/2 to promote growth. Red light is known to promote proteasomal degradation of PIF3/5 ( Leivar and Monte, 2014 ). However, LBL treatment of seedlings caused accumulation of PIF5 protein, even though red light was present in our assays ( Figure 2A ). In LBL, CRYs may shield PIF5 from PHY-mediated proteasomal degradation, similar to observations in Drosophila , where CRY sequesters TIMELESS ( Ceriani et al., 1999 ). In addition, our results suggest that PIF4/5 form the molecular basis of signal integration between CRY and PHY photoperception events. The loss of PIF4 and PIF5 in a cry1 mutant background resulted in shorter hypocotyls in an additive manner during de-etiolation under monochromatic blue light. These results and previous observations ( Kunihiro et al., 2010 ) suggest that CRYs promote deetiolation by modulating PIF activity in blue light, just as PHYs modulate PIF activity to regulate hypocotyl length in red, far-red and low R:FR light ( Leivar and Monte, 2014 ; Lorrain et al., 2008 ).

Our results indicate that CRY2 likely localizes to chromatin indirectly, via associations with PIFs or other TFs, similar to how phyA associates with regulatory regions in the genome ( Chen et al., 2014 ). We hypothesize that CRY1/2 and PIF4/5 likely interact on nuclear DNA, and that photoactive, nuclear-localized PHYs could also be interacting with PIFs on the DNA. CRY2 binding to PIF factors could provide it with specificity to bind the promoter of a gene whose expression is required for the hypocotyl growth response. Therefore we propose that CRY2 can affect transcription positively or negatively depending on the gene, physiological and developmental context of the plant. Results from our study suggest that CRYs directly regulate the activity of PIFs and other TFs through physical interactions on the DNA, such that changes in the external environment can rapidly lead to phenotypic changes ( Figure 7 ).

The exact reasons why plants have evolved multiple ways to regulate the same growth process will remain unclear until additional data have been obtained. The presence of multiple growth promoting pathways likely underlies the wide spectrum of phenotypic responses as well as morphological variations seen in plants. A plethora of receptors, compound circuits, binding partners, cell/tissue types, and downstream components help plants respond and adapt to a wide variety of environmental stresses and growth conditions. Elucidating these growth control circuits will likely require experiments that take into account temporal and spatial factors within specific cell types.
