---
pmid: '24556218'
title: CtIP mediates replication fork recovery in a FANCD2-regulated manner.
authors:
- Yeo JE
- Lee EH
- Hendrickson EA
- Sobeck A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4065146
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu078
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# CtIP mediates replication fork recovery in a FANCD2-regulated manner.
**Authors:** Yeo JE, Lee EH, Hendrickson EA, Sobeck A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu078](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu078)
**PMC:** [PMC4065146](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4065146/)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jul 15;23(14):3695-705. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu078. Epub 2014
 Feb 20.

CtIP mediates replication fork recovery in a FANCD2-regulated manner.

Yeo JE(1), Lee EH(1), Hendrickson EA(1), Sobeck A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA asobeck@umn.edu sobeck.alex@gmail.com.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosome instability syndrome characterized by 
increased cancer predisposition. Within the FA pathway, an upstream FA core 
complex mediates monoubiquitination and recruitment of the central FANCD2 
protein to sites of stalled replication forks. Once recruited, FANCD2 fulfills a 
dual role towards replication fork recovery: (i) it cooperates with BRCA2 and 
RAD51 to protect forks from nucleolytic degradation and (ii) it recruits the BLM 
helicase to promote replication fork restart while suppressing new origin 
firing. Intriguingly, FANCD2 and its interaction partners are also involved in 
homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA double-strand breaks, hinting that 
FANCD2 utilizes HR proteins to mediate replication fork recovery. One such 
candidate is CtIP (CtBP-interacting protein), a key HR repair factor that 
functions in complex with BRCA1 and MRE11, but has not been investigated as 
putative player in the replication stress response. Here, we identify CtIP as a 
novel interaction partner of FANCD2. CtIP binds and stabilizes FANCD2 in a DNA 
damage- and FA core complex-independent manner, suggesting that FANCD2 
monoubiquitination is dispensable for its interaction with CtIP. Following 
cellular treatment with a replication inhibitor, aphidicolin, FANCD2 recruits 
CtIP to transiently stalled, as well as collapsed, replication forks on 
chromatin. At stalled forks, CtIP cooperates with FANCD2 to promote fork restart 
and the suppression of new origin firing. Both functions are dependent on BRCA1 
that controls the step-wise recruitment of MRE11, FANCD2 and finally CtIP to 
stalled replication forks, followed by their concerted actions to promote fork 
recovery.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu078
PMCID: PMC4065146
PMID: 24556218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a chromosome instability syndrome characterized by increased cancer predisposition. Within the FA pathway, an upstream FA core complex mediates monoubiquitination and recruitment of the central FANCD2 protein to sites of stalled replication forks. Once recruited, FANCD2 fulfills a dual role towards replication fork recovery: (i) it cooperates with BRCA2 and RAD51 to protect forks from nucleolytic degradation and (ii) it recruits the BLM helicase to promote replication fork restart while suppressing new origin firing. Intriguingly, FANCD2 and its interaction partners are also involved in homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA double-strand breaks, hinting that FANCD2 utilizes HR proteins to mediate replication fork recovery. One such candidate is CtIP (CtBP-interacting protein), a key HR repair factor that functions in complex with BRCA1 and MRE11, but has not been investigated as putative player in the replication stress response. Here, we identify CtIP as a novel interaction partner of FANCD2. CtIP binds and stabilizes FANCD2 in a DNA damage- and FA core complex-independent manner, suggesting that FANCD2 monoubiquitination is dispensable for its interaction with CtIP. Following cellular treatment with a replication inhibitor, aphidicolin, FANCD2 recruits CtIP to transiently stalled, as well as collapsed, replication forks on chromatin. At stalled forks, CtIP cooperates with FANCD2 to promote fork restart and the suppression of new origin firing. Both functions are dependent on BRCA1 that controls the step-wise recruitment of MRE11, FANCD2 and finally CtIP to stalled replication forks, followed by their concerted actions to promote fork recovery.

INTRODUCTION

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a recessively inherited genome instability syndrome characterized by bone marrow failure and cancer predisposition. FA patient cells are sensitive to DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) and show spontaneous chromosomal aberrations that are further exacerbated upon treatment with replication-inhibiting agents such as hydroxyurea (HU) or aphidicolin (APH) ( 1 , 2 ). The 16 known FA proteins participate in a common pathway. Following replication fork stalling, an upstream FA core complex (8 FA proteins) monoubiquitinates the central FA pathway members FANCD2 and FANCI, followed by their recruitment to chromatin and into DNA repair foci ( 3 , 4 ). Monoubiquitinated FANCD2 (FANCD2 Ub ) functions to recruit DNA repair factors FAN1 (Fanconi-associated nuclease 1) ( 5 – 8 ) and SLX4 (identical to FANCP; a Holliday junction resolvase in complex with SLX1) ( 9 – 12 ), suggesting that chromatin-bound FANCD2 Ub is a docking platform for some DNA repair nucleases. Positioned further downstream in the FA pathway are several breast cancer-associated proteins including FANCD1/BRCA2 (breast cancer-associated protein 2), which coordinates with upstream FA pathway members to promote homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA double-stranded breaks (DNA DSBs) ( 13 – 15 ).

Three new studies shed light on additional FA pathway functions at sites of stalled replication forks: Schlacher et al . reported that several FA pathway members including FANCD2 and BRCA2 protect nascent DNA strands at stalled forks from nucleolytic degradation ( 1 , 16 ). Furthermore, we demonstrated that FANCD2 has additional roles in regulating the BLM helicase pathway (mutated in Bloom's syndrome) to restart stalled replication forks while suppressing new origin firing ( 17 ).

Intriguingly, recent reports identified several additional key HR proteins—including the MRE11 nuclease, RAD51 and XRCC3 ( 18 , 19 )—as crucial factors during replication fork recovery. Moreover, all of these proteins are able to interact with FANCD2 ( 1 , 20 – 22 ), suggesting that FANCD2 promotes replication fork recovery in concert with members of the HR repair machinery.

CtIP (CtBP-interacting protein) ( 23 ) is a central HR repair factor that interacts with the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 (MRN) complex to mediate DNA end resection, and with BRCA1 (breast cancer associated 1) to promote HR repair in a cell cycle-dependent manner ( 24 – 27 ). However, while CtIP's role in HR-mediated DNA DSB repair is well established, a putative function for CtIP in replication fork recovery—possibly in concert with FANCD2—has not been addressed.

In this study, we demonstrate that CtIP interacts with FANCD2 and promotes FANCD2 protein stability. Moreover, this interaction permits FANCD2 to recruit CtIP to sites of transiently stalled and collapsed replication forks. At stalled forks, CtIP cooperates with FANCD2 to promote fork restart while suppressing firing of new replication origins. Both functions are dependent on the upstream factor BRCA1 that monitors recruitment of MRE11, FANCD2 and finally CtIP to stalled replication forks, followed by their coordinated actions to promote fork recovery.

DISCUSSION

In this study, we identify CtIP as novel protein interactor of FANCD2 and demonstrate FANCD2-dependent and -independent roles of CtIP during DNA replication and the replication stress response.

Our findings add CtIP to a growing list of FANCD2-interacting proteins such as MRE11 and BLM that promote replication fork recovery as well as HR-mediated DNA DSB repair, strongly suggesting that fork restart requires HR-related mechanisms ( 18 , 21 , 31 , 35 , 36 ). The interaction of FANCD2 with CtIP-akin to its interactions with MRE11 or BLM ( 17 , 21 )-occurs in a DNA damage and FANCD2 Ub -independent manner, providing additional evidence that FANCD2 monoubiquitination is dispensable for some of its cellular functions.

The fact that the absence of CtIP destabilizes FANCD2, combined with previous findings that both FANCD2 and CtIP are degraded in the absence of MRE11 ( 21 , 37 ) suggests that CtIP is the true stabilizer of FANCD2, likely via a direct physical interaction. Interestingly, dependency of one protein's stability on the presence of another does not necessarily reflect the functional hierarchy between the two: FANCD2 is recruited to stalled replication fork downstream of MRE11 but upstream of CtIP (Figs 5 C and 2 A), yet both MRE11 and CtIP regulate (indirectly or directly) FANCD2 protein stability.

FANCD2-dependent chromatin recruitment of CtIP occurs on several levels: (i) during unperturbed replication, (ii) at stalled forks and (iii) at DNA DSBs generated by fork collapse or IR treatment. These results suggest that FANCD2 controls CtIP functions not only during replication fork restart but also during HR-mediated DNA DSB repair. In support of this idea, independent studies by Nakanishi et al . ( 14 ) and Chen et al . ( 29 ) showed that FANCD2- and CtIP-deficient cells exhibit comparable deficiencies in the HR-mediated repair of DNA DSBs. Future studies should reveal if and how FANCD2 regulates CtIP-dependent functions during HR repair, perhaps via supporting end resection at DNA DSBs.

Unexpectedly, the acute cellular response to APH- or HU-mediated replication fork stalling includes a significant reduction in CtIP foci formation, only to be followed by a subsequent increase in CtIP foci numbers that peak at 24 h, when forks have collapsed into DNA breaks ( 17 , 19 ). We observed that nucleotide incorporation was completely blocked at 2 h post-APH exposure (data not shown), indicating that replication forks are fully stalled at this time. Moreover, the decrease in APH-triggered CtIP foci formation at 30 min and 2 h was accompanied by a simultaneous increase in CtIP chromatin binding. Thus, while CtIP foci formation does not necessarily mirror its chromatin binding, APH-mediated replication fork stalling does actively block CtIP foci formation. Interestingly, a similar phenomenon was recently shown for RAD51, a protein that-like CtIP-promotes both replication fork restart and HR-mediated repair: Petermann et al . demonstrated that following HU exposure, the number of RAD51 foci-positive cells decreased at 1 and 2 h, but increased significantly at 24 h ( 19 ). The fact that we observed strong colocalization of CtIP and RAD51 foci in untreated conditions (small foci) as well as after 24 h of APH treatment (large foci), indicates that these two proteins cooperate during the repair of endogenously and exogenously triggered DNA lesions. While these findings require further investigation, we speculate that DNA repair proteins may not form foci at replication forks stalled in absence of a DNA lesion. The fact that CtIP and RAD51 foci reappear in great numbers once forks have collapsed into DNA DSBs supports a model where foci formation of these proteins is restricted to sites of DNA breaks. Alternatively, the rather small and punctuate CtIP and RAD51 foci observed in unperturbed cells may represent other types of DNA damage recognized by the cell through collision with the replication machinery. A recent study showed that CtIP foci in untreated cells colocalize with PCNA and BrdU, possibly representing sites of DNA lesion repair at unbroken, but currently halted forks ( 30 ).

CtIP's novel role in maintaining replication fork speed provides a mechanistic basis for previous observations that mouse and chicken (DT40) CtIP knockout cells show prolonged S-phase stages and slower overall proliferation profiles ( 38 ). The notion that CtIP performs this role independently of FANCD2 is further strengthened by a recent study showing that FANCD2 is present exclusively at stalled, not moving replication forks ( 39 ). Since FANCD2-deficient cells exhibit normal replication fork speed despite reduced chromatin-bound CtIP levels (Fig. 2 A), low concentrations of chromatin-bound CtIP must be sufficient to maintain replication velocity.

Another novel role for CtIP is its FANCD2-dependent function during replication fork restart, which it shares with other FANCD2-interacting proteins such as BLM and XRCC3. However, unlike FANCD2, we find that CtIP is dispensable for replication fork protection against nucleolytic degradation. This was somewhat unexpected considering that CtIP is crucial for the recruitment of RAD51, at least to sites of DNA DSBs ( 38 ), and RAD51 is indispensable for the protection of stalled forks ( 19 ). Hence, RAD51's recruitment to stalled forks must occur independently of CtIP, predicting different mutual regulation rules among DNA repair proteins at stalled replication forks versus DNA DSBs. In this regard, we also observed that BRCA1-the other newly identified replication fork restart factor in this study-and MRE11 appear to communicate differently during replication fork restart compared with DNA DSB repair: MRE11 acts strictly upstream of BRCA1 ( 34 ) during DNA DSB repair and does not rely on BCRA1 for its own access to DNA breaks ( 40 – 42 ). In contrast, our results indicate mutual stabilization of BRCA1 and MRE11 at sites of stalled replication forks. This mutual regulation between DNA repair proteins appears to be an emerging theme. For example, the FA core complex member FANCM recruits FANCD2 to replicating chromatin, but also relies on FANCD2 for its own chromatin binding ( 43 ). Similarly, the MRN complex recruits ATM to DNA DSBs, but then requires ATM for its own activation ( 44 ). These mutual stabilization events at stalled replication forks or DNA lesions likely empower cells with additional flexibility, by enabling proteins that act at downstream steps of fork recovery or DNA repair to provide regulatory feedback to their upstream mediators.

In summary, our results show that the central FA pathway member FANCD2 is a major regulator of CtIP functions during replication fork recovery in cooperation with BRCA1 and MRE11 ( Supplementary Material, Fig. S5 ). These findings support accumulating evidence that FANCD2 coordinates key HR proteins to mediate replication fork protection and allow successful replication fork restart.
