---
pmid: '32634427'
title: Downregulation of microRNA-155-5p prevents immune thrombocytopenia by promoting
  macrophage M2 polarization via the SOCS1-dependent PD1/PDL1 pathway.
authors:
- Chang Y
- Chen X
- Tian Y
- Gao X
- Liu Z
- Dong X
- Wang L
- He F
- Zhou J
journal: Life Sci
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118057
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Downregulation of microRNA-155-5p prevents immune thrombocytopenia by promoting macrophage M2 polarization via the SOCS1-dependent PD1/PDL1 pathway.
**Authors:** Chang Y, Chen X, Tian Y, Gao X, Liu Z, Dong X, Wang L, He F, Zhou J
**Journal:** Life Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118057](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118057)

## Abstract

1. Life Sci. 2020 Sep 15;257:118057. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118057. Epub 2020
Jul  4.

Downregulation of microRNA-155-5p prevents immune thrombocytopenia by promoting 
macrophage M2 polarization via the SOCS1-dependent PD1/PDL1 pathway.

Chang Y(1), Chen X(1), Tian Y(1), Gao X(1), Liu Z(2), Dong X(1), Wang L(1), He 
F(1), Zhou J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, the 2(nd) Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(2)Flow Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin 150007, PR China.
(3)Department of Hematology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150007, PR China. Electronic address: harbinzhoujie@163.com.

AIMS: We set about to investigate the potential role of microRNA-155-5p 
(miR-155-5p) in the development of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), an idiopathic 
deficiency of blood platelets.
MAIN METHODS: Initially, RT-qPCR and Western blot analyses were carried out to 
determine the expression of miR-155-5p and SOCS1 in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) and macrophages from ITP patients. We undertook gain- and loss- 
function methods by transfection of macrophages and PBMCs with treated plasmids. 
The expression patterns of platelet-related factors were measured by ELISA, and 
the expressions of PD1, PDL1, and macrophage M2 marker CD206 and CD86 were also 
measured. The relationship between miR-155-5p and SOCS1 was determined using the 
dual-luciferase reporter gene assay. We also established an ITP mouse model to 
explore the roles of miR-155-5p and SOCS1 in vivo.
KEY FINDINGS: miR-155-5p was up-regulated, while SOCS1 was down-regulated in 
PBMCs and macrophages from ITP patients. SOCS1 was indicated as a target of 
miR-155-5p. Inhibition of miR-155-5p or up-regulation of SOCS1 facilitated 
macrophage M2 polarization as demonstrated by an increased M2/M1 ratio and 
suppressed expression of platelet-related factors. Furthermore, silencing of 
SOCS1 promoted ITP progression through blocking the PD1/PDL1 pathway, whilst 
upregulation of miR-155-5p remarkably increased the platelet abundance and 
suppressed SOCS1 expression in ITP model mice.
SIGNIFICANCE: Silencing of miR-155-5p could promote PD1/PDL1 pathway-mediated 
macrophage M2 polarization and prevent ITP via up-regulation of SOCS1, thus 
relieving ITP.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2020.118057
PMID: 32634427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The author 
declares no competing interest exists.
