---
pmid: '33002606'
title: The Sur7/PalI family transmembrane protein Tos7 (Yol019w) plays a role in secretion
  in budding yeast.
authors:
- Zhu J
- Jia ZW
- Xia CY
- Gao XD
journal: Fungal Genet Biol
year: '2020'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103467
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The Sur7/PalI family transmembrane protein Tos7 (Yol019w) plays a role in secretion in budding yeast.
**Authors:** Zhu J, Jia ZW, Xia CY, Gao XD
**Journal:** Fungal Genet Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103467](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103467)

## Abstract

1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2020 Nov;144:103467. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103467. Epub 
2020 Sep 28.

The Sur7/PalI family transmembrane protein Tos7 (Yol019w) plays a role in 
secretion in budding yeast.

Zhu J(1), Jia ZW(1), Xia CY(1), Gao XD(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China; Hubei Provincial Cooperative Innovation Center of 
Industrial Fermentation, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: xdgao@whu.edu.cn.

Tos7 (Yol019w) is a Sur7/PalI family transmembrane protein in the budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Since the deletion of TOS7 did not affect growth or 
cell morphology, the cellular roles of Tos7 have not been established 
previously. Here, we show that high-copy TOS7 expression suppressed the growth 
defect of the secretion-defective RGA1-C term-overexpressing mutant and sec15-1 
mutant. Moreover, Tos7 physically interacted with Boi2 and the Rho GTPase Rho3, 
two key regulators of exocyst assembly, suggesting that Tos7 plays a role in 
secretion. We also show that the deletion of TOS7 rendered the cells more 
sensitive to the cell wall-disrupting agents Congo red and calcofluor white 
while high-copy TOS7 expression had an opposite effect, suggesting that Tos7 
affects cell wall organization. Finally, we show that Tos7 localized to punctate 
patches on the plasma membrane that were largely co-localized with the plasma 
membrane microdomains named MCC (membrane compartment of Can1). Together, these 
results suggest that Tos7 contributes to cell surface-related functions. Tos7 is 
likely an auxiliary component of MCC/eisosome that specifically interacts with 
the secretory pathway.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2020.103467
PMID: 33002606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
