---
pmid: '11294638'
title: 'In vitro conversion of propionate to pyruvate by Salmonella enterica enzymes:
  2-methylcitrate dehydratase (PrpD) and aconitase Enzymes catalyze the conversion
  of 2-methylcitrate to 2-methylisocitrate.'
authors:
- Horswill AR
- Escalante-Semerena JC
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/bi015503b
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# In vitro conversion of propionate to pyruvate by Salmonella enterica enzymes: 2-methylcitrate dehydratase (PrpD) and aconitase Enzymes catalyze the conversion of 2-methylcitrate to 2-methylisocitrate.
**Authors:** Horswill AR, Escalante-Semerena JC
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1021/bi015503b](https://doi.org/10.1021/bi015503b)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2001 Apr 17;40(15):4703-13. doi: 10.1021/bi015503b.

In vitro conversion of propionate to pyruvate by Salmonella enterica enzymes: 
2-methylcitrate dehydratase (PrpD) and aconitase Enzymes catalyze the conversion 
of 2-methylcitrate to 2-methylisocitrate.

Horswill AR(1), Escalante-Semerena JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1550 Linden 
Drive, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1567, USA.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 catabolizes propionate through the 
2-methylcitric acid cycle, but the identity of the enzymes catalyzing the 
conversion of 2-methylcitrate into 2-methylisocitrate is unclear. This work 
shows that the prpD gene of the prpBCDE operon of this bacterium encodes a 
protein with 2-methylcitrate dehydratase enzyme activity. Homogeneous PrpD 
enzyme did not contain an iron-sulfur center, displayed no requirements for 
metal cations or reducing agents for activity, and did not catalyze the 
hydration of 2-methyl-cis-aconitate to 2-methylisocitrate. It was concluded that 
the gene encoding the 2-methyl-cis-aconitate hydratase enzyme is encoded outside 
the prpBCDE operon. Computer analysis of bacterial genome databases identified 
the presence of orthologues of the acnA gene (encodes aconitase A) in a number 
of putative prp operons. Homogeneous AcnA protein of S. enterica had strong 
aconitase activity and catalyzed the hydration of the 2-methyl-cis-aconitate to 
yield 2-methylisocitrate. The purification of this enzyme allows the complete 
reconstitution of the 2-methylcitric acid cycle in vitro using homogeneous 
preparations of the PrpE, PrpC, PrpD, AcnA, and PrpB enzymes. However, 
inactivation of the acnA gene did not block growth of S. enterica on propionate 
as carbon and energy source. The existence of a redundant aconitase activity 
(encoded by acnB) was postulated to be responsible for the lack of a phenotype 
in acnA mutant strains. Consistent with this hypothesis, homogeneous AcnB 
protein of S. enterica also had strong aconitase activity and catalyzed the 
conversion of 2-methyl-cis-aconitate into 2-methylisocitrate. To address the 
involvement of AcnB in propionate catabolism, an acnA and acnB double mutant was 
constructed, and this mutant strain cannot grow on propionate even when 
supplemented with glutamate. The phenotype of this double mutant indicates that 
the aconitase enzymes are required for the 2-methylcitric acid cycle during 
propionate catabolism.

DOI: 10.1021/bi015503b
PMID: 11294638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
