---
pmid: '22632832'
title: Adaptor protein self-assembly drives the control of a cullin-RING ubiquitin
  ligase.
authors:
- Errington WJ
- Khan MQ
- Bueler SA
- Rubinstein JL
- Chakrabartty A
- Privé GG
journal: Structure
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.04.009
---

# Adaptor protein self-assembly drives the control of a cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase.
**Authors:** Errington WJ, Khan MQ, Bueler SA, Rubinstein JL, Chakrabartty A, Privé GG
**Journal:** Structure (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2012.04.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2012.04.009)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2012 Jul 3;20(7):1141-53. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2012.04.009. Epub 2012
 May 24.

Adaptor protein self-assembly drives the control of a cullin-RING ubiquitin 
ligase.

Errington WJ(1), Khan MQ, Bueler SA, Rubinstein JL, Chakrabartty A, Privé GG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, 1 Kings College Circle, 
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

The E3 ligases recruit substrate proteins for targeted ubiquitylation. Recent 
insights into the mechanisms of ubiquitylation demonstrate that E3 ligases can 
possess active regulatory properties beyond those of a simple assembly scaffold. 
Here, we describe the dimeric structure of the E3 ligase adaptor protein SPOP 
(speckle-type POZ protein) in complex with the N-terminal domain of Cul3 at 
2.4 Å resolution. We find that SPOP forms large oligomers that can form 
heteromeric species with the closely related paralog SPOPL. In combination, SPOP 
and SPOPL (SPOP-like) form a molecular rheostat that can fine-tune E3 ubiquitin 
ligase activity by affecting the oligomeric state of the E3 complex. We propose 
that adaptor protein self-assembly provides a graded level of regulation of the 
SPOP/Cul3 E3 ligase toward its multiple protein substrates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2012.04.009
PMID: 22632832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
