---
pmid: '17348861'
title: IGF-I-induced oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation requires PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK,
  and Src-like tyrosine kinases.
authors:
- Cui QL
- Almazan G
journal: J Neurochem
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04329.x
---

# IGF-I-induced oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation requires PI3K/Akt, MEK/ERK, and Src-like tyrosine kinases.
**Authors:** Cui QL, Almazan G
**Journal:** J Neurochem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04329.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04329.x)

## Abstract

1. J Neurochem. 2007 Mar;100(6):1480-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04329.x.

IGF-I-induced oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation requires PI3K/Akt,
MEK/ERK, and Src-like tyrosine kinases.

Cui QL(1), Almazan G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) is required for the growth of
oligodendrocytes, although the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood.
Our aim was to investigate the role of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K),
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK1), and Src family tyrosine kinases
in IGF-I-stimulated proliferation of oligodendrocyte progenitors. IGF-I
treatment increased the proliferation of cultured oligodendrocyte progenitors as
determined by measuring incorporation of [(3)H]-thymidine and bromodeoxy-uridine
(BrdU). IGF-I stimulated a transient phosphorylation of
3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and extracellular signal-regulated
kinases (ERK1/2) (targets of MEK1), as well as a rapid and sustained activation
of Akt (a target of PI3K). Furthermore, inhibitors of PI3K (LY294002 and
Wortmannin), MEK1 (PD98059 and U0126), and Src family tyrosine kinases (PP2)
decreased IGF-I-induced proliferation, and blocked ERK1/2 activation. LY294002,
Wortmannin and PP2 also blocked Akt activation. To further determine whether Akt
is required for IGF-I stimulated oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation,
cultures were infected with adenovirus vectors expressing dominant-negative
mutants of Akt or treated with pharmacological inhibitors of Akt. All treatments
reduced IGF-I-induced oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation. Our data
indicate that stimulation of oligodendrocyte progenitor proliferation by IGF-I
requires Src-like tyrosine kinases as well as the PI3K/Akt and MEK1/ERK
signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04329.x
PMID: 17348861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
