---
pmid: '7599155'
title: Kinetics of adenylate metabolism in human and rat myocardium.
authors:
- Tavenier M
- Skladanowski AC
- De Abreu RA
- de Jong JW
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0304-4165(95)98595-c
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Kinetics of adenylate metabolism in human and rat myocardium.
**Authors:** Tavenier M, Skladanowski AC, De Abreu RA, de Jong JW
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0304-4165(95)98595-c](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4165(95)98595-c)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Jun 9;1244(2-3):351-6. doi: 
10.1016/0304-4165(95)98595-c.

Kinetics of adenylate metabolism in human and rat myocardium.

Tavenier M(1), Skladanowski AC, De Abreu RA, de Jong JW.

Author information:
(1)Cardiochemical Laboratory, Thoraxcenter, Erasmus University Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.

Pathways producing and converting adenosine have hardly been investigated in 
human heart, contrasting work in other species. We compared the kinetics of 
enzymes associated with purine degradation and salvage in human and rat heart 
cytoplasm assaying for adenosine deaminase, nucleoside phosphorylase, xanthine 
oxidoreductase, AMP deaminase, AMP- and IMP-specific 5'-nucleotidases, adenosine 
kinase and hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT). Xanthine 
oxidoreductase was not detectable in human heart. The Km-values of the 
AMP-catabolizing enzymes were 2-5 times higher in human heart; the substrate 
affinity of the other enzymes was in the same order of magnitude in both 
species. The maximal activity (Vmax) of adenosine kinase was the same in both 
species, but HGPRT in man was only 12% of that in the rat. For human heart the 
Vmax-values of adenosine deaminase, nucleoside phosphorylase, AMP- and 
IMP-specific 5'-nucleotidases, and AMP deaminase were 25-50% of those for rat 
heart. We conclude that human heart is less geared to purine catabolism than rat 
heart as is evident from the lower activities of the catabolic enzymes. 
Maintenance of the nucleotide pool may thus play a more important role in human 
heart.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-4165(95)98595-c
PMID: 7599155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
