---
pmid: '10698945'
title: Structure of the RXR-RAR DNA-binding complex on the retinoic acid response
  element DR1.
authors:
- Rastinejad F
- Wagner T
- Zhao Q
- Khorasanizadeh S
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC305643
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.5.1045
---

# Structure of the RXR-RAR DNA-binding complex on the retinoic acid response element DR1.
**Authors:** Rastinejad F, Wagner T, Zhao Q, Khorasanizadeh S
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.5.1045](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.5.1045)
**PMC:** [PMC305643](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC305643/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 Mar 1;19(5):1045-54. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.5.1045.

Structure of the RXR-RAR DNA-binding complex on the retinoic acid response 
element DR1.

Rastinejad F(1), Wagner T, Zhao Q, Khorasanizadeh S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 
22908, USA,.

The 9-cis retinoic acid receptor (retinoid X receptor, RXR) forms heterodimers 
with the all-trans retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and other nuclear receptors on 
DNA regulatory sites composed of tandem binding elements. We describe the 1.70 A 
resolution structure of the ternary complex of RXR and RAR DNA-binding regions 
in complex with the retinoic acid response element DR1. The receptors recognize 
identical half-sites through extensive base-specific contacts; however, RXR 
binds exclusively to the 3' site to form an asymmetric complex with the reverse 
polarity of other RXR heterodimers. The subunits associate in a strictly 
DNA-dependent manner using the T-box of RXR and the Zn-II region of RAR, both of 
which are reshaped in forming the complex. The protein-DNA contacts, the 
dimerization interface and the DNA curvature in the RXR-RAR complex are distinct 
from those of the RXR homodimer, which also binds DR1. Together, these 
structures illustrate how the nuclear receptor superfamily exploits 
conformational flexibility and locally induced structures to generate 
combinatorial transcription factors.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.5.1045
PMCID: PMC305643
PMID: 10698945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
