---
pmid: '21925385'
title: The cAMP-dependent protein kinase signaling pathway is a key regulator of P
  body foci formation.
authors:
- Ramachandran V
- Shah KH
- Herman PK
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3176436
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.032
---

# The cAMP-dependent protein kinase signaling pathway is a key regulator of P body foci formation.
**Authors:** Ramachandran V, Shah KH, Herman PK
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.032)
**PMC:** [PMC3176436](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3176436/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2011 Sep 16;43(6):973-81. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.032.

The cAMP-dependent protein kinase signaling pathway is a key regulator of P body 
foci formation.

Ramachandran V(1), Shah KH, Herman PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

In response to stress, eukaryotic cells accumulate mRNAs and proteins at 
discrete sites, or foci, in the cytoplasm. However, the mechanisms regulating 
foci formation, and the biological function of the larger ribonucleoprotein 
(RNP) assemblies, remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a key 
regulator of the assembly of processing bodies (P bodies), an RNP complex 
implicated in mRNA processing and translation. The data suggest that PKA 
specifically inhibits the formation of the larger P body aggregates by directly 
phosphorylating Pat1, a conserved constituent of these foci that functions as a 
scaffold during the assembly process. Finally, we present evidence indicating 
that P body foci are required for the long-term survival of stationary phase 
cells. This work therefore highlights the general relevance of RNP foci in 
quiescent cells, and provides a framework for the study of the many RNP 
assemblies that form in eukaryotic cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.032
PMCID: PMC3176436
PMID: 21925385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
