---
pmid: '24604199'
title: Crystal structures of nucleotide-free and glutathione-bound mitochondrial ABC
  transporter Atm1.
authors:
- Srinivasan V
- Pierik AJ
- Lill R
journal: Science
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1246729
---

# Crystal structures of nucleotide-free and glutathione-bound mitochondrial ABC transporter Atm1.
**Authors:** Srinivasan V, Pierik AJ, Lill R
**Journal:** Science (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1246729](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1246729)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1137-40. doi: 10.1126/science.1246729.

Crystal structures of nucleotide-free and glutathione-bound mitochondrial ABC 
transporter Atm1.

Srinivasan V(1), Pierik AJ, Lill R.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Zytobiologie, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Robert-Koch-Strasse 
6, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

The yeast mitochondrial ABC transporter Atm1, in concert with glutathione, 
functions in the export of a substrate required for cytosolic-nuclear 
iron-sulfur protein biogenesis and cellular iron regulation. Defects in the 
human ortholog ABCB7 cause the sideroblastic anemia XLSA/A. Here, we report the 
crystal structures of free and glutathione-bound Atm1 in inward-facing, open 
conformations at 3.06- and 3.38-angstrom resolution, respectively. The 
glutathione binding site includes a residue mutated in XLSA/A and is located 
close to the inner membrane surface in a large cavity. The two nucleotide-free 
adenosine 5'-triphosphate binding domains do not interact yet are kept in close 
vicinity through tight interaction of the two C-terminal α-helices of the Atm1 
dimer. The resulting protein stabilization may be a common structural feature of 
all ABC exporters.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1246729
PMID: 24604199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
