---
pmid: '18585357'
title: DSCAM is a netrin receptor that collaborates with DCC in mediating turning
  responses to netrin-1.
authors:
- Ly A
- Nikolaev A
- Suresh G
- Zheng Y
- Tessier-Lavigne M
- Stein E
journal: Cell
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2491333
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.05.030
---

# DSCAM is a netrin receptor that collaborates with DCC in mediating turning responses to netrin-1.
**Authors:** Ly A, Nikolaev A, Suresh G, Zheng Y, Tessier-Lavigne M, Stein E
**Journal:** Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2008.05.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2008.05.030)
**PMC:** [PMC2491333](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2491333/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2008 Jun 27;133(7):1241-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.05.030.

DSCAM is a netrin receptor that collaborates with DCC in mediating turning 
responses to netrin-1.

Ly A(1), Nikolaev A, Suresh G, Zheng Y, Tessier-Lavigne M, Stein E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale 
University, 266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

During nervous system development, spinal commissural axons project toward and 
across the ventral midline. They are guided in part by netrin-1, made by midline 
cells, which attracts the axons by activating the netrin receptor DCC. However, 
previous studies suggest that additional receptor components are required. Here, 
we report that the Down's syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule (DSCAM), a candidate 
gene implicated in the mental retardation phenotype of Down's syndrome, is 
expressed on spinal commissural axons, binds netrin-1, and is necessary for 
commissural axons to grow toward and across the midline. DSCAM and DCC can each 
mediate a turning response of these neurons to netrin-1. Similarly, Xenopus 
spinal neurons exogenously expressing DSCAM can be attracted by netrin-1 
independently of DCC. These results show that DSCAM is a receptor that can 
mediate turning responses to netrin-1 and support a key role for netrin/DSCAM 
signaling in commissural axon guidance in vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.05.030
PMCID: PMC2491333
PMID: 18585357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
