---
pmid: '27477018'
title: TREM2 Binds to Apolipoproteins, Including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and Thereby Facilitates
  Uptake of Amyloid-Beta by Microglia.
authors:
- Yeh FL
- Wang Y
- Tom I
- Gonzalez LC
- Sheng M
journal: Neuron
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015
---

# TREM2 Binds to Apolipoproteins, Including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and Thereby Facilitates Uptake of Amyloid-Beta by Microglia.
**Authors:** Yeh FL, Wang Y, Tom I, Gonzalez LC, Sheng M
**Journal:** Neuron (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2016 Jul 20;91(2):328-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015.

TREM2 Binds to Apolipoproteins, Including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and Thereby 
Facilitates Uptake of Amyloid-Beta by Microglia.

Yeh FL(1), Wang Y(1), Tom I(2), Gonzalez LC(3), Sheng M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA.
(2)Department of Proteomics and Biological Resources, Genentech Inc., South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(3)Department of Proteomics and Biological Resources, Genentech Inc., South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. Electronic address: gonzalez.lino@gene.com.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, 
USA. Electronic address: sheng.morgan@gene.com.

Genetic variants of TREM2, a protein expressed selectively by microglia in the 
brain, are associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Starting from an unbiased 
protein microarray screen, we identified a set of lipoprotein particles 
(including LDL) and apolipoproteins (including CLU/APOJ and APOE) as ligands 
of TREM2. Binding of these ligands by TREM2 was abolished or reduced by 
disease-associated mutations. Overexpression of wild-type TREM2 was sufficient 
to enhance uptake of LDL, CLU, and APOE in heterologous cells, whereas TREM2 
disease variants were impaired in this activity. Trem2 knockout microglia showed 
reduced internalization of LDL and CLU. β-amyloid (Aβ) binds to lipoproteins and 
this complex is efficiently taken up by microglia in a TREM2-dependent fashion. 
Uptake of Aβ-lipoprotein complexes was reduced in macrophages from human 
subjects carrying a TREM2 AD variant. These data link three genetic risk factors 
for AD and reveal a possible mechanism by which mutant TREM2 increases risk of 
AD. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.06.015
PMID: 27477018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
