---
pmid: '17873903'
title: Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a
  p53-dependent manner.
authors:
- Iwai A
- Hijikata M
- Hishiki T
- Isono O
- Chiba T
- Shimotohno K
journal: Oncogene
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210801
---

# Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a p53-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Iwai A, Hijikata M, Hishiki T, Isono O, Chiba T, Shimotohno K
**Journal:** Oncogene (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1210801](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210801)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1520-6. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210801. Epub 2007 Sep
 17.

Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a 
p53-dependent manner.

Iwai A(1), Hijikata M, Hishiki T, Isono O, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin is closely related to carcinogenesis. 
Mutations in the p53 gene are reported to induce the aberrant accumulation of 
beta-catenin in the absence of dysfunction in the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
(GSK3beta)-mediated degradation pathway, but the mechanism remains incompletely 
understood. Here, we show that human coiled-coil domain containing 85B (CCDC85B) 
is induced by p53 and regulates beta-catenin activity via interaction with the 
T-cell factor 4 in the nucleus. Moreover, CCDC85B enhances the degradation of 
beta-catenin and suppresses tumor cell growth. In conclusion, we revealed that 
CCDC85B-induced degradation of beta-catenin is independent of GSK3beta and other 
p53-inducible products, Siah-1L, suggesting that CCDC85B constitutes the one of 
the frameworks of p53-induced multiple regulatory pathways for beta-catenin 
activity.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1210801
PMID: 17873903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
