---
pmid: '1427861'
title: The human galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase gene.
authors:
- Leslie ND
- Immerman EB
- Flach JE
- Florez M
- Fridovich-Keil JL
- Elsas LJ
journal: Genomics
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0888-7543(05)80244-7
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The human galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase gene.
**Authors:** Leslie ND, Immerman EB, Flach JE, Florez M, Fridovich-Keil JL, Elsas LJ
**Journal:** Genomics (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0888-7543(05)80244-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0888-7543(05)80244-7)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1992 Oct;14(2):474-80. doi: 10.1016/s0888-7543(05)80244-7.

The human galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase gene.

Leslie ND(1), Immerman EB, Flach JE, Florez M, Fridovich-Keil JL, Elsas LJ.

Author information:
(1)Basic Science Research, Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, 
Ohio 45229.

Classical galactosemia is an inborn error of metabolism caused by a deficiency 
of galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT). Standard treatment with 
dietary galactose restriction will reverse the potentially lethal symptoms of 
the disease that are manifest in the newborn period. However, the long-term 
prognosis for these patients is variable. As a first step toward investigating 
the molecular basis for phenotypic variation in galactosemia, we have cloned and 
sequenced the entire gene for human galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase. 
This gene is organized into 11 exons spanning 4 kb. In exons 6, 9, and a portion 
of 10, there is a high degree of amino acid sequence conservation among 
Escherichia coli, yeast, mouse, and human. We have identified a number of 
nucleotide changes in the GALT genes of galactosemic patients that alter 
conserved amino acids. The most common of these is an A to G transition at 
nucleotide position 1470, converting a glutamine to an arginine at amino acid 
codon position 188 (Q188R).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/s0888-7543(05)80244-7
PMID: 1427861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
