---
pmid: '9351468'
title: Drosophila unconventional myosin VI is involved in intra- and intercellular
  transport during oogenesis.
authors:
- Bohrmann J
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11147410
doi: 10.1007/s000180050084
---

# Drosophila unconventional myosin VI is involved in intra- and intercellular transport during oogenesis.
**Authors:** Bohrmann J
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s000180050084](https://doi.org/10.1007/s000180050084)
**PMC:** [PMC11147410](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11147410/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 1997 Aug;53(8):652-62. doi: 10.1007/s000180050084.

Drosophila unconventional myosin VI is involved in intra- and intercellular 
transport during oogenesis.

Bohrmann J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Biologie I (Zoologie), Universität Freiburg, Germany. 
bohrmjoh@ruf.uni-freiburg.de

During mid-oogenesis of Drosophila, cytoplasmic particles are transported within 
the nurse cells and through ring canals (cytoplasmic bridges) into the oocyte by 
means of a microfilament-dependent mechanism. Video-intensified fluorescence 
timelapse microscopy, in combination with microinjections of antibodies directed 
against Drosophila 95F myosin, have revealed that this unconventional myosin of 
class VI is involved in the transport processes. The results indicate that 
certain cytoplasmic particles in the nurse cells move along microfilaments due 
to their direct association with myosin VI motors. Additional myosin-VI 
molecules located at the rim of the ring canals seem to be involved in particle 
transport into the oocyte. Microinjected mitochondria-specific dyes have 
revealed that some of these particles are mitochondria.

DOI: 10.1007/s000180050084
PMCID: PMC11147410
PMID: 9351468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
