---
pmid: '7510216'
title: Interferon activation of the transcription factor Stat91 involves dimerization
  through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions.
authors:
- Shuai K
- Horvath CM
- Huang LH
- Qureshi SA
- Cowburn D
- Darnell JE Jr
journal: Cell
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90357-3
---

# Interferon activation of the transcription factor Stat91 involves dimerization through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions.
**Authors:** Shuai K, Horvath CM, Huang LH, Qureshi SA, Cowburn D, Darnell JE Jr
**Journal:** Cell (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(94)90357-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(94)90357-3)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1994 Mar 11;76(5):821-8. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90357-3.

Interferon activation of the transcription factor Stat91 involves dimerization 
through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions.

Shuai K(1), Horvath CM, Huang LH, Qureshi SA, Cowburn D, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New 
York 10021.

Stat91 (a 91 kd protein that acts as a signal transducer and activator of 
transcription) is inactive in the cytoplasm of untreated cells but is activated 
by phosphorylation on tyrosine in response to a number of polypeptide ligands, 
including interferon alpha (IFN-alpha) and IFN-gamma. We report here that the 
inactive Stat91 in the cytoplasm of untreated cells is a monomer and that upon 
IFN-gamma-induced phosphorylation it forms a stable homodimer. Only the dimer is 
capable of binding to a specific DNA sequence directing transcription. Through 
dissociation and reassociation assays, we show that dimerization of Stat91 is 
mediated through SH2-phosphotyrosyl peptide interactions. Dimerization involving 
SH2 recognition of specific phosphotyrosyl peptides may well provide a prototype 
for interactions among family members of STAT proteins to form different 
transcription complexes.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90357-3
PMID: 7510216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
