---
pmid: '11818066'
title: 14-3-3 protein interferes with the binding of RNA to the phosphorylated form
  of fission yeast meiotic regulator Mei2p.
authors:
- Sato M
- Watanabe Y
- Akiyoshi Y
- Yamamoto M
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00654-6
---

# 14-3-3 protein interferes with the binding of RNA to the phosphorylated form of fission yeast meiotic regulator Mei2p.
**Authors:** Sato M, Watanabe Y, Akiyoshi Y, Yamamoto M
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00654-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00654-6)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2002 Jan 22;12(2):141-5. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00654-6.

14-3-3 protein interferes with the binding of RNA to the phosphorylated form of 
fission yeast meiotic regulator Mei2p.

Sato M(1), Watanabe Y, Akiyoshi Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Hongo, Japan.

The switch from mitosis to meiosis is controlled by the Pat1(Ran1) kinase-Mei2p 
system in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Mei2p promotes both premeiotic DNA 
synthesis and meiosis I, and its RNA binding ability is essential for these two 
processes. Mei2p forms a dot structure in the nucleus prior to meiosis I, aided 
by a specific RNA species named "meiRNA". Pat1 kinase phosphorylates Mei2p on 
two positions and downregulates its activity. Pat1 kinase undergoes inactivation 
under meiotic conditions, as a result of the production of a tethering 
pseudosubstrate Mei3p, and accumulation of the unphosphorylated form of Mei2p 
commits cells to meiosis. However, the mechanism of how phosphorylation of Mei2p 
suppresses its activity to induce meiosis remains largely unknown. Here we show 
that S. pombe Rad24p, a 14-3-3 protein, functions as a negative factor for 
meiosis by antagonizing the function of meiRNA to promote the formation of a 
nuclear Mei2p dot. Rad24p binds preferentially to Mei2p phosphorylated by Pat1 
kinase. It inhibits association of meiRNA to the phosphorylated form of Mei2p 
but not to the unphosphorylated form in vitro. We speculate that Rad24p, bound 
tightly to the residues phosphorylated by Pat1 kinase, may mask the RNA 
recognition motifs on Mei2p. This model will explain, at least partly, why 
phosphorylation by Pat1 kinase inhibits the meiosis-inducing activity of Mei2p.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(01)00654-6
PMID: 11818066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
