---
pmid: '23704572'
title: Futile protein folding cycles in the ER are terminated by the unfolded protein
  O-mannosylation pathway.
authors:
- Xu C
- Wang S
- Thibault G
- Ng DT
journal: Science
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.1234055
---

# Futile protein folding cycles in the ER are terminated by the unfolded protein O-mannosylation pathway.
**Authors:** Xu C, Wang S, Thibault G, Ng DT
**Journal:** Science (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1234055](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1234055)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2013 May 24;340(6135):978-81. doi: 10.1126/science.1234055.

Futile protein folding cycles in the ER are terminated by the unfolded protein 
O-mannosylation pathway.

Xu C(1), Wang S, Thibault G, Ng DT.

Author information:
(1)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 May 24;340(6135):930-1. doi: 10.1126/science.1239294.

Newly synthesized polypeptides fold and assemble with assistance from protein 
chaperones. Full maturation can take multiple attempts, exchanging chaperones at 
each round. Improperly folded molecules must exit folding cycles and be 
degraded. In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), prolonged substrate cycling is 
detrimental because it expends chaperone and energy resources and increases 
toxic reactive oxygen species. In budding yeast, we found that unfolded protein 
O-mannosylation terminated failed folding attempts through the Pmt1/Pmt2 
complex. O-mannosylation incapacitated target molecule folding and removed them 
from folding cycles by reducing engagement with the Kar2 chaperone. In an in 
vitro protein refolding assay, the modification intrinsically and irreversibly 
disabled the folding potential of the substrate. Thus, protein folding 
termination can involve a covalent glycosylation event.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1234055
PMID: 23704572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
