---
pmid: '7767232'
title: Expression of the auxin-regulated parA gene in transgenic tobacco and nuclear
  localization of its gene products.
authors:
- Takahashi Y
- Hasezawa S
- Kusaba M
- Nagata T
journal: Planta
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/BF00193224
---

# Expression of the auxin-regulated parA gene in transgenic tobacco and nuclear localization of its gene products.
**Authors:** Takahashi Y, Hasezawa S, Kusaba M, Nagata T
**Journal:** Planta (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00193224](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00193224)

## Abstract

1. Planta. 1995;196(1):111-7. doi: 10.1007/BF00193224.

Expression of the auxin-regulated parA gene in transgenic tobacco and nuclear 
localization of its gene products.

Takahashi Y(1), Hasezawa S, Kusaba M, Nagata T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Science, Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, 
Japan.

An auxin-regulated gene, parA, comprises a gene family consisting of a handful 
genes which respond to various signals. Although Droog et al. (Plant Mol. Biol, 
1993, 21, 965-972) postulated that the parA-related genes belong to the family 
of a cytoplasmic enzyme, glutathione S-transferase (GST), we detected a low 
level of GST activity in the parA products, whose value was below 1/30 of that 
of parB products encoding tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) GST. Immunofluorescence 
studies using an antibody against parA protein revealed that the subcellular 
location of parA protein is the nucleus in cultured tobacco mesophyll 
protoplasts, while conventional GSTs' including the parB product were primarily 
located in the cytoplasm. Confocal laser scanning microscopy of tobacco BY-2 
cells showed that the parA product was confined to the nucleus, but was excluded 
from the nucleolus. In addition, exon/intron organization of the parA family was 
appreciably different from that of conventional GSTs including parB. 
Furthermore, the parA protein is much more similar to a 24-kDa protein of 
Escherichia coli that is reported to bind to RNA polymerase. These different 
characteristics of parA compared with to the conventional GSTs, indicate that 
parA protein would have distinct functions, such as involvement in 
transcription, rather than functioning as a conventional GST. Transgenic tobacco 
plants that carried the parA promoter fused to a beta-glucuronidase gene were 
used to show that the parA gene is tissue-specific and also under developmental 
control.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00193224
PMID: 7767232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
