---
pmid: '24140098'
title: A review of the literature on common CYP17A1 mutations in adults with 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase
  deficiency, a case series of such mutations among Koreans and functional characteristics
  of a novel mutation.
authors:
- Kim YM
- Kang M
- Choi JH
- Lee BH
- Kim GH
- Ohn JH
- Kim SY
- Park MS
- Yoo HW
journal: Metabolism
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.08.015
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Review
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# A review of the literature on common CYP17A1 mutations in adults with 17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency, a case series of such mutations among Koreans and functional characteristics of a novel mutation.
**Authors:** Kim YM, Kang M, Choi JH, Lee BH, Kim GH, Ohn JH, Kim SY, Park MS, Yoo HW
**Journal:** Metabolism (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2013.08.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2013.08.015)

## Abstract

1. Metabolism. 2014 Jan;63(1):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.08.015. Epub 2013
 Oct 18.

A review of the literature on common CYP17A1 mutations in adults with 
17-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency, a case series of such mutations among 
Koreans and functional characteristics of a novel mutation.

Kim YM(1), Kang M, Choi JH, Lee BH, Kim GH, Ohn JH, Kim SY, Park MS, Yoo HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency is a rare form of congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia, characterized by hypertension and sexual infantilism and 
caused by loss-of-function mutations in CYP17A1. This study investigated the 
clinical and molecular characteristics of six adults with 
17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency and the functional consequences of a 
novel CYP17A1 mutation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six phenotypic females, three with 46,XY and three with 
46,XX karyotypes, presented with primary amenorrhea and hypertension. All had 
elevated levels of plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone, serum gonadotropin, 
progesterone, and 11-deoxycorticosterone, and reduced testosterone and 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S). All coding exons and flanking intronic 
sequences of CYP17A1 were directly sequenced using genomic DNA. Wild-type and 
mutant CYP17A1 cDNAs were inserted into the pcDNA3.1/V5-His-P450c17 vector, and 
transiently expressed in COS-7 cells. This was followed by an assessment of 
17α-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activities by measuring the conversions of 
progesterone to 17-hydroxyprogesterone and 17-hydroxypregnenolone to DHEA.
RESULTS: The mutation analysis identified one patient with compound 
heterozygosity for p.H373L and p.W406L, one with compound heterozygosity for 
p.H373L and p.A174E, three with compound heterozygosity for p.Y329fs and 
p.H373L, and one with homozygosity for p.H373L. An in vitro functional analysis 
of the novel p.W406L mutation revealed a complete loss of 17α-hydroxylase/17, 
20-lyase activities.
CONCLUSIONS: p.H373L was the most common mutation among these Korean patients, 
consistent with the high allele frequency of p.H373L in Chinese and Japanese 
populations, suggesting possible founder effects in Asian countries. The novel 
p.W406L mutation caused a complete loss of both catalytic activities, indicating 
that this amino acid is critical for P450c17 function.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.08.015
PMID: 24140098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
