---
pmid: '23377137'
title: Expression of caspase-14 and keratin-19 in the human epidermis and appendages
  during fetal skin development.
authors:
- Gkegkes ID
- Aroni K
- Agrogiannis G
- Patsouris ES
- Konstantinidou AE
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1319-8
---

# Expression of caspase-14 and keratin-19 in the human epidermis and appendages during fetal skin development.
**Authors:** Gkegkes ID, Aroni K, Agrogiannis G, Patsouris ES, Konstantinidou AE
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-013-1319-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-013-1319-8)

## Abstract

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2013 Jul;305(5):379-87. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1319-8.
Epub  2013 Feb 3.

Expression of caspase-14 and keratin-19 in the human epidermis and appendages 
during fetal skin development.

Gkegkes ID(1), Aroni K, Agrogiannis G, Patsouris ES, Konstantinidou AE.

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, 75 M.Asias 
Street, 11527 Athens, Greece.

Caspase-14 is a seemingly non-apoptotic caspase involved in keratinocyte 
differentiation and cornification of the skin. Keratin-19 is an epithelial 
marker and a potential marker of epidermal stem cells that is expressed during 
human fetal skin development. We examined the immunohistochemical expression of 
caspase-14 in relation to CK-19 in the human fetal skin during development and 
perinatally, to assess their role in human skin maturation. Skin samples were 
received at autopsy. In the fetal epidermis, caspase-14 was predominantly 
expressed in the more differentiated layers, gradually disappearing from the 
basal layer toward term. By contrast, keratin-19 expression gradually decreased 
with epidermal maturation through gestation (rho = -0.949; p = 0.0001) and was a 
marker of the germinative layers. Keratin-19 was preserved in scarce basal cell 
nests at term and postnatally. Caspase-14 and keratin-19 were inversely 
expressed in the differentiating epidermal layers through gestation (p < 
0.0001). Concerning the appendages, in hair follicles and sebaceous glands, 
caspase-14 located preferentially in the more differentiated layers of the inner 
root sheath, whereas keratin-19 was expressed in the outer sheath. Eccrine sweat 
glands showed a variable pattern of caspase-14 and keratin-19 expression. In 
conclusion, caspase-14 emerged as a marker of human skin differentiation during 
development, while keratin-19 marked the germinative epithelial layers in the 
fetal epidermis and appendages and possibly the nests of epidermal stem cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-013-1319-8
PMID: 23377137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
