---
pmid: '26704641'
title: 'Arabidopsis HY1-Modulated Stomatal Movement: An Integrative Hub Is Functionally
  Associated with ABI4 in Dehydration-Induced ABA Responsiveness.'
authors:
- Xie Y
- Mao Y
- Duan X
- Zhou H
- Lai D
- Zhang Y
- Shen W
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4775125
doi: 10.1104/pp.15.01550
---

# Arabidopsis HY1-Modulated Stomatal Movement: An Integrative Hub Is Functionally Associated with ABI4 in Dehydration-Induced ABA Responsiveness.
**Authors:** Xie Y, Mao Y, Duan X, Zhou H, Lai D, Zhang Y, Shen W
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.15.01550](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.15.01550)
**PMC:** [PMC4775125](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4775125/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2016 Mar;170(3):1699-713. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.01550. Epub 2015
Dec  24.

Arabidopsis HY1-Modulated Stomatal Movement: An Integrative Hub Is Functionally 
Associated with ABI4 in Dehydration-Induced ABA Responsiveness.

Xie Y(1), Mao Y(1), Duan X(1), Zhou H(1), Lai D(1), Zhang Y(1), Shen W(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Laboratory Center of Life Sciences, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Laboratory Center of Life Sciences, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China wbshenh@njau.edu.cn.

Heme oxygenase (HO; EC 1.14.99.3) has recently been proposed as a novel 
component in mediating wide ranges of the plant adaptive signaling processes. 
However, the physiological significance and molecular basis underlying 
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) HO1 (HY1) functioning in drought tolerance 
remained unclear. Here, we report that mutation of HY1 promoted, but 
overexpression of this gene impaired, Arabidopsis drought tolerance. This was 
attributed to the abscisic acid (ABA)-hypersensitive or -hyposensitive 
phenotypes, with the regulation of stomatal closure in particular. However, 
comparative transcriptomic profile analysis showed that the induction of 
numerous ABA/stress-dependent genes in dehydrated wild-type plants was 
differentially impaired in the hy1 mutant. In agreement, ABA-induced ABSCISIC 
ACID-INSENSITIVE4 (ABI4) transcript accumulation was strengthened in the hy1 
mutant. Genetic analysis further identified that the hy1-associated ABA 
hypersensitivity and drought tolerance were arrested in the abi4 background. 
Moreover, the promotion of ABA-triggered up-regulation of RbohD abundance and 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in the hy1 mutant was almost fully blocked 
by the mutation of ABI4, suggesting that the HY1-ABI4 signaling in the wild type 
involved in stomatal closure was dependent on the RbohD-derived ROS production. 
However, hy1-promoted stomatal closure was not affected by a nitric oxide 
scavenger. Correspondingly, ABA-insensitive behaviors in rbohD stomata were not 
affected by either the mutation of HY1 or its ectopic expression in the rbohD 
background, both of which responded significantly to exogenous ROS. These data 
indicate that HY1 functioned negatively and acted upstream of ABI4 in drought 
signaling, which was casually dependent on the RbohD-derived ROS in the 
regulation of stomatal closure.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.15.01550
PMCID: PMC4775125
PMID: 26704641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Heme oxygenase (HO; EC 1.14.99.3) has recently been proposed as a novel component in mediating wide ranges of the plant adaptive signaling processes. However, the physiological significance and molecular basis underlying Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) HO1 ( HY1 ) functioning in drought tolerance remained unclear. Here, we report that mutation of HY1 promoted, but overexpression of this gene impaired, Arabidopsis drought tolerance. This was attributed to the abscisic acid ( ABA )-hypersensitive or -hyposensitive phenotypes, with the regulation of stomatal closure in particular. However, comparative transcriptomic profile analysis showed that the induction of numerous ABA /stress-dependent genes in dehydrated wild-type plants was differentially impaired in the hy1 mutant. In agreement, ABA -induced ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE4 ( ABI4 ) transcript accumulation was strengthened in the hy1 mutant. Genetic analysis further identified that the hy1 -associated ABA hypersensitivity and drought tolerance were arrested in the abi4 background. Moreover, the promotion of ABA -triggered up-regulation of RbohD abundance and reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) levels in the hy1 mutant was almost fully blocked by the mutation of ABI4 , suggesting that the HY1-ABI4 signaling in the wild type involved in stomatal closure was dependent on the RbohD-derived ROS production. However, hy1 -promoted stomatal closure was not affected by a nitric oxide scavenger. Correspondingly, ABA -insensitive behaviors in rbohD stomata were not affected by either the mutation of HY1 or its ectopic expression in the rbohD background, both of which responded significantly to exogenous ROS . These data indicate that HY1 functioned negatively and acted upstream of ABI4 in drought signaling, which was casually dependent on the RbohD-derived ROS in the regulation of stomatal closure.

DISCUSSION

The increasing evidence of HO mediating a wide array of plant physiological processes contrasts with our limited knowledge about the identification of downstream components of its intrinsic signaling cascade ( Shekhawat and Verma, 2010 ). In this study, by using genetic, pharmacological, and physiological approaches, we showed the biological functions of HY1 during drought stress responses, in which HY1 negatively regulated ABI4 in ABA -induced stomatal closure driven by the RbohD-derived ROS . By investigating the consequences of loss and gain of function of HY1 on the drought stress adaptation of Arabidopsis plants, we found that hy1 mutants were tolerant to drought stress ( Fig. 1A ). In agreement with the loss-of-function study, overexpression of HY1 consequently impaired the drought tolerance of transgenic plants. These results clearly demonstrated that HY1 can act as a negative regulator in drought stress signaling in Arabidopsis ( Fig. 6C ).

A subsequent question was, how did a positive regulator of salinity signaling ( Xie et al., 2011 ) negatively regulate Arabidopsis drought tolerance? In an attempt to explain this phenomenon at the molecular level, we performed RNA-Seq analysis, which revealed an impaired expression of multiple stress- and/or ABA -inducible genes in the hy1-100 mutant upon water deficiency ( Fig. 1, B and C ). Some of these genes had functions in ABA -dependent pathways, including GST11 and RD29A , whose overexpression enhanced drought tolerance ( Supplemental Table S1 ; Umezawa et al., 2006 ; Valliyodan and Nguyen, 2006 ; Seki et al., 2007 ). The transcriptomic results showed that HY1 might function upstream of these ABA -inducible genes and positively control the ABA signaling pathway by the induction of multiple stress-responsive genes. However, it was observed that the expression of these stress-inducible genes was enriched in the wild type, which seemed to contradict the drought-tolerant phenotype of hy1-100 . Furthermore, it was noteworthy that a group of genes belonging to the GO transport category were strongly up-regulated in the hy1-100 mutant upon drought stress, in comparison with the wild type ( Fig. 1C ). These genes encode important transmembrane transporters that function to move ions or anions across the plasma membrane, such as AtHAK5 , MATE efflux family proteins, as well as GORK ( Supplemental Table S1 ). It is possible that the observed enhanced expression of the transporters could result in an increased ion flux across the membranes, with guard cell potassium efflux in particular, which may in turn regulate the cell osmolarity and degree of stomatal apertures, subsequently leading to drought tolerance. Accordingly, it was reported that Arabidopsis plants with impaired K + efflux ability presented impaired ABA -mediated stomatal closing and reduced survival of drought stress ( Osakabe et al., 2013 ). We will discuss and verify this point in detail in the following section.

It is well known that ABA regulates plant drought adaptation mainly through its functions in cellular dehydration tolerance and by conserving a higher water status ( Lee and Luan, 2012 ). The former role has been attributed mainly to the induction of dehydration-responsive genes, and the latter trait was associated with the regulation of guard cell movement ( Pierik and Testerink, 2014 ). Our examination of several physiological aspects demonstrated that the hy1 -dependent Arabidopsis drought tolerance was ascribed to the function of HY1 in the regulation of ABA contents and responses, with guard cell movement in particular ( Fig. 2 ; Supplemental Fig. S1 ). For example, compared with the wild type, seed germination, early seedling development and growth (except primary root growth), as well as stomatal closure were hypersensitive to ABA in the hy1-100 and hy1-1 mutant alleles but ABA insensitive in HY1 -overexpressed transgenic plants. In particular, our stomata results illustrated that HY1 negatively affected ABA signaling in guard cells, thereafter modulating Arabidopsis drought tolerance. In comparison, Shen et al. (2006) and Tomiyama et al. (2014) showed normal or partial ABA -insensitive phenotypes in the genome uncoupled2 ( gun2 ) /hy1 mutant, respectively. Combined with our findings, these results added more complex features to the control of guard cell signaling, and further investigation will be needed to fully clarify the direct target of HY1 involved in ABA signaling in guard cells. Meanwhile, one possible explanation of the above-mentioned impairment of the up-regulation of stress/ ABA -inducible genes in drought-stressed hy1-100 plants might be its hypersensitivity in terms of stomatal closure. This, in turn, would conserve a higher water status, thereby resulting in down-regulation feedback on the induced genes. It was noteworthy that the ABA -induced responses, such as radicle protrusion ( Fig. 2D ) and stomatal movement ( Fig. 2C ), were greatly impaired but not fully eliminated when HY1 was overexpressed, indicating that some ABA signaling cascades remain. We deduced that additional factors may retain sufficient activity to trigger the observed residual response. Another possibility was that there was an HY1 -independent, ABA -responsive pathway that controls these responses. It was also observed that disruption or overexpression of HY1 did not cause significant alternation of the ABA -inhibited primary root growth. These results implied the functional segregation of HY1 in the regulation of multiple ABA responses. Similar segregated behavior was found between Arabidopsis SnRK2.6 and SnRK2.2/2.3, suggesting that SnRK2.6 functions in guard cells, whereas SnRK2.2/2.3 specializes in seed germination and seedling growth ( Fujii and Zhu, 2009 ). Taken together, the improved performance of the hy1-100 mutant plants under limiting water conditions was associated with its enhanced ABA content and increased ABA sensitivity, thus leading to the promotion of the ABA -induced stomatal closure.

The formation of biliverdin catalyzed by HY1 plays a fundamental role in phytochrome chromophore biosynthesis. Biliverdin is coordinated with phytochrome apoprotein biosynthesis pathways to synthesize photochemically active phytochrome, an essential step for proper photomorphogenesis in plants ( Muramoto et al., 1999 ). The cytosol-synthesized PHYTOCHROME (PHY) apoproteins are encoded by small families of nuclear genes (PHYA–PHYE in Arabidopsis; Sharrock and Quail, 1989 ). It has been reported that PHYB increases drought tolerance by enhancing ABA sensitivity in Arabidopsis ( González et al., 2012 ). It should be noted that hy1 is a phytochromobilin-deficient mutant ( Muramoto et al., 1999 ). Therefore, the hypersensitive closed-stomata phenotype in hy1 might be unlikely due to the PHY-associated light signaling.

HY1 was identified through the characterization of gun2 mutants that block the chloroplast-to-nucleus retrograde signaling ( Muramoto et al., 1999 ; Mochizuki et al., 2001 ). ABI4 has been proposed as the master switch that controls the expression of a large number of nuclear genes in response to plastid-derived signals ( Wind et al., 2013 ). Ample evidence implies that plastid-to-nucleus signaling and ABA signaling may be interconnected ( Voigt et al., 2010 ). For example, the chloroplast protein PTM connects the plastid GUN1 pathway with the nuclear ABI4 pathway ( Sun et al., 2011 ), while downstream components of ABI4 are CYP707A1 and CYP707A2 as well as a cluster of the heme activator proteins ( Zhang et al., 2013 ). Our results suggested a potent coordination between HY1 and ABI4 involved in chloroplast-to-nucleus retrograde signaling ( Supplemental Fig. S8 ). It was further demonstrated that ABI4 appears to be a downstream component of HY1 in controlling a subset of ABA responses. First, ABA -induced ABI4 mRNA abundance was more pronounced in the hy1-100 mutant seedling, suggesting the processing role of hy1 in the activation of ABI4 ( Fig. 3F ). Second, ABI4 promoter - derived GUS activities were moderately higher when HY1 activity was blocked by ZnPPIX in the presence or absence of ABA ( Fig. 3G ). Therefore, the promotion of ABA -induced ABI4 is most likely caused by the loss of function of HY1 in the hy1-100 mutant. Third, the ABA -hypersensitive phenotype of hy1-100 , in terms of ABA -inhibited seed germination and postgermination development, as well as the guard cell movement but not primary root growth, could be almost fully abolished by the mutation of ABI4 ( Fig. 3, A–E ). Finally, guard cell developmental processes were also regulated by HY1 and ABI4 , as evaluated by stoma size and number ( Supplemental Figs. S9 and S10 ). Importantly, the drought-tolerant phenotype of hy1-100 was markedly blocked by the mutation of ABI4 , while a single mutation of ABI4 did not significantly alter the plant response to drought stress compared with that of the wild type ( Fig. 3H ). Similarly, the abi4 mutant showed weaker drought tolerance after norflurazon treatment ( Zhang et al., 2013 ). These results all supported the view that tetrapyrrole and ABI4 signaling were coordinated and indicated the biological significance of retrograde signaling associated with plant drought tolerance. In contrast, Finkelstein (1994) reported that the abi4 mutants showed no difference from the wild type in stomatal closure (data not shown). These discrepancies indicated the complex signaling network of guard cells and plant drought tolerance.

Previous studies have reported the linearity existing among ABA , H 2 O 2 , and NO signaling in the control of stomatal closure and drought tolerance ( Bright et al., 2006 ; Wilkinson and Davies, 2010 ). Previous investigations have also showed that ABI4 was activated to regulate redox signaling in mature plants ( Kerchev et al., 2011 , 2013 ). In this study, a genetic approach was adopted to characterize the downstream module of the HY1-ABI4-mediated ABA response with respect to stomatal closure and drought tolerance. Our assessment of stomatal aperture has clarified that the HY1-ABI4-controlled guard cell movement was associated with RbohD-dependent ROS production ( Fig. 5 ). Remarkably, ROS production in guard cells or leaves in hy1-100 plants was promoted, as monitored using a ROS fluorescence probe. The concomitant stomatal closure was largely impaired by abi4 compared with the wild type ( Fig. 5, A and C ). Stomatal closure of the ABA -treated hy1-100 mutant could be attenuated by the removal of H 2 O 2 . In a number of physiological responses, especially guard movement, NO production was dependent on ROS generation (especially H 2 O 2 synthesis; Bright et al., 2006 ). The data in this study demonstrated that ABA -induced stomatal closure in wild-type plants was greatly reduced in the presence of the NO scavenger cPTIO but was not so strongly affected in the hy1-100 , abi4 , and hy1-100/abi4 mutant lines ( Fig. 4 ). These data implied that endogenous NO may not be involved in hy1 -promoted ABA hypersensitivity in stomatal closure, at least under our experimental conditions. By contrast, all mutants responded significantly to SNP and NONOate, two NO -releasing compounds, as well as in the wild type. Our data thus provide evidence that the ABA -induced HY1-ABI4- ROS guard cell signaling propagation remains divergent from NO signaling at some points and may relate to a mechanism that is independent of de novo NO biosynthesis ( Lozano-Juste and León, 2010 ).

It has been demonstrated that ROS mainly produced by NADPH oxidases are crucial for mediating ion homeostasis in Arabidopsis roots ( Ma et al., 2012 ). In this study, we present evidence of a positive function for RbohD in HY1-ABI4 signal propagation and the activation of stomatal closure. The increasing tendencies of ABA -induced RbohD expression in the wild type were accelerated in hy1-100 but depressed in abi4 and hy1-100/abi4 mutants ( Fig. 6A ). These results implied a putative role of hy1 and ABI4 in the activation of RbohD expression, which would be important for controlling guard cell movement. Moreover, either overexpression or null mutation of HY1 could not alter the ABA hyposensitivity of rbohD in terms of stomatal closure ( Fig. 6B ), further placing RbohD as a downstream component of HY1-ABI4 signaling in the wild type. However, compared with wild-type plants, all mutant lines responded strongly to exogenous H 2 O 2 , which was similar to the behavior of SNP and NONOate ( Fig. 4 ). Taken together, these results identified the requirement for RbohD-related ROS generation in the propagation of ABA -activated HY1-ABI4 signaling to control stomatal closure in wild-type plants. Our previous investigations reported the participation of RbohD-derived ROS in relaying HY1-mediated salt acclimation signaling ( Xie et al., 2011 ). RbohD was also required for the pathogen response and systemic signaling ( Marino et al., 2012 ). Therefore, in order to adapt to the continually exposed changes of living conditions, the differential organic localization (root or leaf, etc.) of RbohD appears to facilitate its broad-range functions in the spatiotemporal control of ROS production and delivering complex signaling processes.

Unequivocally, the GORK channel is highly expressed in guard cells and thought to provide the main barrier for K + loss to drive stomatal closure, which is important for plant adaptation to environmental changes ( Ache et al., 2000 ; Imes et al., 2013 ; Osakabe et al., 2013 ). Our transcriptomic and Q-PCR data showed that a subset of transporter transcripts were strongly up-regulated in the hy1-100 mutant upon drought stress, including GORK ( Supplemental Table S2 ; Supplemental Fig. S1 ). Preliminary molecular, physiological, and genetic experiments illustrated that Arabidopsis lacking functional GORK displays impaired stomatal closure in response to ABA and H 2 O 2 ( Supplemental Fig. S14 ). These results implied the potential role of GORK activation (K + homeostasis) for HY1-ABI4-RbohD-mediated ABA signaling in the induction of stomatal closure and drought stress responses. In addition, the differential cell part localization of HY1 (plastid; Muramoto et al., 1999 ), ABI4 (nucleus; Sun et al., 2011 ; Zhang et al., 2013 ), and GORK (guard cell; Ache et al., 2000 ; Osakabe et al., 2013 ) suggested that we still do not know what determines the relay of this observed cascade, directly or indirectly.

HY1 is involved in the tetrapyrrole biosynthetic pathway. Recently, the significance of tetrapyrrole-based drought stress signaling was addressed, and this signaling was favored toward free heme production owing to drought-induced secondary events, including chloroplast-localized oxidative stress ( Nagahatenna et al., 2015 ). Therefore, it was reasonable to hypothesize that the hy1 -promoted drought tolerance may result from the sustained free heme status ( Phung et al., 2011 ). Free heme was proposed to activate a series of drought-responsive and ROS detoxification genes that could also be utilized to generate heme-derived antioxidant biomolecules for defense. However, noncovalently bound heme in hy1-100 seedlings was lower than that in the wild type ( Supplemental Table S1 ). More importantly, the transcriptomic data showed that a broad range of genes related to abiotic/biotic stress responses appeared in the wild type upon drought stress, but not in the hy1-100 mutant ( Fig. 1C ). It was also observed that ROS production was more pronounced upon ABA treatment in hy1-100 leaves ( Fig. 5, A and B ). Therefore, these results indicated that free heme status does not account for the drought-tolerant phenotype of the hy1 mutant, indicating that other factors may be responsible for hy1 -promoted Arabidopsis drought tolerance. Supporting this notion was the finding that Arabidopsis ferrochelatase1 mutants produced significantly less total heme upon oxidative stress when compared with wild-type plants ( Nagai et al., 2007 ), whereas no expected hypersensitive mutant phenotype was observed ( Scharfenberg et al., 2015 ). Thus, future investigations should unravel the interrelationship between the biological function of HY1 and free heme-associated ROS detoxification.

In conclusion, we have identified, to our knowledge, a novel pathway linking the mutation of HY1 with ABA biosynthesis, several ABA responses, and drought tolerance. Disruption of HY1 expression leads to the activation of ABI4 , thereby increasing the RbohD enzyme with consequently elevated levels of ROS production ( Fig. 6C ). Thereafter, the increased ROS induce stomatal closure, as reflected in ABA -promoted drought tolerance. It is possible that ion channels such as GORK participate in this signal propagation and also function in the stomatal response, thus enhancing drought tolerance ( Osakabe et al., 2013 ). These findings extend our knowledge of the gene expression regulation network to stress conditions. They also open the possibility to engineer transgenic plants with enhanced drought tolerance by reducing HY1 levels using a guard cell-specific approach.
