---
pmid: '24813853'
title: 'Understanding carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS1) deficiency by using the
  recombinantly purified human enzyme: effects of CPS1 mutations that concentrate
  in a central domain of unknown function.'
authors:
- Díez-Fernández C
- Hu L
- Cervera J
- Häberle J
- Rubio V
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.04.003
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Understanding carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS1) deficiency by using the recombinantly purified human enzyme: effects of CPS1 mutations that concentrate in a central domain of unknown function.
**Authors:** Díez-Fernández C, Hu L, Cervera J, Häberle J, Rubio V
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.04.003)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2014 Jun;112(2):123-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.04.003.
Epub  2014 Apr 18.

Understanding carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS1) deficiency by using the 
recombinantly purified human enzyme: effects of CPS1 mutations that concentrate 
in a central domain of unknown function.

Díez-Fernández C(1), Hu L(2), Cervera J(3), Häberle J(4), Rubio V(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia of the CSIC, Valencia, Spain.
(2)University Children's Hospital, Zurich and Children's Research Center, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia of the CSIC, Valencia, Spain; Group 739 
of the Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER) del Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain.
(4)University Children's Hospital, Zurich and Children's Research Center, 
Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: johannes.haeberle@kispi.uzh.ch.
(5)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia of the CSIC, Valencia, Spain; Group 739 
of the Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER) del Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Spain. Electronic address: 
rubio@ibv.csic.es.

Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 deficiency (CPS1D) is an inborn error of the 
urea cycle that is due to mutations in the CPS1 gene. In the first large 
repertory of mutations found in CPS1D, a small CPS1 domain of unknown function 
(called the UFSD) was found to host missense changes with high frequency, 
despite the fact that this domain does not host substrate-binding or catalytic 
machinery. We investigate here by in vitro expression studies using 
baculovirus/insect cells the reasons for the prominence of the UFSD in CPS1D, as 
well as the disease-causing roles and pathogenic mechanisms of the mutations 
affecting this domain. All but three of the 18 missense changes found thus far 
mapping in this domain in CPS1D patients drastically decreased the yield of pure 
CPS1, mainly because of decreased enzyme solubility, strongly suggesting 
misfolding as a major determinant of the mutations negative effects. In 
addition, the majority of the mutations also decreased from modestly to very 
drastically the specific activity of the fraction of the enzyme that remained 
soluble and that could be purified, apparently because they decreased V(max). 
Substantial although not dramatic increases in K(m) values for the substrates or 
for N-acetyl-L-glutamate were observed for only five mutations. Similarly, 
important thermal stability decreases were observed for three mutations. The 
results indicate a disease-causing role for all the mutations, due in most cases 
to the combined effects of the low enzyme level and the decreased activity. Our 
data strongly support the value of the present expression system for 
ascertaining the disease-causing potential of CPS1 mutations, provided that the 
CPS1 yield is monitored. The observed effects of the mutations have been 
rationalized on the basis of an existing structural model of CPS1. This model 
shows that the UFSD, which is in the middle of the 1462-residue multidomain CPS1 
protein, plays a key integrating role for creating the CPS1 multidomain 
architecture leading us to propose here a denomination of "Integrating Domain" 
for this CPS1 region. The majority of these 18 mutations distort the interaction 
of this domain with other CPS1 domains, in many cases by causing improper 
folding of structural elements of the Integrating Domain that play key roles in 
these interactions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.04.003
PMID: 24813853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
