---
pmid: '11493548'
title: Hierarchical coupling of phytochromes and cryptochromes reconciles stability
  and light modulation of Arabidopsis development.
authors:
- Mazzella MA
- Cerdán PD
- Staneloni RJ
- Casal JJ
journal: Development
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.128.12.2291
---

# Hierarchical coupling of phytochromes and cryptochromes reconciles stability and light modulation of Arabidopsis development.
**Authors:** Mazzella MA, Cerdán PD, Staneloni RJ, Casal JJ
**Journal:** Development (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.128.12.2291](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.128.12.2291)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2001 Jun;128(12):2291-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.128.12.2291.

Hierarchical coupling of phytochromes and cryptochromes reconciles stability and 
light modulation of Arabidopsis development.

Mazzella MA(1), Cerdán PD, Staneloni RJ, Casal JJ.

Author information:
(1)IFEVA, Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Avenida San Martín 
4453, 1417-Buenos Aires, Argentina.

In plants, development is a continuing process that takes place under strong 
fluctuations of the light environment. Here we show that in Arabidopsis thaliana 
plants grown under intense white light, coupling of the photoreceptor 
cryptochrome 2 to developmental processes is broader than previously 
appreciated. Compared to the wild type, the cry2 mutant showed reduced activity 
of a Lhcb1*2 promoter fused to a reporter, and delayed flowering. The cry2 
mutation also reduced the inhibition of hypocotyl growth, the unfolding of the 
cotyledons, the rate of leaf production during the vegetative phase, and the 
pace of development after transition to the reproductive stage; but these 
effects were obvious only in the absence of cryptochrome 1 and in some cases 
phytochrome A and/or phytochrome B. Complementary, the cry2 mutation uncovered 
novel roles for cryptochrome 1 and phytochrome A. The activity of the Lhcb1*2 
promoter was higher in the cry1 cry2 mutant than in the cry2 mutant, suggesting 
that cry1 could be involved in blue-light repression of photosynthetic genes. 
Surprisingly, the phyA cry1 cry2 triple mutant flowered earlier and showed 
better response to photoperiod than the cry1 cry2 double mutant, indicating that 
phyA is involved in light repression of flowering. Growth and development were 
severely impaired in the quadruple phyA phyB cry1 cry2 mutant. We propose that 
stability and light modulation of development are achieved by simultaneous 
coupling of phytochrome A, phytochrome B, cryptochrome 1 and cryptochrome 2 to 
developmental processes, in combination with context-dependent hierarchy of 
their relative activities.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.128.12.2291
PMID: 11493548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
