---
pmid: '9845368'
title: PIF3, a phytochrome-interacting factor necessary for normal photoinduced signal
  transduction, is a novel basic helix-loop-helix protein.
authors:
- Ni M
- Tepperman JM
- Quail PH
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81636-0
---

# PIF3, a phytochrome-interacting factor necessary for normal photoinduced signal transduction, is a novel basic helix-loop-helix protein.
**Authors:** Ni M, Tepperman JM, Quail PH
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81636-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81636-0)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1998 Nov 25;95(5):657-67. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81636-0.

PIF3, a phytochrome-interacting factor necessary for normal photoinduced signal 
transduction, is a novel basic helix-loop-helix protein.

Ni M(1), Tepperman JM, Quail PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley 
94720, USA.

The mechanism by which the phytochrome (phy) photoreceptor family transduces 
informational light signals to photoresponsive genes is unknown. Using a yeast 
two-hybrid screen, we have identified a phytochrome-interacting factor, PIF3, a 
basic helix-loop-helix protein containing a PAS domain. PIF3 binds to wild-type 
C-terminal domains of both phyA and phyB, but less strongly to 
signaling-defective, missense mutant-containing domains. Expression of sense or 
antisense PIF3 sequences in transgenic Arabidopsis perturbs photoresponsiveness 
in a manner indicating that PIF3 functions in both phyA and phyB signaling 
pathways in vivo. PIF3 localized to the nucleus in transient transfection 
experiments, indicating a potential role in controlling gene expression. 
Together, the data suggest that phytochrome signaling to photoregulated genes 
includes a direct pathway involving physical interaction between the 
photoreceptor and a transcriptional regulator.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81636-0
PMID: 9845368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
