---
pmid: '15543146'
title: Mutations in PTF1A cause pancreatic and cerebellar agenesis.
authors:
- Sellick GS
- Barker KT
- Stolte-Dijkstra I
- Fleischmann C
- Coleman RJ
- Garrett C
- Gloyn AL
- Edghill EL
- Hattersley AT
- Wellauer PK
- Goodwin G
- Houlston RS
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng1475
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in PTF1A cause pancreatic and cerebellar agenesis.
**Authors:** Sellick GS, Barker KT, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Fleischmann C, Coleman RJ, Garrett C, Gloyn AL, Edghill EL, Hattersley AT, Wellauer PK, Goodwin G, Houlston RS
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1475](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1475)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Dec;36(12):1301-5. doi: 10.1038/ng1475. Epub 2004 Nov 14.

Mutations in PTF1A cause pancreatic and cerebellar agenesis.

Sellick GS(1), Barker KT, Stolte-Dijkstra I, Fleischmann C, Coleman RJ, Garrett 
C, Gloyn AL, Edghill EL, Hattersley AT, Wellauer PK, Goodwin G, Houlston RS.

Author information:
(1)Section of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

Individuals with permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus usually present within the 
first three months of life and require insulin treatment. We recently identified 
a locus on chromosome 10p13-p12.1 involved in permanent neonatal diabetes 
mellitus associated with pancreatic and cerebellar agenesis in a genome-wide 
linkage search of a consanguineous Pakistani family. Here we report the further 
linkage analysis of this family and a second family of Northern European descent 
segregating an identical phenotype. Positional cloning identified the mutations 
705insG and C886T in the gene PTF1A, encoding pancreas transcription factor 
1alpha, as disease-causing sequence changes. Both mutations cause truncation of 
the expressed PTF1A protein C-terminal to the basic-helix-loop-helix domain. 
Reporter-gene studies using a minimal PTF1A deletion mutant indicate that the 
deleted region defines a new domain that is crucial for the function of this 
protein. PTF1A is known to have a role in mammalian pancreatic development, and 
the clinical phenotype of the affected individuals implicated the protein as a 
key regulator of cerebellar neurogenesis. The essential role of PTF1A in normal 
cerebellar development was confirmed by detailed neuropathological analysis of 
Ptf1a(-/-) mice.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1475
PMID: 15543146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
