---
pmid: '15294159'
title: Regulation of the myosin-directed chaperone UNC-45 by a novel E3/E4-multiubiquitylation
  complex in C. elegans.
authors:
- Hoppe T
- Cassata G
- Barral JM
- Springer W
- Hutagalung AH
- Epstein HF
- Baumeister R
journal: Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.014
---

# Regulation of the myosin-directed chaperone UNC-45 by a novel E3/E4-multiubiquitylation complex in C. elegans.
**Authors:** Hoppe T, Cassata G, Barral JM, Springer W, Hutagalung AH, Epstein HF, Baumeister R
**Journal:** Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.014)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2004 Aug 6;118(3):337-49. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.014.

Regulation of the myosin-directed chaperone UNC-45 by a novel 
E3/E4-multiubiquitylation complex in C. elegans.

Hoppe T(1), Cassata G, Barral JM, Springer W, Hutagalung AH, Epstein HF, 
Baumeister R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurogenetics, Adolph-Butenandt-Institute, Ludwig 
Maximilians University, Schillerstrasse 44, 80336 Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell. 2004 Aug 6;118(3):272-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.020.

The organization of the motor protein myosin into motile cellular structures 
requires precise temporal and spatial control. Caenorhabditis elegans UNC-45 
facilitates this by functioning both as a chaperone and as a Hsp90 cochaperone 
for myosin during thick filament assembly. Consequently, mutations in C. elegans 
unc-45 result in paralyzed animals with severe myofibril disorganization in 
striated body wall muscles. Here, we report a new E3/E4 complex, formed by 
CHN-1, the C. elegans ortholog of CHIP (carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting 
protein), and UFD-2, an enzyme known to have ubiquitin conjugating E4 activity 
in yeast, as necessary and sufficient to multiubiquitylate UNC-45 in vitro. The 
phenotype of unc-45 temperature-sensitive animals is partially suppressed by 
chn-1 loss of function, while UNC-45 overexpression in worms deficient for chn-1 
results in severely disorganized muscle cells. These results identify CHN-1 and 
UFD-2 as a functional E3/E4 complex and UNC-45 as its physiologically relevant 
substrate.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.014
PMID: 15294159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
