---
pmid: '23042605'
title: DVC1 (C1orf124) is a DNA damage-targeting p97 adaptor that promotes ubiquitin-dependent
  responses to replication blocks.
authors:
- Mosbech A
- Gibbs-Seymour I
- Kagias K
- Thorslund T
- Beli P
- Povlsen L
- Nielsen SV
- Smedegaard S
- Sedgwick G
- Lukas C
- Hartmann-Petersen R
- Lukas J
- Choudhary C
- Pocock R
- Bekker-Jensen S
- Mailand N
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2395
---

# DVC1 (C1orf124) is a DNA damage-targeting p97 adaptor that promotes ubiquitin-dependent responses to replication blocks.
**Authors:** Mosbech A, Gibbs-Seymour I, Kagias K, Thorslund T, Beli P, Povlsen L, Nielsen SV, Smedegaard S, Sedgwick G, Lukas C, Hartmann-Petersen R, Lukas J, Choudhary C, Pocock R, Bekker-Jensen S, Mailand N
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2395](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2395)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Nov;19(11):1084-92. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2395. Epub
2012  Oct 7.

DVC1 (C1orf124) is a DNA damage-targeting p97 adaptor that promotes 
ubiquitin-dependent responses to replication blocks.

Mosbech A(1), Gibbs-Seymour I, Kagias K, Thorslund T, Beli P, Povlsen L, Nielsen 
SV, Smedegaard S, Sedgwick G, Lukas C, Hartmann-Petersen R, Lukas J, Choudhary 
C, Pocock R, Bekker-Jensen S, Mailand N.

Author information:
(1)Ubiquitin Signaling Group, Department of Disease Biology, Novo Nordisk 
Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Ubiquitin-mediated processes orchestrate critical DNA-damage signaling and 
repair pathways. We identify human DVC1 (C1orf124; Spartan) as a cell 
cycle-regulated anaphase-promoting complex (APC) substrate that accumulates at 
stalled replication forks. DVC1 recruitment to sites of replication stress 
requires its ubiquitin-binding UBZ domain and PCNA-binding PIP box motif but is 
independent of RAD18-mediated PCNA monoubiquitylation. Via a conserved SHP box, 
DVC1 recruits the ubiquitin-selective chaperone p97 to blocked replication 
forks, which may facilitate p97-dependent removal of translesion synthesis (TLS) 
DNA polymerase η (Pol η) from monoubiquitylated PCNA. DVC1 knockdown enhances UV 
light-induced mutagenesis, and depletion of human DVC1 or the Caenorhabditis 
elegans ortholog DVC-1 causes hypersensitivity to replication stress-inducing 
agents. Our findings establish DVC1 as a DNA damage-targeting p97 adaptor that 
protects cells from deleterious consequences of replication blocks and suggest 
an important role of p97 in ubiquitin-dependent regulation of TLS.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2395
PMID: 23042605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
