---
pmid: '19662078'
title: Recognition of an intra-chain tandem 14-3-3 binding site within PKCepsilon.
authors:
- Kostelecky B
- Saurin AT
- Purkiss A
- Parker PJ
- McDonald NQ
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2750047
doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.150
---

# Recognition of an intra-chain tandem 14-3-3 binding site within PKCepsilon.
**Authors:** Kostelecky B, Saurin AT, Purkiss A, Parker PJ, McDonald NQ
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/embor.2009.150](https://doi.org/10.1038/embor.2009.150)
**PMC:** [PMC2750047](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2750047/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2009 Sep;10(9):983-9. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.150. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Recognition of an intra-chain tandem 14-3-3 binding site within PKCepsilon.

Kostelecky B(1), Saurin AT, Purkiss A, Parker PJ, McDonald NQ.

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology Laboratory, London Research Institute, Cancer Research UK, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

The phosphoserine/threonine binding protein 14-3-3 stimulates the catalytic 
activity of protein kinase C-epsilon (PKCepsilon) by engaging two tandem 
phosphoserine-containing motifs located between the PKCepsilon regulatory and 
catalytic domains (V3 region). Interaction between 14-3-3 and this region of 
PKCepsilon is essential for the completion of cytokinesis. Here, we report the 
crystal structure of 14-3-3zeta bound to a synthetic diphosphorylated PKCepsilon 
V3 region revealing how a consensus 14-3-3 site and a divergent 14-3-3 site 
cooperate to bind to 14-3-3 and so activate PKCepsilon. Thermodynamic data show 
a markedly enhanced binding affinity for two-site phosphopeptides over 
single-site 14-3-3 binding motifs and identifies Ser 368 as a gatekeeper 
phosphorylation site in this physiologically relevant 14-3-3 ligand. This 
dual-site intra-chain recognition has implications for other 14-3-3 targets, 
which seem to have only a single 14-3-3 motif, as other lower affinity and 
cryptic 14-3-3 gatekeeper sites might exist.

DOI: 10.1038/embor.2009.150
PMCID: PMC2750047
PMID: 19662078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
