---
pmid: '22258505'
title: Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose homeostasis.
authors:
- He C
- Bassik MC
- Moresi V
- Sun K
- Wei Y
- Zou Z
- An Z
- Loh J
- Fisher J
- Sun Q
- Korsmeyer S
- Packer M
- May HI
- Hill JA
- Virgin HW
- Gilpin C
- Xiao G
- Bassel-Duby R
- Scherer PE
- Levine B
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3518436
doi: 10.1038/nature10758
---

# Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose homeostasis.
**Authors:** He C, Bassik MC, Moresi V, Sun K, Wei Y, Zou Z, An Z, Loh J, Fisher J, Sun Q, Korsmeyer S, Packer M, May HI, Hill JA, Virgin HW, Gilpin C, Xiao G, Bassel-Duby R, Scherer PE, Levine B
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature10758](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10758)
**PMC:** [PMC3518436](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518436/)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2012 Jan 18;481(7382):511-5. doi: 10.1038/nature10758.

Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose 
homeostasis.

He C(1), Bassik MC, Moresi V, Sun K, Wei Y, Zou Z, An Z, Loh J, Fisher J, Sun Q, 
Korsmeyer S, Packer M, May HI, Hill JA, Virgin HW, Gilpin C, Xiao G, Bassel-Duby 
R, Scherer PE, Levine B.

Author information:
(1)Center for Autophagy Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2013 Nov 7:503(7474):146.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb 01;13(3):136. doi: 10.1038/nrm3287.
    Cell Metab. 2012 Mar 7;15(3):273-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.02.008.

Exercise has beneficial effects on human health, including protection against 
metabolic disorders such as diabetes. However, the cellular mechanisms 
underlying these effects are incompletely understood. The lysosomal degradation 
pathway, autophagy, is an intracellular recycling system that functions during 
basal conditions in organelle and protein quality control. During stress, 
increased levels of autophagy permit cells to adapt to changing nutritional and 
energy demands through protein catabolism. Moreover, in animal models, autophagy 
protects against diseases such as cancer, neurodegenerative disorders, 
infections, inflammatory diseases, ageing and insulin resistance. Here we show 
that acute exercise induces autophagy in skeletal and cardiac muscle of fed 
mice. To investigate the role of exercise-mediated autophagy in vivo, we 
generated mutant mice that show normal levels of basal autophagy but are 
deficient in stimulus (exercise- or starvation)-induced autophagy. These mice 
(termed BCL2 AAA mice) contain knock-in mutations in BCL2 phosphorylation sites 
(Thr69Ala, Ser70Ala and Ser84Ala) that prevent stimulus-induced disruption of 
the BCL2-beclin-1 complex and autophagy activation. BCL2 AAA mice show decreased 
endurance and altered glucose metabolism during acute exercise, as well as 
impaired chronic exercise-mediated protection against high-fat-diet-induced 
glucose intolerance. Thus, exercise induces autophagy, BCL2 is a crucial 
regulator of exercise- (and starvation)-induced autophagy in vivo, and autophagy 
induction may contribute to the beneficial metabolic effects of exercise.

DOI: 10.1038/nature10758
PMCID: PMC3518436
PMID: 22258505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
