---
pmid: '25736436'
title: WDFY1 mediates TLR3/4 signaling by recruiting TRIF.
authors:
- Hu YH
- Zhang Y
- Jiang LQ
- Wang S
- Lei CQ
- Sun MS
- Shu HB
- Liu Y
journal: EMBO Rep
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4388611
doi: 10.15252/embr.201439637
---

# WDFY1 mediates TLR3/4 signaling by recruiting TRIF.
**Authors:** Hu YH, Zhang Y, Jiang LQ, Wang S, Lei CQ, Sun MS, Shu HB, Liu Y
**Journal:** EMBO Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embr.201439637](https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201439637)
**PMC:** [PMC4388611](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4388611/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):447-55. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439637. Epub 2015 Mar
3.

WDFY1 mediates TLR3/4 signaling by recruiting TRIF.

Hu YH(1), Zhang Y(1), Jiang LQ(1), Wang S(1), Lei CQ(1), Sun MS(1), Shu HB(1), 
Liu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Medical Research Institute College of Life 
Sciences Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Medical Research Institute College of Life 
Sciences Wuhan University, Wuhan, China yuliu@whu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):397-8. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540145.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern recognition receptors that sense a 
variety of pathogens, initiate innate immune responses, and direct adaptive 
immunity. All TLRs except TLR3 recruit the adaptor MyD88 to ultimately elicit 
inflammatory gene expression, whereas TLR3 and internalized TLR4 use 
TIR-domain-containing adaptor TRIF for the induction of type I interferon and 
inflammatory cytokines. Here, we identify the WD repeat and 
FYVE-domain-containing protein WDFY1 as a crucial adaptor protein in the TLR3/4 
signaling pathway. Overexpression of WDFY1 potentiates TLR3- and TLR4-mediated 
activation of NF-κB, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and production of 
type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. WDFY1 depletion has the opposite 
effect. WDFY1 interacts with TLR3 and TLR4 and mediates the recruitment of TRIF 
to these receptors. Our findings suggest a crucial role for WDFY1 in bridging 
the TLR-TRIF interaction, which is necessary for TLR signaling.

© 2015 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201439637
PMCID: PMC4388611
PMID: 25736436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern recognition receptors that sense a variety of pathogens, initiate innate immune responses, and direct adaptive immunity. All TLRs except TLR3 recruit the adaptor MyD88 to ultimately elicit inflammatory gene expression, whereas TLR3 and internalized TLR4 use TIR-domain-containing adaptor TRIF for the induction of type I interferon and inflammatory cytokines. Here, we identify the WD repeat and FYVE-domain-containing protein WDFY1 as a crucial adaptor protein in the TLR3/4 signaling pathway. Overexpression of WDFY1 potentiates TLR3- and TLR4-mediated activation of NF-κB, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and production of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. WDFY1 depletion has the opposite effect. WDFY1 interacts with TLR3 and TLR4 and mediates the recruitment of TRIF to these receptors. Our findings suggest a crucial role for WDFY1 in bridging the TLR–TRIF interaction, which is necessary for TLR signaling.

Introduction

The vital roles of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been demonstrated in both innate and adaptive immune responses 1 . All 13 TLRs identified so far in humans and mice contain an extracellular leucine-rich repeats (LRR) domain, which recognizes a distinct set of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and an intracellular signaling TIR domain, which is conserved among Toll and interleukin-1 receptors 2 , 3 . Ligand binding to a TLR leads to the recruitment of TIR-domain-containing adaptor proteins, such as myeloid differentiation primary-response gene 88 (MyD88) and/or TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β (TRIF). The MyD88-dependent or TRIF-dependent signaling cascade activates several transcription factors leading to the induction of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferons (IFNs) 3 , 4 , 5 .

All TLRs besides TLR3 depend, at least in part, upon MyD88 signaling 6 . MyD88 contains an N-terminal death domain, which interacts with IL-1R-associated kinase-4 (IRAK4). IRAK4 phosphorylates IRAK1 and IRAK2 leading to the activation of TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) 7 . TRAF6, as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, activates the inhibitor of kappa B (IκB) kinase (IKK) complex resulting in the activation of transcription factor nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) 8 , 9 . The interferon regulatory transcription factor (IRF) family is also activated. IRF7 is activated by IRAK1 as IRF1 associates with MyD88 directly, and IRF5 associates with both MyD88 and TRAF6 10 , 11 , 12 .

Engagement of TLR3 by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) causes dimerization and tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR3, which then recruits TRIF 13 . TRIF contains multiple conserved domains that are responsible for further association with downstream molecules receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1), TRAF6, and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). RIP1 and TRAF6 participate in TRIF-mediated NF-κB activation, whereas TBK1 directly phosphorylates transcription factor IRF3, which subsequently undergoes dimerization and translocates to the nucleus 14 , 15 , 16 . The activation of NF-κB and IRFs induces the production of a series of proinflammatory cytokines and IFNs, the latter of which further induces the transcription of a wide range of downstream antiviral genes and subsequent antiviral responses 17 , 18 .

Engagement of TLR4 by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) triggers both MyD88-dependent and TRIF-dependent signaling. TLR4 recognizes ligands at the cell surface resulting in recruitment and signaling through MyD88. Subsequently, TLR4 is internalized into early endosomes and triggers TRIF-dependent signaling 19 , 20 .

Although much progress has been made in understanding TLR signaling, mechanistic details regarding TLR signaling molecules still need to be elucidated. By screening the possible molecules that are involved in TLR3 signaling, we identified a WD repeat and FYVE-domain-containing 1 protein (WDFY1). It has been previously reported that WDFY1 is localized on the membrane of endosomes by the FYVE domain, but its function is still obscure 21 . In this study, we found WDFY1 potentiated poly(I:C)- or LPS-triggered activation of IRF3 and NF-κB. Knocking down WDFY1 had the opposite effect. We demonstrate that WDFY1 acts as a critical adaptor protein during TLR3/TLR4 recruitment of TRIF.

Materials and Methods

More detailed information can be found in Supplementary Materials and Methods.
