---
pmid: '9418871'
title: DDB, a putative DNA repair protein, can function as a transcriptional partner
  of E2F1.
authors:
- Hayes S
- Shiyanov P
- Chen X
- Raychaudhuri P
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC121483
doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.240
---

# DDB, a putative DNA repair protein, can function as a transcriptional partner of E2F1.
**Authors:** Hayes S, Shiyanov P, Chen X, Raychaudhuri P
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.18.1.240](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.18.1.240)
**PMC:** [PMC121483](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC121483/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jan;18(1):240-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.240.

DDB, a putative DNA repair protein, can function as a transcriptional partner of 
E2F1.

Hayes S(1), Shiyanov P, Chen X, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at 
Chicago, 60612, USA.

The transcription factor E2F1 is believed to be involved in the regulated 
expression of the DNA replication genes. To gain insights into the 
transcriptional activation function of E2F1, we looked for proteins in HeLa 
nuclear extracts that bind to the activation domain of E2F1. Here we show that 
DDB, a putative DNA repair protein, associates with the activation domain of 
E2F1. DDB was identified as a heterodimeric protein (48 and 127 kDa) that binds 
to UV-damaged DNA. We show that the UV-damaged-DNA binding activity from HeLa 
nuclear extracts can associate with the activation domain of E2F1. Moreover, the 
48-kDa subunit of DDB, synthesized in vitro, binds to a fusion protein of E2F1 
depending on the C-terminal activation domain. The interaction between DDB and 
E2F1 can also be detected by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. 
Immunoprecipitation of an epitope-tagged DDB from cell extracts resulted in the 
coprecipitation of E2F1. In a reciprocal experiment, immunoprecipitates of E2F1 
were found to contain DDB. Fractionation of HeLa nuclear extracts also revealed 
a significant overlap in the elution profiles of E2F1 and DDB. For instance, 
DDB, which does not bind to the E2F sites, was enriched in the high-salt 
fractions containing E2F1 during chromatography through an E2F-specific DNA 
affinity column. We also observed evidence for a functional interaction between 
DDB and E2F1 in living cells. For instance, expression of DDB specifically 
stimulated E2F1-activated transcription. In addition, the transcriptional 
activation function of a heterologous transcription factor containing the 
activation domain of E2F1 was stimulated by coexpression of DDB. Moreover, DDB 
expression could overcome the retinoblastoma protein (Rb)-mediated inhibition of 
E2F1-activated transcription. The results suggest that this damaged-DNA binding 
protein can function as a transcriptional partner of E2F1. We speculate that the 
damaged-DNA binding function of DDB, besides repair, might serve as a negative 
regulator of E2F1-activated transcription, as damaged DNA will sequester DDB and 
make it unavailable for E2F1. Furthermore, the binding of DDB to damaged DNA 
might be involved in downregulating the replication genes during growth arrest 
induced by damaged DNA.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.18.1.240
PMCID: PMC121483
PMID: 9418871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
