---
pmid: '18429817'
title: Bood POZ containing gene type 2 is a human counterpart of yeast Btb3p and promotes
  the degradation of terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase.
authors:
- Maezawa S
- Hayano T
- Koiwai K
- Fukushima R
- Kouda K
- Kubota T
- Koiwai O
journal: Genes Cells
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01179.x
---

# Bood POZ containing gene type 2 is a human counterpart of yeast Btb3p and promotes the degradation of terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase.
**Authors:** Maezawa S, Hayano T, Koiwai K, Fukushima R, Kouda K, Kubota T, Koiwai O
**Journal:** Genes Cells (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01179.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01179.x)

## Abstract

1. Genes Cells. 2008 May;13(5):439-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01179.x.

Bood POZ containing gene type 2 is a human counterpart of yeast Btb3p and
promotes the degradation of terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase.

Maezawa S(1), Hayano T, Koiwai K, Fukushima R, Kouda K, Kubota T, Koiwai O.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Science and Technology, Department of Applied Biological Science,
Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan.
j6407705@ed.noda.tus.ac.jp

Bood POZ containing gene type 2 (BPOZ-2) is involved in the growth suppressive
effect of the phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN). We showed that BPOZ-2 is
a human counterpart of yeast Btb3p, which is a putative adaptor for Pcu3p-based
ubiquitin ligase. BPOZ-2 bound to E3 ligase CUL3 in vitro and in vivo. BPOZ-2
itself was ubiquitinated through the CUL3-based E3 ligase mainly within the
nucleus and degraded by the 26S proteasome. Although BPOZ-2 was mainly expressed
within the cytoplasm, it accumulated within the nucleus in the presence of the
specific 26S proteasome inhibitor MG132. BPOZ-2 may be recruited to the nucleus
from the cytoplasm. Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TdT) was detected as a
BPOZ-2-binding protein using a yeast two-hybrid system by screening a human
thymus cDNA library. TdT, BPOZ-2, and CUL3 formed a ternary complex in vivo. TdT
was ubiquitinated only within the nucleus and degraded by the 26S proteasome.
The ubiqutination or degradation of TdT was markedly promoted by co-expression
of BPOZ-2 and CUL3 or BPOZ-2 in 293T cells, respectively.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2008.01179.x
PMID: 18429817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
