---
pmid: '10637294'
title: Tim18p is a new component of the Tim54p-Tim22p translocon in the mitochondrial
  inner membrane.
authors:
- Kerscher O
- Sepuri NB
- Jensen RE
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC14760
doi: 10.1091/mbc.11.1.103
---

# Tim18p is a new component of the Tim54p-Tim22p translocon in the mitochondrial inner membrane.
**Authors:** Kerscher O, Sepuri NB, Jensen RE
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.11.1.103](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.11.1.103)
**PMC:** [PMC14760](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC14760/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2000 Jan;11(1):103-16. doi: 10.1091/mbc.11.1.103.

Tim18p is a new component of the Tim54p-Tim22p translocon in the mitochondrial 
inner membrane.

Kerscher O(1), Sepuri NB, Jensen RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The mitochondrial inner membrane contains two separate translocons: one required 
for the translocation of matrix-targeted proteins (the Tim23p-Tim17p complex) 
and one for the insertion of polytopic proteins into the mitochondrial inner 
membrane (the Tim54p-Tim22p complex). To identify new members of the 
Tim54p-Tim22p complex, we screened for high-copy suppressors of the 
temperature-sensitive tim54-1 mutant. We identified a new gene, TIM18, that 
encodes an integral protein of the inner membrane. The following genetic and 
biochemical observations suggest that the Tim18 protein is part of the 
Tim54p-Tim22p complex in the inner membrane: multiple copies of TIM18 suppress 
the tim54-1 growth defect; the tim18::HIS3 disruption is synthetically lethal 
with tim54-1; Tim54p and Tim22p can be coimmune precipitated with the Tim18 
protein; and Tim18p, along with Tim54p and Tim22p, is detected in an 
approximately 300-kDa complex after blue native electrophoresis. We propose that 
Tim18p is a new component of the Tim54p-Tim22p machinery that facilitates 
insertion of polytopic proteins into the mitochondrial inner membrane.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.11.1.103
PMCID: PMC14760
PMID: 10637294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
