---
pmid: '8649363'
title: A Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3-domain-binding protein.
authors:
- Parker F
- Maurier F
- Delumeau I
- Duchesne M
- Faucher D
- Debussche L
- Dugue A
- Schweighoffer F
- Tocque B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC231246
doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.6.2561
---

# A Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3-domain-binding protein.
**Authors:** Parker F, Maurier F, Delumeau I, Duchesne M, Faucher D, Debussche L, Dugue A, Schweighoffer F, Tocque B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.16.6.2561](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.16.6.2561)
**PMC:** [PMC231246](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC231246/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2561-9. doi: 10.1128/MCB.16.6.2561.

A Ras-GTPase-activating protein SH3-domain-binding protein.

Parker F(1), Maurier F, Delumeau I, Duchesne M, Faucher D, Debussche L, Dugue A, 
Schweighoffer F, Tocque B.

Author information:
(1)Gene Medicine Department, Rhône-Poulenc Rorer, Centre de Recherche de 
Vitry-Alfortville, Vitry Sur Seine, France.

We report the purification of a Ras-GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-binding 
protein, G3BP, a ubiquitously expressed cytosolic 68-kDa protein that 
coimmunoprecipitates with GAP. G3BP physically associates with the SH3 domain of 
GAP, which previously had been shown to be essential for Ras signaling. The G3BP 
cDNA revealed that G3BP is a novel 466-amino-acid protein that shares several 
features with heterogeneous nuclear RNA-binding proteins, including 
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) motifs RNP1 and RNP2, an RG-rich domain, and acidic 
sequences. Recombinant G3BP binds effectively to the GAP SH3 domain G3BP 
coimmunoprecipitates with GAP only when cells are in a proliferating state, 
suggesting a recruitment of a GAP-G3BP complex when Ras is in its activated 
conformation.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.16.6.2561
PMCID: PMC231246
PMID: 8649363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We report the purification of a Ras-GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-binding protein, G3BP, a ubiquitously expressed cytosolic 68-kDa protein that coimmunoprecipitates with GAP. G3BP physically associates with the SH3 domain of GAP, which previously had been shown to be essential for Ras signaling. The G3BP cDNA revealed that G3BP is a novel 466-amino-acid protein that shares several features with heterogeneous nuclear RNA-binding proteins, including ribonucleoprotein (RNP) motifs RNP1 and RNP2, an RG-rich domain, and acidic sequences. Recombinant G3BP binds effectively to the GAP SH3 domain G3BP coimmunoprecipitates with GAP only when cells are in a proliferating state, suggesting a recruitment of a GAP-G3BP complex when Ras is in its activated conformation.
