---
pmid: '23775086'
title: Biochemical characterization of Hpa2 and Hpa3, two small closely related acetyltransferases
  from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Sampath V
- Liu B
- Tafrov S
- Srinivasan M
- Rieger R
- Chen EI
- Sternglanz R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2013'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3724611
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486274
---

# Biochemical characterization of Hpa2 and Hpa3, two small closely related acetyltransferases from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Sampath V, Liu B, Tafrov S, Srinivasan M, Rieger R, Chen EI, Sternglanz R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M113.486274](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M113.486274)
**PMC:** [PMC3724611](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3724611/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 26;288(30):21506-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486274. Epub 
2013 Jun 17.

Biochemical characterization of Hpa2 and Hpa3, two small closely related 
acetyltransferases from Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Sampath V(1), Liu B, Tafrov S, Srinivasan M, Rieger R, Chen EI, Sternglanz R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony 
Brook, New York 11794, USA.

Based on their sequences, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hpa2 and Hpa3 proteins 
are annotated as two closely related members of the Gcn5 acetyltransferase 
family. Here, we describe the biochemical characterization of Hpa2 and Hpa3 as 
bona fide acetyltransferases with different substrate specificities. Mutational 
and MALDI-TOF analyses showed that Hpa3 translation initiates primarily from 
Met-19 rather than the annotated start site, Met-1, with a minor product 
starting at Met-27. When expressed in Escherichia coli and assayed in vitro, 
Hpa2 and Hpa3 (from Met-19) acetylated histones and polyamines. Whereas Hpa2 
acetylated histones H3 and H4 (at H3 Lys-14, H4 Lys-5, and H4 Lys-12), Hpa3 
acetylated only histone H4 (at Lys-8). Additionally, Hpa2, but not Hpa3, 
acetylated certain small basic proteins. Hpa3, but not Hpa2, has been reported 
to acetylate D-amino acids, and we present results consistent with that. 
Overexpression of Hpa2 or Hpa3 is toxic to yeast cells. However, their deletions 
do not show any standard phenotypic defects. These results suggest that Hpa2 and 
Hpa3 are similar but distinct acetyltransferases that might have overlapping 
roles with other known acetyltransferases in vivo in acetylating histones and 
other small proteins.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486274
PMCID: PMC3724611
PMID: 23775086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Based on their sequences, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hpa2 and Hpa3 proteins are annotated as two closely related members of the Gcn5 acetyltransferase family. Here, we describe the biochemical characterization of Hpa2 and Hpa3 as bona fide acetyltransferases with different substrate specificities. Mutational and MALDI-TOF analyses showed that Hpa3 translation initiates primarily from Met-19 rather than the annotated start site, Met-1, with a minor product starting at Met-27. When expressed in Escherichia coli and assayed in vitro , Hpa2 and Hpa3 (from Met-19) acetylated histones and polyamines. Whereas Hpa2 acetylated histones H3 and H4 (at H3 Lys-14, H4 Lys-5, and H4 Lys-12), Hpa3 acetylated only histone H4 (at Lys-8). Additionally, Hpa2, but not Hpa3, acetylated certain small basic proteins. Hpa3, but not Hpa2, has been reported to acetylate d -amino acids, and we present results consistent with that. Overexpression of Hpa2 or Hpa3 is toxic to yeast cells. However, their deletions do not show any standard phenotypic defects. These results suggest that Hpa2 and Hpa3 are similar but distinct acetyltransferases that might have overlapping roles with other known acetyltransferases in vivo in acetylating histones and other small proteins.

Introduction

Acetyltransferases catalyze the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to an acceptor residue on proteins or small molecules and have wide-ranging roles in gene regulation, antibiotic inactivation, transcriptional silencing, and cell cycle progression ( 1 , 2 ). The best characterized enzymes in this group, the histone acetyltransferases (HATs), 3 acetylate the ϵ-amino group of lysines on histone N-terminal tails and core regions and bring about changes in chromatin structure and dynamics, often resulting in transcriptional activation ( 3 ).

Many well known HATs, such as Gcn5, Hat1, and PCAF ( p 300/ C BP- a ssociated f actor), belong to the GNAT ( G cn5-related N - a cetyl t ransferases) family with clear sequence and structural similarity, but they acetylate different residues on different histones ( 3 ). These HATs are often present in multisubunit complexes in vivo , such as Gcn5 in SAGA and ADA complexes, Hat1 in the HAT-B complex, etc. In yeast, the SAGA complex has well defined roles in transcriptional activation at promoters and also has roles in transcription elongation and mRNA export ( 4 ). In the context of the SAGA complex, Gcn5 is able to acetylate histones and nucleosomes primarily on H3 Lys-14. Hat1 in the HAT-B complex acetylates free histone H4 at Lys-5 and Lys-12 and is thought to be the primary acetyltransferase for newly synthesized histones ( 5 ). NuA4 and NuA3 are two other yeast HAT complexes. They contain the MYST family acetyltransferases Esa1 and Sas3 as the catalytic subunits, acetylating histones H4 and H3, respectively ( 6 , 7 ). The multiplicity of HATs and their overlapping specificities indicate built-in redundancy to maintain proper in vivo function.

Hpa2 and Hpa3 are two closely related members of the GNAT superfamily, with nearly 50% identity and 68% similarity over 156 amino acids ( 3 ). Both proteins share significant sequence and structural similarity in their catalytic and acetyl-CoA-binding regions (motifs A and D) with other members of the GNAT superfamily ( 8 ). The Hpa2 crystal structure shows that motif C is structurally conserved within the superfamily even though there is very limited sequence conservation. Sedimentation analysis shows that Hpa2 forms a dimer in solution and can tetramerize in the presence of acetyl-CoA ( 8 ). The crystal structure of the oligomer reveals that two Hpa2 dimers are held together by interaction between the bound acetyl-CoA molecules ( 8 ).

Despite their sequence homology, Hpa3, but not Hpa2, has been shown to acetylate a wide variety of d -amino acids in vitro ( 9 ). This activity is required in vivo to prevent toxicity when d -amino acids are taken up by the cell ( 10 ). Uptake of exogenous d -amino acids through the Gap1 permease is inhibited by the presence of l -amino acids and rich nitrogen sources such as ammonium ions ( 11 ). However, in limiting nitrogen medium, even a low concentration of d -amino acids is toxic to cells presumably by being misincorporated into proteins. Acetylation of d -amino acids by Hpa3 combined with the action of d -tyrosyl-tRNA Tyr deacylase to recycle mislabeled d -aminoacyl-tRNAs allows the cells to export the d -amino acids out of the cell and overcome their toxicity ( 10 , 12 ).

Our goal in this study was to understand the substrate specificity of Hpa2 and Hpa3. Our earlier attempts to understand the HAT activity profile of these proteins led us to hypothesize that only Hpa2 can acetylate histones ( 8 ). However, as we show in this study, the natural form of Hpa3 can acetylate histones but with a different substrate specificity than Hpa2. Our biochemical analysis also shows that Hpa2 and Hpa3 are unique acetyltransferases, with a wide range of substrates in vitro , including histones, polyamines, and some non-histone chromatin proteins.

DISCUSSION

Hpa2 and Hpa3 are members of the GNAT family of acetyltransferases, a group of proteins with a wide variety of substrates ranging from small molecules such as antibiotics and amino acids to proteins ( 3 ). Although Hpa3 has been shown to be a d -amino acid acetyltransferase that detoxifies d -amino acids, the exact in vivo role of Hpa2 is not yet clear ( 10 ). In this study, we have shown that both Hpa2 and Hpa3 can acetylate histones and other proteins with distinct substrate specificities.
