---
pmid: '15485925'
title: Interferon-inducible ubiquitin E2, Ubc8, is a conjugating enzyme for protein
  ISGylation.
authors:
- Kim KI
- Giannakopoulos NV
- Virgin HW
- Zhang DE
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC522249
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9592-9600.2004
---

# Interferon-inducible ubiquitin E2, Ubc8, is a conjugating enzyme for protein ISGylation.
**Authors:** Kim KI, Giannakopoulos NV, Virgin HW, Zhang DE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.21.9592-9600.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.21.9592-9600.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC522249](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC522249/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(21):9592-600. doi:
10.1128/MCB.24.21.9592-9600.2004.

Interferon-inducible ubiquitin E2, Ubc8, is a conjugating enzyme for protein 
ISGylation.

Kim KI(1), Giannakopoulos NV, Virgin HW, Zhang DE.

Author information:
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 
92037, USA.

Protein ISGylation is unique among ubiquitin-like conjugation systems in that 
the expression and conjugation processes are induced by specific stimuli, mainly 
via the alpha/beta interferon signaling pathway. It has been suggested that 
protein ISGylation plays a special role in the immune response, because of its 
interferon-signal dependency and its appearance only in higher eukaryotic 
organisms. Here, we report the identification of an ISG15-conjugating enzyme, 
Ubc8. Like other components of the protein ISGylation system (ISG15, UBE1L, and 
UBP43), Ubc8 is an interferon-inducible protein. Ubc8 clearly mediates protein 
ISGylation in transfection assays. The reduction of Ubc8 expression by small 
interfering RNA causes a decrease in protein ISGylation in HeLa cells upon 
interferon treatment. Neither UbcH7/UbcM4, the closest homologue of Ubc8 among 
known ubiquitin E2s, nor the small ubiquitin-like modifier E2 Ubc9 supports 
protein ISGylation. These findings strongly suggest that Ubc8 is a major 
ISG15-conjugating enzyme responsible for protein ISGylation upon interferon 
stimulation. Furthermore, we established an assay system to detect ISGylated 
target proteins by cotransfection of ISG15, UBE1L, and Ubc8 together with a 
target protein to be analyzed. This method provides an easy and effective way to 
identify new targets for the ISGylation system and will facilitate related 
studies.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.21.9592-9600.2004
PMCID: PMC522249
PMID: 15485925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
