---
pmid: '22124326'
title: 'Tail-anchor targeting by a Get3 tetramer: the structure of an archaeal homologue.'
authors:
- Suloway CJ
- Rome ME
- Clemons WM Jr
journal: EMBO J
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3273380
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.433
---

# Tail-anchor targeting by a Get3 tetramer: the structure of an archaeal homologue.
**Authors:** Suloway CJ, Rome ME, Clemons WM Jr
**Journal:** EMBO J (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.433](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.433)
**PMC:** [PMC3273380](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3273380/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2012 Feb 1;31(3):707-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.433. Epub 2011 Nov
29.

Tail-anchor targeting by a Get3 tetramer: the structure of an archaeal 
homologue.

Suloway CJ(1), Rome ME, Clemons WM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Efficient delivery of membrane proteins is a critical cellular process. The 
recently elucidated GET (Guided Entry of TA proteins) pathway is responsible for 
the targeted delivery of tail-anchored (TA) membrane proteins to the endoplasmic 
reticulum. The central player is the ATPase Get3, which in its free form exists 
as a dimer. Biochemical evidence suggests a role for a tetramer of Get3. Here, 
we present the first crystal structure of an archaeal Get3 homologue that exists 
as a tetramer and is capable of TA protein binding. The tetramer generates a 
hydrophobic chamber that we propose binds the TA protein. We use small-angle 
X-ray scattering to provide the first structural information of a fungal Get3/TA 
protein complex showing that the overall molecular envelope is consistent with 
the archaeal tetramer structure. Moreover, we show that this fungal tetramer 
complex is capable of TA insertion. This allows us to suggest a model where a 
tetramer of Get3 sequesters a TA protein during targeting to the membrane.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.433
PMCID: PMC3273380
PMID: 22124326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
