---
pmid: '26099433'
title: TDP-35 sequesters TDP-43 into cytoplasmic inclusions through binding with RNA.
authors:
- Che MX
- Jiang LL
- Li HY
- Jiang YJ
- Hu HY
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.009
---

# TDP-35 sequesters TDP-43 into cytoplasmic inclusions through binding with RNA.
**Authors:** Che MX, Jiang LL, Li HY, Jiang YJ, Hu HY
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.009)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2015 Jul 8;589(15):1920-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.009. Epub
 2015 Jun 19.

TDP-35 sequesters TDP-43 into cytoplasmic inclusions through binding with RNA.

Che MX(1), Jiang LL(1), Li HY(1), Jiang YJ(1), Hu HY(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic address: hyhu@sibcb.ac.cn.

TDP-43 (TAR DNA binding protein of 43 kDa) and its C-terminal fragments are 
thought to be linked to the pathologies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Here, we demonstrate that the aggregates or 
inclusions formed by its 35-kDa fragment (namely TDP-35) sequester full-length 
TDP-43 into cytoplasmic inclusions; and this sequestration is mediated by 
binding with RNA that is enriched in the cytoplasmic inclusions. RNA recognition 
motif 1 (RRM1) of TDP-43/TDP-35 plays a dominant role in nucleic-acid binding; 
mutation in this moiety abrogates formation of the TDP-35 inclusions and its 
RNA-assisted association with TDP-43. Thus, TDP-35 is able to sequester TDP-43 
from nuclear localization into cytoplasmic inclusions, and RNA binding plays an 
essential role in this process.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.06.009
PMID: 26099433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
