---
pmid: '10924506'
title: Identification of GRIM-19, a novel cell death-regulatory gene induced by the
  interferon-beta and retinoic acid combination, using a genetic approach.
authors:
- Angell JE
- Lindner DJ
- Shapiro PS
- Hofmann ER
- Kalvakolanu DV
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003929200
---

# Identification of GRIM-19, a novel cell death-regulatory gene induced by the interferon-beta and retinoic acid combination, using a genetic approach.
**Authors:** Angell JE, Lindner DJ, Shapiro PS, Hofmann ER, Kalvakolanu DV
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M003929200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M003929200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33416-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M003929200.

Identification of GRIM-19, a novel cell death-regulatory gene induced by the 
interferon-beta and retinoic acid combination, using a genetic approach.

Angell JE(1), Lindner DJ, Shapiro PS, Hofmann ER, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information:
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

We show here that the combination of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) and 
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) induces the death of tumor cells. To understand the 
molecular basis for synergistic growth-suppressive action and to identify the 
gene products that participate in this process, we have employed an antisense 
knock-out technique. This approach permits the isolation of cell 
death-associated genes based on their selective inactivation by overexpression 
of antisense cDNAs. Because the antisense mRNA inactivates gene expression of 
death-specific genes, transfected cells survive in the presence death inducers. 
Several Genes associated with Retinoid-IFN-induced Mortality (GRIM) were 
identified using this approach. Here we report the isolation of a novel GRIM 
gene, GRIM-19. This 552-base pair cDNA encodes a 16-kDa protein. Antisense 
expression of GRIM-19 confers a strong resistance against IFN/RA-induced death 
by reducing the intracellular levels of GRIM-19 protein. Overexpression of 
GRIM-19 enhances cell death in response to IFN/RA. GRIM-19 is primarily a 
nuclear protein whose expression is induced by the IFN/RA combination. Together, 
our studies identify a novel cell death-regulatory molecule.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M003929200
PMID: 10924506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
