---
pmid: '8020957'
title: Genomic cloning and chromosomal localization of HRY, the human homolog to the
  Drosophila segmentation gene, hairy.
authors:
- Feder JN
- Li L
- Jan LY
- Jan YN
journal: Genomics
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1126
---

# Genomic cloning and chromosomal localization of HRY, the human homolog to the Drosophila segmentation gene, hairy.
**Authors:** Feder JN, Li L, Jan LY, Jan YN
**Journal:** Genomics (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1994.1126](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1994.1126)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1994 Mar 1;20(1):56-61. doi: 10.1006/geno.1994.1126.

Genomic cloning and chromosomal localization of HRY, the human homolog to the 
Drosophila segmentation gene, hairy.

Feder JN(1), Li L, Jan LY, Jan YN.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco 
94143-0724.

The Drosophila hairy gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix protein that 
functions in at least two steps during Drosophila development: (1) during 
embryogenesis, when it partakes in the establishment of segments, and (2) during 
the larval stage, when it functions negatively in determining the pattern of 
sensory bristles on the adult fly. In the rat, a structurally homologous gene 
(RHL) behaves as an immediate-early gene in its response to growth factors and 
can, like that in Drosophila, suppress neuronal differentiation events. Here, we 
report the genomic cloning of the human hairy gene homolog (HRY). The coding 
region of the gene is contained within four exons. The predicted amino acid 
sequence reveals only four amino acid differences between the human and rat 
genes. Analysis of the DNA sequence 5' to the coding region reveals a putative 
untranslated exon. To increase the value of the HRY gene as a genetic marker and 
to assess its potential involvement in genetic disorders, we sublocalized the 
locus to chromosome 3q28-q29 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1994.1126
PMID: 8020957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
