---
pmid: '8103425'
title: Further study on the specificity of D-amino acid oxidase and D-aspartate oxidase
  and time course for complete oxidation of D-amino acids.
authors:
- D'Aniello A
- Vetere A
- Petrucelli L
journal: Comp Biochem Physiol B
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0305-0491(93)90113-j
---

# Further study on the specificity of D-amino acid oxidase and D-aspartate oxidase and time course for complete oxidation of D-amino acids.
**Authors:** D'Aniello A, Vetere A, Petrucelli L
**Journal:** Comp Biochem Physiol B (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0305-0491(93)90113-j](https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-0491(93)90113-j)

## Abstract

1. Comp Biochem Physiol B. 1993 Jul-Aug;105(3-4):731-4. doi: 
10.1016/0305-0491(93)90113-j.

Further study on the specificity of D-amino acid oxidase and D-aspartate oxidase 
and time course for complete oxidation of D-amino acids.

D'Aniello A(1), Vetere A, Petrucelli L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Stazione Zoologica, Napoli, 
Italy.

1. D-Amino acid oxidase (D-AAO) oxidizes: D-Met, D-Pro, D-Phe, D-Tyr, D-Ile, 
D-Leu, D-Ala and D-Val. D-Ser, D-Arg, D-His, D-norleucine and D-Trp are oxidized 
at a low rate. D-Ornithine, cis-4-hydroxy-D-proline, D-Thr, D-Trp-methyl ester, 
N-acetyl-D-Ala and D-Lys are oxidized at a very low rate. 2. D-Asp, D-Glu and 
their derivatives, Gly and all the L-amino acids are not oxidized (or are at a 
rate which is undetectable). 3. Among all D-amino acids, D-Met is the most 
highly oxidized compound. The Km value is 1.7 mM. 4. D-Aspartate oxidase 
(D-Aspo) either purified from Octopus vulgaris or from beef kidney oxidizes only 
D-Asp, D-Glu and their following derivatives: D-Asn, D-Gln, D-Asp-dimethyl-ester 
and N-methyl-D-Asp. 5. However, D-Pro, D-Leu, D-Ala and D-Met, are also oxidized 
by this enzyme, but at a very low rate (between 0.2 and 0.6% of D-Asp). 6. All 
other D-amino acids, glycine and all the L-amino acids are not oxidized. 7. 
Under experimental conditions, 1 U of D-AAO is able to totally oxidize 0.2 
micromol of the following amino acids: D-Met, D-Pro, D-Phe, D-Thy, D-Ile, D-Leu, 
D-Ala, D-Val, D-Ser and D-Arg. 8. Similarly, 1 U of D-AspO in 1 hr of incubation 
totally oxidizes 0.1 micromol of D-Asp, D-Glu, D-Asn and D-Gln.

DOI: 10.1016/0305-0491(93)90113-j
PMID: 8103425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
