---
pmid: '22464731'
title: Skp2 E3 ligase integrates ATM activation and homologous recombination repair
  by ubiquitinating NBS1.
authors:
- Wu J
- Zhang X
- Zhang L
- Wu CY
- Rezaeian AH
- Chan CH
- Li JM
- Wang J
- Gao Y
- Han F
- Jeong YS
- Yuan X
- Khanna KK
- Jin J
- Zeng YX
- Lin HK
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3518281
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.02.018
---

# Skp2 E3 ligase integrates ATM activation and homologous recombination repair by ubiquitinating NBS1.
**Authors:** Wu J, Zhang X, Zhang L, Wu CY, Rezaeian AH, Chan CH, Li JM, Wang J, Gao Y, Han F, Jeong YS, Yuan X, Khanna KK, Jin J, Zeng YX, Lin HK
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2012.02.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.02.018)
**PMC:** [PMC3518281](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3518281/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2012 May 11;46(3):351-61. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.02.018. Epub
2012  Mar 29.

Skp2 E3 ligase integrates ATM activation and homologous recombination repair by 
ubiquitinating NBS1.

Wu J(1), Zhang X, Zhang L, Wu CY, Rezaeian AH, Chan CH, Li JM, Wang J, Gao Y, 
Han F, Jeong YS, Yuan X, Khanna KK, Jin J, Zeng YX, Lin HK.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China and Department of 
Experimental Research, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.

The Mre11/Rad50/NBS1 (MRN) complex is thought to be a critical sensor that 
detects damaged DNA and recruits ATM to DNA foci for activation. However, it 
remains to be established how the MRN complex regulates ATM recruitment to the 
DNA foci during DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Here we show that Skp2 E3 
ligase is a key component for the MRN complex-mediated ATM activation in 
response to DSBs. Skp2 interacts with NBS1 and triggers K63-linked 
ubiquitination of NBS1 upon DSBs, which is critical for the interaction of NBS1 
with ATM, thereby facilitating ATM recruitment to the DNA foci for activation. 
Finally, we show that Skp2 deficiency exhibits a defect in homologous 
recombination (HR) repair, thereby increasing IR sensitivity. Our results 
provide molecular insights into how Skp2 and the MRN complex coordinate to 
activate ATM, and identify Skp2-mediatetd NBS1 ubiquitination as a vital event 
for ATM activation in response to DNA damage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.02.018
PMCID: PMC3518281
PMID: 22464731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
