---
pmid: '8513503'
title: Transcriptional induction of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum resident
  proteins requires a transmembrane protein kinase.
authors:
- Cox JS
- Shamu CE
- Walter P
journal: Cell
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90648-a
---

# Transcriptional induction of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum resident proteins requires a transmembrane protein kinase.
**Authors:** Cox JS, Shamu CE, Walter P
**Journal:** Cell (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(93)90648-a](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(93)90648-a)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1993 Jun 18;73(6):1197-206. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90648-a.

Transcriptional induction of genes encoding endoplasmic reticulum resident 
proteins requires a transmembrane protein kinase.

Cox JS(1), Shamu CE, Walter P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California Medical 
School, San Francisco 94143-0448.

The transcription of genes encoding soluble proteins that reside in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is induced when unfolded proteins accumulate in the 
ER. Thus, an intracellular signal transduction pathway must exist that mediates 
communication between the ER lumen and the nucleus. We have identified a gene in 
S. cerevisiae, IRE1, that is required for this pathway: ire1- mutants cannot 
activate transcription of KAR2 and PDI1, which encode the ER resident proteins 
BiP and protein disulfide isomerase. Moreover, IRE1 is essential for cell 
viability under stress conditions that cause unfolded proteins to accumulate in 
the ER. IRE1 encodes a transmembrane serine/threonine kinase that we propose 
transmits the unfolded protein signal across the ER or inner nuclear membrane. 
IRE1 is also required for inositol prototrophy, suggesting that the induction of 
ER resident proteins is coupled to the biogenesis of new ER membrane.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(93)90648-a
PMID: 8513503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
