---
pmid: '12970760'
title: 'Caspase-3 regulates cell cycle in B cells: a consequence of substrate specificity.'
authors:
- Woo M
- Hakem R
- Furlonger C
- Hakem A
- Duncan GS
- Sasaki T
- Bouchard D
- Lu L
- Wu GE
- Paige CJ
- Mak TW
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ni976
---

# Caspase-3 regulates cell cycle in B cells: a consequence of substrate specificity.
**Authors:** Woo M, Hakem R, Furlonger C, Hakem A, Duncan GS, Sasaki T, Bouchard D, Lu L, Wu GE, Paige CJ, Mak TW
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni976](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni976)

## Abstract

1. Nat Immunol. 2003 Oct;4(10):1016-22. doi: 10.1038/ni976. Epub 2003 Sep 14.

Caspase-3 regulates cell cycle in B cells: a consequence of substrate 
specificity.

Woo M(1), Hakem R, Furlonger C, Hakem A, Duncan GS, Sasaki T, Bouchard D, Lu L, 
Wu GE, Paige CJ, Mak TW.

Author information:
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2N9, Canada.

Caspases are important for apoptosis but are also involved in mammalian cell 
survival and cell division. Here we report that caspase-3 is a negative 
regulator of B cell cycling. Mice deficient in caspase-3 (Casp3-/- mice) have 
increased numbers of splenic B cells that show normal apoptosis but enhanced 
proliferation in vivo and hyperproliferation after mitogenic stimulation in 
vitro. Cdkn1a encodes p21 (also called Waf1 or Cip1), a cyclin-dependent kinase 
(CDK) inhibitor. Although expression of p21 was increased, CDK activities and 
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) were increased in Casp3-/- B cells. 
Using Casp3-/-Cdkn1a-/- mice, we show that the hyperproliferation of Casp3-/- B 
cells is abolished when Cdkn1a is also deleted. Our genetic and biochemical data 
demonstrate that caspase-3 is essential in the regulation of B cell homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1038/ni976
PMID: 12970760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
