---
pmid: '18448518'
title: The nucleocapsid protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus inhibits
  cell cytokinesis and proliferation by interacting with translation elongation factor
  1alpha.
authors:
- Zhou B
- Liu J
- Wang Q
- Liu X
- Li X
- Li P
- Ma Q
- Cao C
journal: J Virol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2446950
doi: 10.1128/JVI.00133-08
---

# The nucleocapsid protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus inhibits cell cytokinesis and proliferation by interacting with translation elongation factor 1alpha.
**Authors:** Zhou B, Liu J, Wang Q, Liu X, Li X, Li P, Ma Q, Cao C
**Journal:** J Virol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/JVI.00133-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00133-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2446950](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2446950/)

## Abstract

1. J Virol. 2008 Jul;82(14):6962-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00133-08. Epub 2008 Apr 30.

The nucleocapsid protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 
inhibits cell cytokinesis and proliferation by interacting with translation 
elongation factor 1alpha.

Zhou B(1), Liu J, Wang Q, Liu X, Li X, Li P, Ma Q, Cao C.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Biotechnology, Beijing, China.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is the etiological 
agent of SARS, an emerging disease characterized by atypical pneumonia. Using a 
yeast two-hybrid screen with the nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-CoV as a bait, 
the C terminus (amino acids 251 to 422) of the N protein was found to interact 
with human elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1alpha), an essential component of the 
translational machinery with an important role in cytokinesis, promoting the 
bundling of filamentous actin (F-actin). In vitro and in vivo interaction was 
then confirmed by immuno-coprecipitation, far-Western blotting, and surface 
plasmon resonance. It was demonstrated that the N protein of SARS-CoV induces 
aggregation of EF1alpha, inhibiting protein translation and cytokinesis by 
blocking F-actin bundling. Proliferation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes 
and other human cell lines was significantly inhibited by the infection of 
recombinant retrovirus expressing SARS-CoV N protein.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00133-08
PMCID: PMC2446950
PMID: 18448518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is the etiological agent of SARS, an emerging disease characterized by atypical pneumonia. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen with the nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-CoV as a bait, the C terminus (amino acids 251 to 422) of the N protein was found to interact with human elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1α), an essential component of the translational machinery with an important role in cytokinesis, promoting the bundling of filamentous actin (F-actin). In vitro and in vivo interaction was then confirmed by immuno-coprecipitation, far-Western blotting, and surface plasmon resonance. It was demonstrated that the N protein of SARS-CoV induces aggregation of EF1α, inhibiting protein translation and cytokinesis by blocking F-actin bundling. Proliferation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes and other human cell lines was significantly inhibited by the infection of recombinant retrovirus expressing SARS-CoV N protein.

DISCUSSION

CoV N proteins commonly localize in the nucleolus ( 44 ). For CoVs other than SARS-CoV, the N proteins interact with fibrillarin and nucleolin, which are two of the major components of the nucleolus ( 5 , 44 ). In the described mechanism, N protein may induce multinucleated cells by interfering with rRNA processing and ribosome biogenesis ( 5 ). There are eight putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) motifs in the SARS-CoV N protein with six in the domain of aa 369 to 390 ( 38 ). Unlike N protein of other CoVs, SARS-CoV N was mostly distributed in the cytoplasm, supporting previous results in Vero cells infected with SARS-CoV or in transfections with a plasmid expressing the N gene ( 38 ). NLS recognition may sterically block the interaction between aa 369 to 390 of N protein and a cytoplasmic protein ( 38 ). Our data suggest that EF1α, an abundant cytoplasmic protein, may block the nuclear translocation of the N protein by masking its NLS motifs through binding to residues 251 to 422 of SARS-CoV N protein, where most NLS motifs are embedded. These data also imply that multinucleated cells were not induced through interaction with fibrillarin or nucleolin by the N protein of SARS-CoV.

Cytokinesis takes place through the contraction of a contractile ring that is mainly composed of F-actin bundles ( 15 , 43 ). An increasing body of evidence suggests that, in addition to its role in peptide elongation, EF1α may have additional functions. One of these noncanonical functions is a role for EF1α in the regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics. The first clear indication of the interaction between the cytoskeleton and EF1α was that one of the actin binding proteins (ABP-50), which was isolated from Dictyostelium discoideum , was identified as EF1α, and this protein was further shown to bundle F-actin during chemotaxis ( 45 ). Since then, the actin bundling activity of EF1α has been extensively demonstrated. It was also found that Tetrahymena EF1α was localized in the division furrow (instead of diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm) and involved in the formation of F-actin bundles in the contractile ring during cytokinesis ( 35 ). Approximately 70 to 90% of total cell EF1α, one of the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic cells, is bound to F-actin ( 12 ). In CoV-infected cells, N protein is the most abundant viral protein ( 20 ). A high-affinity interaction between N protein and EF1α may block EF1α-mediated F-actin bundling and the formation of the contractile ring, which leads to the formation of multinucleate cells by inhibiting cytokinesis. Our findings further support this hypothesis because F-actin bundles were not observed in the cells in which N protein was expressed, and only the EF1α-interacting domain of N protein induced multinucleation. In concert with these observations, it is noteworthy that N protein of HCoV-229E has a significantly lower affinity with EF1α than N protein of SARS-CoV and induces multinucleate cells much more slowly in a substantially smaller fraction of the transfected cells.

EFs in protein synthesis may be the target of interference by several pathogenic mechanisms. For example, diphtheria toxin and Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A inhibit protein synthesis by ADP-ribosylation of eukaryotic EF2 ( 42 ); human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Gag polyprotein was shown to interact with EF1α and impair translation in vitro ( 8 ), and the Lit protease in E. coli cleaves EF-Tu and shuts down translation in response to specific binding of the Gol peptide of bacteriophage T4 binding to EF-Tu ( 2 , 14 ). Inhibition of protein translation by N protein can be reversed by the addition of purified EF1α but not by 10- to 50-fold more mRNA. These data suggest that N protein inhibits protein translation by interacting with EF1α and not by enzymatic modification or binding to mRNA.

Unlike responses in other viral infections, the CD3 + , CD4 + , and CD8 + lymphocytes in SARS-infected patients are dramatically reduced in patients with critical SARS, and these cell populations are gradually returned to normal as the patients' symptoms improve ( 10 , 19 , 30 ). Thus, a T-lymphocyte subgroup might play a key role in the process of SARS-CoV infection. Since actively dividing lymphocytes are one of the major targeted cell populations of SARS-CoV ( 18 ), SARS-CoV can destroy lymphocytes directly and interfere with the functions of the immune system. In this work, we found that expression of N protein in cells led to the inhibition of cytokinesis and proliferation of PBLs. Consistent with our observation, multinucleate syncytia of macrophages or epithelial cells have been observed in late-phase SARS-CoV but not in other CoV-infected patients ( 6 ) As the most abundant viral protein during SARS infection, N protein may lead to the slower proliferation of PBLs during SARS infection as a result of the molecular interactions described here. It will be important to perform experiments with infectious virus as follow-on studies; however, access to a biosafety level 3 facility for performing SARS-CoV work is currently not available in China. The experiments described in this study are not able to prove that N protein induces cytokinesis in the cells infected by SARS-CoV. However, the present observation that SARS-CoV N protein inhibits cell proliferation by interacting with EF1α provides a clue for further research on the pathogenic mechanisms of SARS-CoV.
