---
pmid: '9342365'
title: Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins in discrete
  nuclear domains.
authors:
- Jin Y
- Xu XL
- Yang MC
- Wei F
- Ayi TC
- Bowcock AM
- Baer R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1997'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC23707
doi: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.12075
---

# Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins in discrete nuclear domains.
**Authors:** Jin Y, Xu XL, Yang MC, Wei F, Ayi TC, Bowcock AM, Baer R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.94.22.12075](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.22.12075)
**PMC:** [PMC23707](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC23707/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 28;94(22):12075-80. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.22.12075.

Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins in discrete 
nuclear domains.

Jin Y(1), Xu XL, Yang MC, Wei F, Ayi TC, Bowcock AM, Baer R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75235, USA.

Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene predispose women to early-onset breast and 
ovarian cancer by compromising the gene's presumptive function as a tumor 
suppressor. Although the biochemical properties of BRCA1 polypeptides are not 
understood, their expression pattern and subcellular localization suggest a role 
in cell-cycle regulation. When resting cells are induced to proliferate, the 
steady-state levels of BRCA1 increase in late G1 and reach a maximum during S 
phase. Moreover, in S phase cells, BRCA1 polypeptides are hyperphosphorylated 
and accumulate into discrete subnuclear foci termed "BRCA1 nuclear dots." BRCA1 
associates in vivo with a structurally related protein termed BARD1. Here we 
show that the steady-state levels of BARD1, unlike those of BRCA1, remain 
relatively constant during cell cycle progression. However, immunostaining 
revealed that BARD1 resides within BRCA1 nuclear dots during S phase of the cell 
cycle, but not during the G1 phase. Nevertheless, BARD1 polypeptides are found 
exclusively in the nuclear fractions of both G1- and S-phase cells. Therefore, 
progression to S phase is accompanied by the aggregation of nuclear BARD1 
polypeptides into BRCA1 nuclear dots. This cell cycle-dependent colocalization 
of BARD1 and BRCA1 indicates a role for BARD1 in BRCA1-mediated tumor 
suppression.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.22.12075
PMCID: PMC23707
PMID: 9342365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene predispose women to early-onset breast and ovarian cancer by compromising the gene’s presumptive function as a tumor suppressor. Although the biochemical properties of BRCA1 polypeptides are not understood, their expression pattern and subcellular localization suggest a role in cell-cycle regulation. When resting cells are induced to proliferate, the steady-state levels of BRCA1 increase in late G 1 and reach a maximum during S phase. Moreover, in S phase cells, BRCA1 polypeptides are hyperphosphorylated and accumulate into discrete subnuclear foci termed “BRCA1 nuclear dots.” BRCA1 associates in vivo with a structurally related protein termed BARD1. Here we show that the steady-state levels of BARD1, unlike those of BRCA1, remain relatively constant during cell cycle progression. However, immunostaining revealed that BARD1 resides within BRCA1 nuclear dots during S phase of the cell cycle, but not during the G 1 phase. Nevertheless, BARD1 polypeptides are found exclusively in the nuclear fractions of both G 1 - and S-phase cells. Therefore, progression to S phase is accompanied by the aggregation of nuclear BARD1 polypeptides into BRCA1 nuclear dots. This cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 indicates a role for BARD1 in BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression.

DISCUSSION

In most cell types BRCA1 expression remains low or undetectable until just prior to the G 1 /S transition ( 9 – 12 ). As S phase begins, the expression of BRCA1 increases dramatically and its protein products aggregate into nuclear dots ( 18 ). However, the nature and composition of these subnuclear domains remains unclear. Are they preexisting structures into which BRCA1 accumulates as cells enter S phase or do they represent newly assembled organelles that arise de novo with the onset of S phase? The mechanism underlying the accumulation of BRCA1 polypeptides into nuclear dots is equally unclear, although it may be significant that BRCA1 also undergoes hyperphosphorylation at this stage of the cell cycle ( 9 ).

Our previous studies had shown that BARD1 and BRCA1 associate with one another in vivo and that both proteins bear a similar arrangement of protein motifs, including an amino-terminal RING domain and two carboxyl-terminal BRCT domains ( 6 ). Since tumor-associated missense mutations of BRCA1 disrupt its in vivo interaction with BARD1, the formation of BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimers is likely to be a critical event in BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression. The present results indicate that BARD1, unlike BRCA1, is expressed at comparable levels throughout the cell cycle. In addition, Western analyses of subcellular fractions from synchronized cell populations demonstrate that BARD1 remains in the nuclear compartment of G 1 - and S-phase proliferating cells. Moreover, immunofluorescence microscopy reveals a punctate distribution of BARD1 polypeptides similar to that of BRCA1 nuclear dots, and two-color immunostaining showed that BARD1 and BRCA1 colocalize almost perfectly in the nuclei of these cells. These results, together with our previous data ( 6 ), provide compelling evidence that the in vivo association of BRCA1 and BARD1 is physiologically relevant. The same pattern of immunostaining with BRCA1- and BARD1-specific antibodies was observed in bladder carcinoma cells (T24), immortalized cells from normal mammary epithelium (HBL-100), as well as primary HMECs; thus, the colocalization of BRCA1 and BARD1 in nuclear dots appears to be independent of cell type and the degree of neoplastic transformation.

To our surprise, immunostaining with BARD1-specific antibodies was not observed in G 1 cells, despite the fact that BARD1 polypeptides were readily detected by Western analysis of nuclear fractions derived from these cells. Several explanations can be invoked to account for this phenomenon. For example, the epitopes recognized by the BARD1-specific antibodies may be masked during certain stages of the cell cycle by interactions with other macromolecules. However, identical results were obtained with three different reagents raised against a substantial segment of human BARD1 (residues 141–388): an affinity-purified rabbit polyclonal antiserum, a mouse polyclonal antiserum, and a mouse monoclonal antibody. Furthermore, attempts to unmask hidden epitopes with heat or high salt failed to elicit BARD1-specific staining in G 1 cells, despite the fact that the monoclonal antibody readily detects denatured BARD1 polypeptides (unpublished data). Thus, a more plausible explanation for this phenomenon is that BARD1 polypeptides are distributed diffusely within the nuclei of G 1 cells at concentrations too low for immunodetection. In contrast, the S-phase-dependent accumulation of BARD1 into BRCA1 dots presumably increases their local concentration to levels detectable by immunofluorescence microscopy.

If BARD1 polypeptides are diffusely distributed in the nuclei of G 1 cells, then all, or at least a significant subset, of these polypeptides must be recruited into the BRCA1 nuclear dots as cells progress into S phase. The present data do not address whether this relocalization of BARD1 can occur independently of BRCA1 or whether BARD1 accumulation into the dots requires the prior formation of BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimers. In this regard it would be interesting to see the nuclear distribution of BARD1 in cells that lack functional BRCA1; this should be feasible once cell lines are established from either Brca1-null mice or breast carcinomas of BRCA1 mutation carriers.

Germ-line mutations of either BRCA1 or BRCA2 are responsible for most cases of familial breast cancer. Thus, it is intriguing to note that these genes share a number of other similarities. First, unlike most tumor suppressors, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are rarely mutated in truly sporadic cases of breast cancer ( 25 – 28 ). Second, the phylogenetic conservation of both genes is remarkably poor—for example, the mouse and human orthologs of their protein products exhibit only 58% identity at the amino acid level ( 7 , 29 – 33 ). Third, the transcription of both genes is coordinately induced by estrogen ( 34 ). Fourth, the expression patterns of BRCA1 and BRCA2 with respect to the cell cycle are almost indistinguishable: both are induced in late G 1 upon mitogenic stimulation of quiescent cells, and the levels of their gene products peak just prior to DNA synthesis ( 9 – 12 , 35 , 36 ). These intriguing parallels were underscored recently by the discovery that BRCA2 also interacts in vivo with HsRad51 ( 33 , 37 ). Although the subcellular localization of BRCA2 has not yet been described, these findings suggest that BRCA1 and BRCA2 normally serve as components of a common biochemical pathway involving the HsRad51 protein ( 18 , 33 , 37 ). As such, the disruption of this pathway by mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 may be a critical step in the development of hereditary breast cancer. The specific localization of BARD1 into the BRCA1 nuclear dots of S-phase cells suggests that it too may be an essential component of a HsRad51-associated pathway of tumor suppression.
