---
pmid: '17349584'
title: Fez1/Lzts1 absence impairs Cdk1/Cdc25C interaction during mitosis and predisposes
  mice to cancer development.
authors:
- Vecchione A
- Baldassarre G
- Ishii H
- Nicoloso MS
- Belletti B
- Petrocca F
- Zanesi N
- Fong LY
- Battista S
- Guarnieri D
- Baffa R
- Alder H
- Farber JL
- Donovan PJ
- Croce CM
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1987708
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.01.014
---

# Fez1/Lzts1 absence impairs Cdk1/Cdc25C interaction during mitosis and predisposes mice to cancer development.
**Authors:** Vecchione A, Baldassarre G, Ishii H, Nicoloso MS, Belletti B, Petrocca F, Zanesi N, Fong LY, Battista S, Guarnieri D, Baffa R, Alder H, Farber JL, Donovan PJ, Croce CM
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2007.01.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2007.01.014)
**PMC:** [PMC1987708](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1987708/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2007 Mar;11(3):275-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.01.014.

Fez1/Lzts1 absence impairs Cdk1/Cdc25C interaction during mitosis and 
predisposes mice to cancer development.

Vecchione A(1), Baldassarre G, Ishii H, Nicoloso MS, Belletti B, Petrocca F, 
Zanesi N, Fong LY, Battista S, Guarnieri D, Baffa R, Alder H, Farber JL, Donovan 
PJ, Croce CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics and 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The FEZ1/LZTS1 (LZTS1) protein is frequently downregulated in human cancers of 
different histotypes. LZTS1 is expressed in normal tissues, and its introduction 
in cancer cells inhibits cell growth and suppresses tumorigenicity, owing to an 
accumulation of cells in G2/M. Here, we define its role in cell cycle regulation 
and tumor progression by generating Lzts1 knockout mice. In Lzts1(-/-) mouse 
embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), Cdc25C degradation was increased during M phase, 
resulting in decreased Cdk1 activity. As a consequence, Lzts1(-/-) MEFs showed 
accelerated mitotic progression, resistance to taxol- and nocodazole-induced M 
phase arrest, and improper chromosome segregation. Accordingly, Lzts1 deficiency 
was associated with an increased incidence of both spontaneous and 
carcinogen-induced cancers in mice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.01.014
PMCID: PMC1987708
PMID: 17349584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
