---
pmid: '11907092'
title: Mutational analysis of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs of the
  Ig-like transcript 2 (CD85j) leukocyte receptor.
authors:
- Bellón T
- Kitzig F
- Sayós J
- López-Botet M
journal: J Immunol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3351
---

# Mutational analysis of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs of the Ig-like transcript 2 (CD85j) leukocyte receptor.
**Authors:** Bellón T, Kitzig F, Sayós J, López-Botet M
**Journal:** J Immunol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3351](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3351)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2002 Apr 1;168(7):3351-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3351.

Mutational analysis of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs of the 
Ig-like transcript 2 (CD85j) leukocyte receptor.

Bellón T(1), Kitzig F, Sayós J, López-Botet M.

Author information:
(1)Hospital de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.

The inhibitory receptor Ig-like transcript (ILT)2 (leukocyte Ig-like receptor or 
CD85j) is a type I transmembrane protein expressed by different leukocyte 
lineages. The extracellular region of ILT2 binds HLA class I molecules, and its 
cytoplasmic domain displays four immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition 
motifs. Upon tyrosine phosphorylation ILT2 recruits the Src homology 2 
domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP-1) that is involved in 
negative signaling. To address the structural basis of ILT2-mediated inhibitory 
signaling, deletion and single tyrosine mutants were generated and transfected 
in the COS-7 and rat basophilic leukemia cell lines; their abilities to bind 
SHP-1 and to inhibit FcepsilonR-induced serotonin release in rat basophilic 
leukemia cells were studied. Both biochemical and functional analyses revealed 
tyrosines 644 (SIYATL) and 614 (VTYAQL) as the SHP-1 docking sites required for 
ILT2 inhibitory function. Substitution of tyrosine 562 (VTYAEV) did not alter 
receptor function. By contrast, mutation of tyrosine 533 (NLYAAV) interfered 
with ILT2 tyrosine phosphorylation and the subsequent SHP-1 recruitment, thus 
supporting a regulatory role for this motif.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.168.7.3351
PMID: 11907092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
