---
pmid: '21945095'
title: Mcm10 interacts with Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1) and its association with origins of
  DNA replication is dependent on Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1).
authors:
- Taylor M
- Moore K
- Murray J
- Aves SJ
- Price C
journal: DNA Repair (Amst)
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.09.001
---

# Mcm10 interacts with Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1) and its association with origins of DNA replication is dependent on Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1).
**Authors:** Taylor M, Moore K, Murray J, Aves SJ, Price C
**Journal:** DNA Repair (Amst) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.09.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.09.001)

## Abstract

1. DNA Repair (Amst). 2011 Nov 10;10(11):1154-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.09.001. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Mcm10 interacts with Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1) and its association with origins of DNA 
replication is dependent on Rad4/Cut5(TopBP1).

Taylor M(1), Moore K, Murray J, Aves SJ, Price C.

Author information:
(1)School of Health and Medicine, Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, 
Biological Sciences Building, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK.

Initiation of DNA replication in eukaryotes is a highly conserved and ordered 
process involving the co-ordinated, stepwise association of distinct proteins at 
multiple origins of replication throughout the genome. Here, taking 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe as a model, the role of Rad4(TopBP1) in the assembly 
of the replication complex has been examined. Quantitative chromatin 
immunoprecipitation experiments confirm that Rad4(TopBP1) associates with 
origins of DNA replication and, in addition, demonstrate that the protein is not 
present within the active replisome. A direct interaction between Rad4(TopBP1) 
and Mcm10 is shown and this is reflected in the Rad4(TopBP1)-dependent origin 
association of Mcm10. Rad4(TopBP1) is also shown to interact with Sld2 and Sld3 
and to be required for the stable origin association of these two proteins. 
Rad4(TopBP1) chromatin association at stalled replication forks was found to be 
dependent upon the checkpoint protein Rad9, which was not required for 
Rad4(TopBP1) origin association. Comparison of the levels of chromatin 
association at origins of replication and stalled replication forks and the 
differential requirement for Rad9 suggest functional differences for 
Rad4(TopBP1) at these distinct sites.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2011.09.001
PMID: 21945095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
