---
pmid: '4015840'
title: Biochemical genetic analysis of human and rodent aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).
authors:
- Hopkinson DA
- Santisteban I
- Povey S
- Smith M
journal: Alcohol
year: '1985'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0741-8329(85)90019-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Biochemical genetic analysis of human and rodent aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).
**Authors:** Hopkinson DA, Santisteban I, Povey S, Smith M
**Journal:** Alcohol (1985)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0741-8329(85)90019-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0741-8329(85)90019-9)

## Abstract

1. Alcohol. 1985 Jan-Feb;2(1):73-8. doi: 10.1016/0741-8329(85)90019-9.

Biochemical genetic analysis of human and rodent aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).

Hopkinson DA, Santisteban I, Povey S, Smith M.

ALDH isozymes have been characterized in terms of substrate and coenzyme 
specificity, heat stability, tissue distribution and electrophoretic properties. 
The activity of the isozymes has also been examined in rodent-human somatic cell 
hybrids in order to map the structural genes to specific chromosomes and to 
study the control of gene expression. One isozyme, designated ALDH3, which is 
very active against benzaldehyde, was found to show variable expression in 
hybrids made between rat hepatoma cells and human fibroblasts or fetal liver. 
Segregation analysis of these hybrids indicates that the structural locus for 
human ALDH3 may be on chromosome 17. The expression of rodent ALDH3 in these 
hybrids was extremely variable and not correlated with the appearance of the 
human enzyme. In hybrids expressing human and rodent ALDH3 no heteromeric 
isozymes were observed. The human "cytosolic" ALDH1 and "mitochondrial" ALDH2 
isozymes did not appear to be expressed in any of the somatic cell hybrids 
examined.

DOI: 10.1016/0741-8329(85)90019-9
PMID: 4015840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
