---
pmid: '9469824'
title: Isolation and characterization of RAD51C, a new human member of the RAD51 family
  of related genes.
authors:
- Dosanjh MK
- Collins DW
- Fan W
- Lennon GG
- Albala JS
- Shen Z
- Schild D
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC147393
doi: 10.1093/nar/26.5.1179
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Isolation and characterization of RAD51C, a new human member of the RAD51 family of related genes.
**Authors:** Dosanjh MK, Collins DW, Fan W, Lennon GG, Albala JS, Shen Z, Schild D
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/26.5.1179](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/26.5.1179)
**PMC:** [PMC147393](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC147393/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Mar 1;26(5):1179-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/26.5.1179.

Isolation and characterization of RAD51C, a new human member of the RAD51 family 
of related genes.

Dosanjh MK(1), Collins DW, Fan W, Lennon GG, Albala JS, Shen Z, Schild D.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA.

The yeast and human RAD51 genes encode strand-transfer proteins that are thought 
to be involved in both recombinational repair of DNA damage and meiotic 
recombination. In yeast, the Rad51 family of related proteins also includes 
Rad55, Rad57 and Dmc1. In mammalian cells, five genes in this family have been 
identified (HsRAD51, XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B/hREC2 and HsDMC1), and here we report 
the isolation of the sixth member, RAD51C. RAD51C was originally identified by a 
computer screen of the EST database. A full-length approximately 1.3 kb cDNA 
clone has been isolated that encodes a protein of 376 aa, having a 18-26% aa 
identity with other human Rad51 family members. RAD51C includes a previously 
mapped sequenced-tagged site location near the end of chromosome 17q. The RAD51C 
transcript is expressed in various human tissues, with highest level of 
expression in testis, followed by heart muscle, spleen and prostate. Yeast 
two-hybrid experiments indicate that the Rad51C protein binds to two other 
members of the Rad51 protein family (Xrcc3 and Rad51B) but not to itself. These 
findings suggest that Rad51C may function similarly to the yeast Rad55 or Rad57 
proteins, rather than as a Rad51 functional homolog.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.5.1179
PMCID: PMC147393
PMID: 9469824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The yeast and human RAD51 genes encode strand-transfer proteins that are thought to be involved in both recombinational repair of DNA damage and meiotic recombination. In yeast, the Rad51 family of related proteins also includes Rad55, Rad57 and Dmc1. In mammalian cells, five genes in this family have been identified (HsRAD51, XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B/hREC2 and HsDMC1), and here we report the isolation of the sixth member, RAD51C. RAD51C was originally identified by a computer screen of the EST database. A full-length approximately 1.3 kb cDNA clone has been isolated that encodes a protein of 376 aa, having a 18-26% aa identity with other human Rad51 family members. RAD51C includes a previously mapped sequenced-tagged site location near the end of chromosome 17q. The RAD51C transcript is expressed in various human tissues, with highest level of expression in testis, followed by heart muscle, spleen and prostate. Yeast two-hybrid experiments indicate that the Rad51C protein binds to two other members of the Rad51 protein family (Xrcc3 and Rad51B) but not to itself. These findings suggest that Rad51C may function similarly to the yeast Rad55 or Rad57 proteins, rather than as a Rad51 functional homolog.
