---
pmid: '18566587'
title: Essential function of TORC2 in PKC and Akt turn motif phosphorylation, maturation
  and signalling.
authors:
- Ikenoue T
- Inoki K
- Yang Q
- Zhou X
- Guan KL
journal: EMBO J
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2486275
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.119
---

# Essential function of TORC2 in PKC and Akt turn motif phosphorylation, maturation and signalling.
**Authors:** Ikenoue T, Inoki K, Yang Q, Zhou X, Guan KL
**Journal:** EMBO J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2008.119](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2008.119)
**PMC:** [PMC2486275](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2486275/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2008 Jul 23;27(14):1919-31. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.119. Epub 2008 Jun
 19.

Essential function of TORC2 in PKC and Akt turn motif phosphorylation,
maturation and signalling.

Ikenoue T(1), Inoki K, Yang Q, Zhou X, Guan KL.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2008 Aug 20;27(16):2270.

Protein kinase C (PKC) is involved in a wide array of cellular processes such as
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Phosphorylation of both turn
motif (TM) and hydrophobic motif (HM) are important for PKC function. Here, we
show that the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) has an important
function in phosphorylation of both TM and HM in all conventional PKCs, novel
PKCepsilon as well as Akt. Ablation of mTORC2 components (Rictor, Sin1 or mTOR)
abolished phosphorylation on the TM of both PKCalpha and Akt and HM of Akt and
decreased HM phosphorylation of PKCalpha. Interestingly, the mTORC2-dependent TM
phosphorylation is essential for PKCalpha maturation, stability and signalling.
Our study demonstrates that mTORC2 is involved in post-translational processing
of PKC by facilitating TM and HM phosphorylation and reveals a novel function of
mTORC2 in cellular regulation.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2008.119
PMCID: PMC2486275
PMID: 18566587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
