---
pmid: '11230095'
title: Presence of both constitutive and inducible forms of heat shock protein 70
  in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal synapses.
authors:
- Moon IS
- Park IS
- Schenker LT
- Kennedy MB
- Moon JI
- Jin I
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/cercor/11.3.238
---

# Presence of both constitutive and inducible forms of heat shock protein 70 in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal synapses.
**Authors:** Moon IS, Park IS, Schenker LT, Kennedy MB, Moon JI, Jin I
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/11.3.238](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/11.3.238)

## Abstract

1. Cereb Cortex. 2001 Mar;11(3):238-48. doi: 10.1093/cercor/11.3.238.

Presence of both constitutive and inducible forms of heat shock protein 70 in 
the cerebral cortex and hippocampal synapses.

Moon IS(1), Park IS, Schenker LT, Kennedy MB, Moon JI, Jin I.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Department of Anatomy, College of Oriental Medicine, 
Dongguk University, 707 Sukjang, Kyongju 780-714, Korea. 
moonis@mail.dongguk.ac.kr

Heat shock proteins serve as molecular chaperones in a protein "holding and 
folding" system. Protein sequencing, extraction and immunoblot analyses indicate 
that Hsc70, a constitutive form, is a major component of the rat postsynaptic 
density (PSD) fraction, while Hsp70, an inducible form, is present at the basal 
level. Immunohistochemical studies show that expression of Hsc70 is high, but 
that of Hsp70 is low, in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal formation. In 
dissociated hippocampal neurons, both Hsp70 and Hsc70 immunoreactivities are 
distributed throughout the soma and dendrites. In dendrites, there are many 
stained puncta which are mostly co-localized with PSD-95, a postsynaptic marker. 
Interestingly, variation in staining intensity of the puncta is significantly 
larger for Hsp70 than for Hsc70 in 2-week-old cultures, but becomes less 
significant in 5(1/2)-week-old cultures. At the electron microscopic level, both 
Hsp70 and Hsc70 are mainly associated with asymmetrical PSDs. However, Hsc70 is 
also associated with amorphous subsynaptic structures and spine apparatus-like 
cisternae. Our data indicate that both Hsp70 and Hsc70 are present in PSDs but 
are differentially distributed at subsynaptic sites, and provide a potential 
candidate system for a "synaptic tag".

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/11.3.238
PMID: 11230095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
