---
pmid: '17272722'
title: Yeast Rtt109 promotes genome stability by acetylating histone H3 on lysine
  56.
authors:
- Driscoll R
- Hudson A
- Jackson SP
journal: Science
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3334813
doi: 10.1126/science.1135862
---

# Yeast Rtt109 promotes genome stability by acetylating histone H3 on lysine 56.
**Authors:** Driscoll R, Hudson A, Jackson SP
**Journal:** Science (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1135862](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1135862)
**PMC:** [PMC3334813](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3334813/)

## Abstract

1. Science. 2007 Feb 2;315(5812):649-52. doi: 10.1126/science.1135862.

Yeast Rtt109 promotes genome stability by acetylating histone H3 on lysine 56.

Driscoll R(1), Hudson A, Jackson SP.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust and Cancer Research U.K. Gurdon Institute and the Department 
of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Posttranslational modifications of the histone octamer play important roles in 
regulating responses to DNA damage. Here, we reveal that Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae Rtt109p promotes genome stability and resistance to DNA-damaging 
agents, and that it does this by functionally cooperating with the histone 
chaperone Asf1p to maintain normal chromatin structure. Furthermore, we show 
that, as for Asf1p, Rtt109p is required for histone H3 acetylation on lysine 56 
(K56) in vivo. Moreover, we show that Rtt109p directly catalyzes this 
modification in vitro in a manner that is stimulated by Asf1p. These data 
establish Rtt109p as a member of a new class of histone acetyltransferases and 
show that its actions are critical for cell survival in the presence of DNA 
damage during S phase.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1135862
PMCID: PMC3334813
PMID: 17272722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
