---
reference_id: PMID:16574069
title: "hnulp1, a basic helix-loop-helix protein with a novel transcriptional repressive domain, inhibits transcriptional activity of serum response factor."
authors:
- Cai Z
- Wang Y
- Yu W
- Xiao J
- Li Y
- Liu L
- Zhu C
- Tan K
- Deng Y
- Yuan W
- Liu M
- Wu X
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.02.187
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# hnulp1, a basic helix-loop-helix protein with a novel transcriptional repressive domain, inhibits transcriptional activity of serum response factor.
**Authors:** Cai Z, Wang Y, Yu W, Xiao J, Li Y, Liu L, Zhu C, Tan K, Deng Y, Yuan W, Liu M, Wu X
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.02.187](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.02.187)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 12;343(3):973-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.02.187. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

hnulp1, a basic helix-loop-helix protein with a novel transcriptional repressive
domain, inhibits transcriptional activity of serum response factor.

Cai Z(1), Wang Y, Yu W, Xiao J, Li Y, Liu L, Zhu C, Tan K, Deng Y, Yuan W, Liu
M, Wu X.

Author information:
(1)The Center for Heart Development, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, 410081 Hunan, PR China.

Many bHLH proteins are involved in cardiac development and cardiovascular
diseases. Herein, we identified and characterized the human homologue (hnulp1)
of mouse gene nulp1. The predicted protein contains a bHLH domain and a DUF654
domain in N-terminal and C-terminal, respectively. Northern blot analysis shows
that a 2.3-kb transcript expressed broadly in early human embryonic and adult
tissues, especially with a higher level in adult heart. hnulp1 is a
transcription repressor when fused to GAL4 DNA-binding domain and co-transfected
with VP-16, in which DUF654 motif represents the basal transcriptional
repressive activity. Treatment of cells with trichostatin A can relieve this
repression, suggesting that the DUF654 motif acts through increasing deacetylase
activity at the GAL4-driven promoter. Overexpression of hnulp1 protein in COS-7
cells inhibits the transcriptional activity of serum response factor (SRF),
suggesting that hnulp1 may act as a novel bHLH transcriptional repressor in SRF
signaling pathway to mediate cellular functions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.02.187
PMID: 16574069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]