---
pmid: '7758956'
title: The ribose 5-phosphate isomerase-encoding gene is located immediately downstream
  from that encoding murine immunoglobulin kappa.
authors:
- Apel TW
- Scherer A
- Adachi T
- Auch D
- Ayane M
- Reth M
journal: Gene
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)00901-4
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The ribose 5-phosphate isomerase-encoding gene is located immediately downstream from that encoding murine immunoglobulin kappa.
**Authors:** Apel TW, Scherer A, Adachi T, Auch D, Ayane M, Reth M
**Journal:** Gene (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0378-1119(94)00901-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(94)00901-4)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1995 Apr 24;156(2):191-7. doi: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)00901-4.

The ribose 5-phosphate isomerase-encoding gene is located immediately downstream 
from that encoding murine immunoglobulin kappa.

Apel TW(1), Scherer A, Adachi T, Auch D, Ayane M, Reth M.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunobiologie, Freiburg, Germany.

The immunoglobulin kappa locus (Ig kappa) is active only in the B-lymphocyte 
cell lineage. By exon-trapping we found a gene situated downstream from the 
murine Ig kappa locus. This gene encodes a protein with 53% sequence identity to 
the ribose 5-phosphate isomerase A (RPI-A) of Escherichia coli and is therefore 
likely to be the murine homologue (mRPI) of this enzyme. We confirmed this 
assumption by showing that a glutathione S-transferase (GST)::mRPI fusion 
protein has enzymatic activity and that an anti-mRPI antibody detects a protein 
of the predicted mass of RPI (33 kDa). Cloning and sequencing of the human 
counterpart show that the RPI gene is evolutionarily conserved. The expression 
of mRPI is not influenced by the rearrangement status of the Ig kappa locus in B 
cells and mRPI is expressed in all tissues. We thus show that two genes with 
very different expression patterns, a housekeeping gene and a gene expressed in 
a tissue-specific manner, can be located on a chromosome in close proximity to 
each other.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1119(94)00901-4
PMID: 7758956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
