---
pmid: '10811610'
title: 'mu1A-adaptin-deficient mice: lethality, loss of AP-1 binding and rerouting
  of mannose 6-phosphate receptors.'
authors:
- Meyer C
- Zizioli D
- Lausmann S
- Eskelinen EL
- Hamann J
- Saftig P
- von Figura K
- Schu P
journal: EMBO J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC384363
doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.10.2193
---

# mu1A-adaptin-deficient mice: lethality, loss of AP-1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6-phosphate receptors.
**Authors:** Meyer C, Zizioli D, Lausmann S, Eskelinen EL, Hamann J, Saftig P, von Figura K, Schu P
**Journal:** EMBO J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/19.10.2193](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/19.10.2193)
**PMC:** [PMC384363](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC384363/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2000 May 15;19(10):2193-203. doi: 10.1093/emboj/19.10.2193.

mu1A-adaptin-deficient mice: lethality, loss of AP-1 binding and rerouting of 
mannose 6-phosphate receptors.

Meyer C(1), Zizioli D, Lausmann S, Eskelinen EL, Hamann J, Saftig P, von Figura 
K, Schu P.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Dept. Biochemie II, 
Universität Göttingen, Heinrich-Düker-Weg 12, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The heterotetrameric AP-1 complex is involved in the formation of 
clathrin-coated vesicles at the trans-Golgi network (TGN) and interacts with 
sorting signals in the cytoplasmic tails of cargo molecules. Targeted disruption 
of the mouse mu1A-adaptin gene causes embryonic lethality at day 13.5. In cells 
deficient in micro1A-adaptin the remaining AP-1 adaptins do not bind to the TGN. 
Polarized epithelial cells are the only cells of micro1A-adaptin-deficient 
embryos that show gamma-adaptin binding to membranes, indicating the formation 
of an epithelial specific AP-1B complex and demonstrating the absence of 
additional mu1A homologs. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors are cargo molecules that 
exit the TGN via AP-1-clathrin-coated vesicles. The steady-state distribution of 
the mannose 6-phosphate receptors MPR46 and MPR300 in mu1A-deficient cells is 
shifted to endosomes at the expense of the TGN. MPR46 fails to recycle back from 
the endosome to the TGN, indicating that AP-1 is required for retrograde 
endosome to TGN transport of the receptor.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/19.10.2193
PMCID: PMC384363
PMID: 10811610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
