---
pmid: '20621096'
title: Deletion of Swm2p selectively impairs trimethylation of snRNAs by trimethylguanosine
  synthase (Tgs1p).
authors:
- Boon KL
- Kos M
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.001
---

# Deletion of Swm2p selectively impairs trimethylation of snRNAs by trimethylguanosine synthase (Tgs1p).
**Authors:** Boon KL, Kos M
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.001)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2010 Aug 4;584(15):3299-304. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.001.
Epub  2010 Jul 15.

Deletion of Swm2p selectively impairs trimethylation of snRNAs by 
trimethylguanosine synthase (Tgs1p).

Boon KL(1), Kos M.

Author information:
(1)Biochemistry Center (BZH), University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 328, 
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. kum-loong.boon@bzh.uni-heidelberg.de

The 5' cap trimethylation of small nuclear (snRNAs) and several nucleolar RNAs 
(snoRNAs) by trimethylguanosine synthase 1 (Tgs1p) is required for efficient 
pre-mRNA splicing. The previously uncharacterised protein Swm2p interacted with 
Tgs1p in yeast two-hybrid screens. In the present study we show that Swm2p 
interacts with the N-terminus of Tgs1p and its deletion impairs pre-mRNA 
splicing and pre-rRNA processing. The trimethylation of spliceosomal snRNAs and 
the U3 snoRNA, but not other snoRNAs, was abolished in the absence of Swm2p, 
indicating that Swm2p is required for a substrate-specific activity of Tgs1p.

Copyright (c) 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.001
PMID: 20621096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
