---
pmid: '16880511'
title: Regulation of p27 degradation and S-phase progression by Ro52 RING finger protein.
authors:
- Sabile A
- Meyer AM
- Wirbelauer C
- Hess D
- Kogel U
- Scheffner M
- Krek W
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1592794
doi: 10.1128/MCB.01630-05
---

# Regulation of p27 degradation and S-phase progression by Ro52 RING finger protein.
**Authors:** Sabile A, Meyer AM, Wirbelauer C, Hess D, Kogel U, Scheffner M, Krek W
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.01630-05](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.01630-05)
**PMC:** [PMC1592794](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1592794/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(16):5994-6004. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01630-05.

Regulation of p27 degradation and S-phase progression by Ro52 RING finger 
protein.

Sabile A(1), Meyer AM, Wirbelauer C, Hess D, Kogel U, Scheffner M, Krek W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, ETH-Hönggerberg, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. 
wilhelm.krek@cell.biol.ethz.ch.

Ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 
provides a powerful route for enforcing normal progression through the mammalian 
cell cycle. According to a current model, the ubiquitination of p27 during 
S-phase progression is mediated by SCF(Skp2) E3 ligase that captures 
Thr187-phosphorylated p27 by means of the F-box protein Skp2, which in turn 
couples the bound substrate via Skp1 to a catalytic core complex composed of 
Cul1 and the Rbx/Roc RING finger protein. Here we identify Skp2 as a component 
of an Skp1-cullin-F-box complex that is based on a Cul1-Ro52 RING finger B-box 
coiled-coil motif family protein catalytic core. Ro52-containing complexes 
display E3 ligase activity and promote the ubiquitination of 
Thr187-phosphorylated p27 in a RING-dependent manner in vitro. The knockdown of 
Ro52 expression in human cells with small interfering RNAs causes the 
accumulation of p27 and the failure of cells to enter S phase. Importantly, 
these effects are abrogated by the simultaneous removal of p27. Taken together, 
these data suggest a key role for Ro52 RING finger protein in the regulation of 
p27 degradation and S-phase progression in mammalian cells and provide evidence 
for the existence of a Cul1-based catalytic core that utilizes Ro52 RING protein 
to promote ubiquitination.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.01630-05
PMCID: PMC1592794
PMID: 16880511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
