---
pmid: '30404837'
title: Cullin-3-KCTD10-mediated CEP97 degradation promotes primary cilium formation.
authors:
- Nagai T
- Mukoyama S
- Kagiwada H
- Goshima N
- Mizuno K
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.219527
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cullin-3-KCTD10-mediated CEP97 degradation promotes primary cilium formation.
**Authors:** Nagai T, Mukoyama S, Kagiwada H, Goshima N, Mizuno K
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.219527](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.219527)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2018 Dec 12;131(24):jcs219527. doi: 10.1242/jcs.219527.

Cullin-3-KCTD10-mediated CEP97 degradation promotes primary cilium formation.

Nagai T(1), Mukoyama S(1), Kagiwada H(2), Goshima N(2), Mizuno K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Chemical Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life 
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan.
(2)Functional Proteomics Team, Molecular Profiling Research Center for Drug 
Discovery, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 
Tokyo 135-0064, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular and Chemical Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life 
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8578, Japan 
kmizuno@biology.tohoku.ac.jp.

Primary cilia are antenna-like sensory organelles that transmit various 
extracellular signals. Ciliogenesis requires the removal of CP110 and its 
interactor CEP97 from the mother centriole for initiating ciliary axoneme 
extension, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. Here we show that, upon 
serum starvation, CEP97 is partially degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome 
system. CEP97 was polyubiquitylated in serum-starved cells, and overexpression 
of a non-ubiquitylatable CEP97 mutant effectively blocked CP110 removal and 
ciliogenesis induced by serum-starvation. Through several screening steps, we 
identified the cullin-3-RBX1-KCTD10 complex as the E3 ligase that mediates CEP97 
degradation and removal from the mother centriole. Depletion of each component 
of this E3 complex caused aberrant accumulation of CEP97 on the centrosome, 
suppressed the removal of CEP97 and CP110 from the mother centriole, and 
impaired ciliogenesis. Moreover, KCTD10 was specifically localized to the mother 
centriole. These results suggest that CEP97 degradation by the 
cullin-3-RBX1-KCTD10 complex plays a crucial role in serum-starvation-induced 
CP110 removal and ciliogenesis.

© 2018. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.219527
PMID: 30404837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.
