---
pmid: '11360189'
title: Absence of PPP2R1A mutations in Wilms tumor.
authors:
- Ruteshouser EC
- Ashworth LK
- Huff V
journal: Oncogene
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204301
---

# Absence of PPP2R1A mutations in Wilms tumor.
**Authors:** Ruteshouser EC, Ashworth LK, Huff V
**Journal:** Oncogene (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1204301](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1204301)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 12;20(16):2050-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204301.

Absence of PPP2R1A mutations in Wilms tumor.

Ruteshouser EC(1), Ashworth LK, Huff V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, TX 77030, USA.

Evidence from genetic linkage analysis indicates that a gene located at 19q13.4, 
FWT2, is responsible for predisposition to Wilms tumor in many Wilms tumor 
families. This region has also been implicated in the etiology of sporadic Wilms 
tumor through loss of heterozygosity analyses. The PPP2R1A gene, encoding the 
alpha isoform of the heterotrimeric serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A 
(PP2A), is located within the FWT2 candidate region and is altered in breast and 
lung carcinomas. PPP2R1B, encoding the beta isoform, is mutated in lung, colon, 
and breast cancers. These findings suggested that both PPP2R1A and PPP2R1B may 
be tumor suppressor genes. Additionally, PP2A is important in fetal kidney 
growth and differentiation and has an expression pattern similar to that of the 
Wilms tumor suppressor gene WT1. Since PPP2R1A was therefore a compelling 
candidate for the FWT2 gene, we analysed the coding region of PPP2R1A in DNA and 
RNA samples from affected members of four Wilms tumor families and 30 sporadic 
tumors and identified no mutations in PPP2R1A in any of these 34 samples. We 
conclude that PPP2R1A is not the 19q familial Wilms tumor gene and that mutation 
of PPP2R1A is not a common event in the etiology of sporadic Wilms tumor.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1204301
PMID: 11360189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
