---
pmid: '17182030'
title: Inhibition of HtrA2/Omi ameliorates heart dysfunction following ischemia/reperfusion
  injury in rat heart in vivo.
authors:
- Bhuiyan MS
- Fukunaga K
journal: Eur J Pharmacol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.10.067
---

# Inhibition of HtrA2/Omi ameliorates heart dysfunction following ischemia/reperfusion injury in rat heart in vivo.
**Authors:** Bhuiyan MS, Fukunaga K
**Journal:** Eur J Pharmacol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.10.067](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.10.067)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Feb 28;557(2-3):168-77. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.10.067.  Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Inhibition of HtrA2/Omi ameliorates heart dysfunction following 
ischemia/reperfusion injury in rat heart in vivo.

Bhuiyan MS(1), Fukunaga K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

High temperature requirement A2 (HtrA2)/Omi is a mitochondrial serine protease 
that is released into the cytosol from mitochondria and in turn promotes caspase 
activation by proteolyzing inhibitor of apoptosis proteins. Here we asked 
whether treatment with an HtrA2/Omi inhibitor, 
5-[5-(2-nitrophenyl)furfuryliodine]-1,3-diphenyl-2-thiobarbituric acid 
(UCF-101), restores heart dysfunction following ischemia/reperfusion injury in 
vivo. Rats underwent a 30-min ischemia by occluding the left anterior descending 
artery, followed by 24 h reperfusion. UCF-101 (0.75 or 1.5 micromol/kg, i.p.) 
was administered 10 min before reperfusion. UCF-101 treatment significantly 
recovered the mean arterial blood pressure and ameliorated contractile 
dysfunction of the left ventricle 72 h after reperfusion with concomitant 
reduction of infarct size. Cardio-protection mediated by UCF-101 was correlated 
with reduced X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) degradation and 
inhibition of Caspase-9, Caspase-3, and Caspase-7 processing. Furthermore, 
UCF-101 prevented loss of membrane integrity by inhibiting fodrin breakdown in 
cardiomyocytes. UCF-101-induced cytoprotection was also correlated with reduced 
Fas ligand expression and inhibition of FLIP degradation following 
ischemia/reperfusion. These results suggest that UCF-101 rescues cardiomyocytes 
from ischemia/reperfusion injury by inhibiting XIAP degradation and 
Fas/Fas-ligand-induced apoptosis, thereby ameliorating 
ischemia/reperfusion-induced myocardial dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.10.067
PMID: 17182030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
