---
pmid: '15337766'
title: Leukemia/lymphoma-related factor, a POZ domain-containing transcriptional repressor,
  interacts with histone deacetylase-1 and inhibits cartilage oligomeric matrix protein
  gene expression and chondrogenesis.
authors:
- Liu CJ
- Prazak L
- Fajardo M
- Yu S
- Tyagi N
- Di Cesare PE
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405288200
---

# Leukemia/lymphoma-related factor, a POZ domain-containing transcriptional repressor, interacts with histone deacetylase-1 and inhibits cartilage oligomeric matrix protein gene expression and chondrogenesis.
**Authors:** Liu CJ, Prazak L, Fajardo M, Yu S, Tyagi N, Di Cesare PE
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M405288200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M405288200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 5;279(45):47081-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405288200. Epub
2004  Aug 26.

Leukemia/lymphoma-related factor, a POZ domain-containing transcriptional 
repressor, interacts with histone deacetylase-1 and inhibits cartilage 
oligomeric matrix protein gene expression and chondrogenesis.

Liu CJ(1), Prazak L, Fajardo M, Yu S, Tyagi N, Di Cesare PE.

Author information:
(1)Musculoskeletal Research Center, New York University-Hospital for Joint 
Diseases Department of Orthopedic Surgery, New York, New York 10003, USA.

Mutations in the human cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) gene have been 
linked to the development of pseudoachondroplasia and multiple epiphyseal 
dysplasia. We previously cloned the promoter region of the COMP gene and 
delineated a minimal negative regulatory element (NRE) that is both necessary 
and sufficient to repress its promoter (Issack, P. S., Fang, C. H., Leslie, M. 
P., and Di Cesare, P. E. (2000) J. Orthop. Res. 18, 345-350; Issack, P. S., Liu, 
C. J., Prazak, L., and Di Cesare, P. E. (2004) J. Orthop. Res. 22, 751-758). In 
this study, a yeast one-hybrid screen for proteins that associate with the NRE 
led to the identification of the leukemia/lymphoma-related factor (LRF), a 
transcriptional repressor that contains a POZ (poxvirus zinc finger) domain, as 
an NRE-binding protein. LRF bound directly to the NRE both in vitro and in 
living cells. Nine nucleotides (GAGGGTCCC) in the 30-bp NRE are essential for 
binding to LRF. LRF showed dose-dependent inhibition of COMP-specific reporter 
gene activity, and exogenous overexpression of LRF repressed COMP gene 
expression in both rat chondrosarcoma cells and bone morphogenetic 
protein-2-treated C3H10T1/2 progenitor cells. In addition, LRF also inhibited 
bone morphogenetic protein-2-induced chondrogenesis in high density micromass 
cultures of C3H10T1/2 cells, as evidenced by lack of expression of other 
chondrocytic markers, such as aggrecan and collagen types II, IX, X, and XI, and 
by Alcian blue staining. LRF associated with histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC1), and 
experiments utilizing the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A revealed that 
LRF-mediated repression requires deacetylase activity. LRF is the first 
transcription factor found to bind directly to the COMP gene promoter, to 
recruit HDAC1, and to regulate both COMP gene expression and chondrogenic 
differentiation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405288200
PMID: 15337766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
