---
reference_id: PMID:1373730
title: Characterization of squid crystallin genes. Comparison with mammalian glutathione S-transferase genes.
authors:
- Tomarev SI
- Zinovieva RD
- Piatigorsky J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1992'
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Characterization of squid crystallin genes. Comparison with mammalian glutathione S-transferase genes.
**Authors:** Tomarev SI, Zinovieva RD, Piatigorsky J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1992)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1992 Apr 25;267(12):8604-12.

Characterization of squid crystallin genes. Comparison with mammalian
glutathione S-transferase genes.

Tomarev SI(1), Zinovieva RD, Piatigorsky J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Previous experiments have indicated that the crystallins of the squid lens
(S-crystallins) are evolutionarily related to glutathione S-transferases (GST)
(EC 2.5.1.18). Here we confirm by peptide sequencing that the crystallins of the
lens of the squid Ommastrephes sloani pacificus comprise a family of GST-like
proteins. Squid lens extracts showed 400 times less GST activity than those of
liver using 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene as a substrate, suggesting that the
abundant GST-like crystallins lack enzymatic activity. Four different cDNAs
(pSL20-1, pSL18, pSL11, and pSL4) showed 20-25% similarity in homologous regions
with mammalian GST polypeptides. pSL20-1, pSL18, and pSL4 each encode an
S-crystallin with a unique internal peptide that is unrelated to mammalian GSTs
or any other sequence in GenBank. The S-crystallin family is encoded in a
minimum of 9-10 genes, and the exon-intron structures of at least two of these
(SL20-1 and SL11) are similar to those of the mammalian GST genes. The SL20-1
gene has six exons, with the its unique internal peptide encoded precisely in
exon 4; the SL11 gene lacks a unique internal peptide and has five exons.
Experiments using bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase as a reporter gene
showed that at least 84 and 111 base pairs of 5'-flanking sequence are needed
for function of the SL20-1 and SL11 promoters, respectively, in a transfected
rabbit lens epithelial cell line (N/N1003A). Within these regions each has a
putative TATA box and an upstream AP-1 site overlapping with antioxidant
responsive-like elements, which are regulatory elements in the rat GST Ya and
quinone reductase genes responsive to oxidative stress.

PMID: 1373730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]