---
pmid: '15837194'
title: Same structure, different function crystal structure of the Epstein-Barr virus
  IL-10 bound to the soluble IL-10R1 chain.
authors:
- Yoon SI
- Jones BC
- Logsdon NJ
- Walter MR
journal: Structure
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.01.016
---

# Same structure, different function crystal structure of the Epstein-Barr virus IL-10 bound to the soluble IL-10R1 chain.
**Authors:** Yoon SI, Jones BC, Logsdon NJ, Walter MR
**Journal:** Structure (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2005.01.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2005.01.016)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2005 Apr;13(4):551-64. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2005.01.016.

Same structure, different function crystal structure of the Epstein-Barr virus 
IL-10 bound to the soluble IL-10R1 chain.

Yoon SI(1), Jones BC, Logsdon NJ, Walter MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294, USA.

Human IL-10 (hIL-10) is a cytokine that modulates diverse immune responses. The 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome contains an IL-10 homolog (vIL-10) that shares 
high sequence and structural similarity with hIL-10. Although vIL-10 suppresses 
inflammatory responses like hIL-10, it cannot activate many other 
immunostimulatory functions performed by the cellular cytokine. These functional 
differences have been correlated with the approximately 1000-fold lower affinity 
of vIL-10, compared to hIL-10, for the IL-10R1 receptor chain. To define the 
structural basis for these observations, crystal structures of vIL-10 and a 
vIL-10 point mutant were determined bound to the soluble IL-10R1 receptor 
fragment (sIL-10R1) at 2.8 and 2.7 A resolution, respectively. The structures 
reveal that subtle changes in the conformation and dynamics of the vIL-10 AB and 
CD loops and an orientation change of vIL-10 on sIL-10R1 are the main factors 
responsible for vIL-10's reduced affinity for sIL-10R1 and its distinct 
biological profile.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2005.01.016
PMID: 15837194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
