---
reference_id: PMID:12384298
title: "Molecular cloning and characterization of novel tissue-specific isoforms of the human vacuolar H(+)-ATPase C, G and d subunits, and their evaluation in autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis."
authors:
- Smith AN
- Borthwick KJ
- Karet FE
journal: Gene
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00884-3
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Molecular cloning and characterization of novel tissue-specific isoforms of the human vacuolar H(+)-ATPase C, G and d subunits, and their evaluation in autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis.
**Authors:** Smith AN, Borthwick KJ, Karet FE
**Journal:** Gene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00884-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00884-3)

## Content

1. Gene. 2002 Sep 4;297(1-2):169-77. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00884-3.

Molecular cloning and characterization of novel tissue-specific isoforms of the
human vacuolar H(+)-ATPase C, G and d subunits, and their evaluation in
autosomal recessive distal renal tubular acidosis.

Smith AN(1), Borthwick KJ, Karet FE.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medical Genetics and Nephrology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research Room 4.25B, Addenbrooke's Hospital Box
139, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Several of the 13 subunits comprising mammalian H(+)-ATPases have multiple
isoforms, encoded by separate genes and with differing tissue expression
patterns, which may play an important role in the intracellular localization and
activity of H(+)-ATPases. Here we report the cloning of three previously
uncharacterized human genes, ATP6V1C2, ATP6V1G3 and ATP6V0D2, encoding novel
H(+)-ATPase subunit isoforms C2, G3 and d2, respectively. We demonstrate that
these novel genes are expressed in kidney and few other tissues, and confirm
previous reports that the C1, G1 and d1 isoforms are ubiquitously expressed,
while G2 is brain-specific. Previously we have shown that mutations in two
kidney-specific genes, ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V0A4, encoding the H(+)-ATPase B1 and a4
subunit isoforms, cause recessive distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA). As the
genes reported here are expressed mainly in kidney, we assessed their candidacy
as causative genes for recessive dRTA in eight kindreds unlinked to either known
disease locus. Although no potential disease-causing mutations were seen in this
cohort, this does not rule out a role for these genes in other families. The
identification of these three novel tissue-specific isoforms supports the
hypothesis that subunit differences may play a key role in the structure, site
and function of H(+)-ATPases within the cell.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(02)00884-3
PMID: 12384298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]