---
pmid: '15953601'
title: Erythropoietin receptor Y479 couples to ERK1/2 activation via recruitment of
  phospholipase Cgamma.
authors:
- Halupa A
- Chohan M
- Stickle NH
- Beattie BK
- Miller BA
- Barber DL
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.030
---

# Erythropoietin receptor Y479 couples to ERK1/2 activation via recruitment of phospholipase Cgamma.
**Authors:** Halupa A, Chohan M, Stickle NH, Beattie BK, Miller BA, Barber DL
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.030)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Sep 10;309(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.030.

Erythropoietin receptor Y479 couples to ERK1/2 activation via recruitment of 
phospholipase Cgamma.

Halupa A(1), Chohan M, Stickle NH, Beattie BK, Miller BA, Barber DL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Stem Cell and Developmetal Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

Red blood cell development is primarily controlled by erythropoietin (EPO). 
Several studies have revealed the importance of EPO-R Y343 and Y479 for 
erythroid cell growth, differentiation, and survival. In order to isolate 
critical signaling proteins that bind to EPO-R, we initiated a Cloning of Ligand 
Target (COLT) screen using a murine embryonic day 16 phage library and a 
biotinylated EPO-R Y343 phosphopeptide. One of the clones isolated encodes 
Phospholipase C (PLC)gamma1. PLCgamma1 is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated upon 
EPO stimulation and associates with EPO-R in an SH2-domain-dependent manner. 
Although PLCgamma1 bound EPO-R Y343, Y401, Y429, Y431, and Y479 in the COLT 
screen, PLCgamma1 required Y479 for association with EPO-R in Ba/F3-EPO-R cells. 
Studies have identified EPO-R Y479 as important for ERK activation. Since 
PI3-kinase binds EPO-R Y479, one group has suggested that ERK activation 
downstream of PI3-kinase accounts for the importance of this residue in EPO 
signaling. However, we show that inhibition of PI3-kinase does not abolish ERK 
activation. Furthermore, we demonstrate interaction of PLCgamma1 with Grb2 and 
SOS2. Hence, we have identified a novel adapter function for PLCgamma1 in EPO 
signaling in which recruitment of PLCgamma1 to EPO-R may lead to activation of 
the ERK pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.04.030
PMID: 15953601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
