---
pmid: '20980589'
title: Naked dense bodies provoke depression.
authors:
- Hallermann S
- Kittel RJ
- Wichmann C
- Weyhersmüller A
- Fouquet W
- Mertel S
- Owald D
- Eimer S
- Depner H
- Schwärzel M
- Sigrist SJ
- Heckmann M
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2010'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6634796
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2495-10.2010
---

# Naked dense bodies provoke depression.
**Authors:** Hallermann S, Kittel RJ, Wichmann C, Weyhersmüller A, Fouquet W, Mertel S, Owald D, Eimer S, Depner H, Schwärzel M, Sigrist SJ, Heckmann M
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2495-10.2010](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2495-10.2010)
**PMC:** [PMC6634796](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6634796/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 27;30(43):14340-5. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2495-10.2010.

Naked dense bodies provoke depression.

Hallermann S(1), Kittel RJ, Wichmann C, Weyhersmüller A, Fouquet W, Mertel S, 
Owald D, Eimer S, Depner H, Schwärzel M, Sigrist SJ, Heckmann M.

Author information:
(1)Carl-Ludwig-Institute of Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Leipzig, 
04103 Leipzig, Germany.

At presynaptic active zones (AZs), the frequently observed tethering of synaptic 
vesicles to an electron-dense cytomatrix represents a process of largely unknown 
functional significance. Here, we identified a hypomorphic allele, brpnude, 
lacking merely the last 1% of the C-terminal amino acids (17 of 1740) of the 
active zone protein Bruchpilot. In brpnude, electron-dense bodies were properly 
shaped, though entirely bare of synaptic vesicles. While basal glutamate release 
was unchanged, paired-pulse and sustained stimulation provoked depression. 
Furthermore, rapid recovery following sustained release was slowed. Our results 
causally link, with intramolecular precision, the tethering of vesicles at the 
AZ cytomatrix to synaptic depression.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2495-10.2010
PMCID: PMC6634796
PMID: 20980589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

At presynaptic active zones (AZs), the frequently observed tethering of synaptic vesicles to an electron-dense cytomatrix represents a process of largely unknown functional significance. Here, we identified a hypomorphic allele, brp nude , lacking merely the last 1% of the C-terminal amino acids (17 of 1740) of the active zone protein Bruchpilot. In brp nude , electron-dense bodies were properly shaped, though entirely bare of synaptic vesicles. While basal glutamate release was unchanged, paired-pulse and sustained stimulation provoked depression. Furthermore, rapid recovery following sustained release was slowed. Our results causally link, with intramolecular precision, the tethering of vesicles at the AZ cytomatrix to synaptic depression.

Introduction

The rate at which sensory information can be transmitted across synapses is an important factor that limits rapid and precise information processing in the nervous system. The mechanisms that operate in the presynaptic terminals to release neurotransmitter at AZs at high repetition rates are currently intensely investigated ( Atwood and Karunanithi, 2002 ; Zucker and Regehr, 2002 ; Kidokoro et al., 2004 ; Neher and Sakaba, 2008 ). AZs are decorated with electron-dense material of varying shape and size depending on synapse type and species ( Zhai and Bellen, 2004 ).

Recently, the CAST/ERC-family member Bruchpilot (BRP), a coiled-coil rich protein of nearly 200 kDa, was identified via its localization to Drosophila AZs. BRP was shown to be crucial for cytomatrix formation, proper Ca 2+ channel clustering within AZs, and efficient neurotransmitter release at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction ( Kittel et al., 2006 ; Wagh et al., 2006 ). Furthermore, BRP is a direct component of the electron-dense cytomatrix (T-bar) and adopts an elongated conformation, with its N terminus (N-term) facing Ca 2+ channels at the membrane and its C-term reaching into the cytoplasm ( Fouquet et al., 2009 ).

Discussion

To our knowledge, the specific impairment of vesicle tethering reported here delivers the first direct demonstration that efficient sustained release relies on the ability of the AZ to tether vesicles. While the overall AZ structure, including the distribution of Ca 2+ channels, was unaffected, the impairment of vesicle tethering provoked pronounced synaptic depression and a slowed first component of recovery.

The C-terminal half of BRP consists of ∼1000 aa of essentially contiguous coiled-coil sequence ( Wagh et al., 2006 ), reminiscent of Golgi/ER-resident tethering factors such as, e.g., GM130 ( Lupashin and Sztul, 2005 ). These coiled-coils typically form rod-like structures, where 100 aa residues extend ∼15 nm when dimerized, and proteins such as Uso1p ( Yamakawa et al., 1996 ) extend over 150 nm ( Lupashin and Sztul, 2005 ). These rod-like proteins are believed to act before SNARE protein assembly by forming contacts between membranes at a distance, thereby increasing the specificity or efficiency of the initial attachment of vesicles (tethering) ( Guo et al., 2000 ). We have provided morphological and functional evidence that BRP filaments tether vesicles, and thus further mechanistic comparisons between AZ and Golgi/ER trafficking, e.g., concerning the role of small GTPases, might well be informative.

The C-terminal half of BRP is very highly conserved in insects but not elsewhere ( Wagh et al., 2006 ). Interestingly, the Drosophila genome does not appear to encode homologs of the vertebrate AZ components Piccolo and Bassoon ( Wagh et al., 2006 ), which are key regulators of the vertebrate cytomatrix ( Khimich et al., 2005 ). At central vertebrate synapses, CAST and Bassoon immunoreactivities (closer and further from the AZ membrane, respectively) were recently found to be associated with filaments that may connect vesicles to the AZ ( Siksou et al., 2007 ). It is tempting to speculate that at AZs of central vertebrate synapses, CAST associates with coiled-coil domain proteins, such as bassoon, to perform the dual functions of Ca 2+ channel clustering and vesicle tethering executed by the N-terminal and the C-terminal domains of BRP, respectively.

How synapses manage to repetitively release transmitter with high precision is intensely investigated. Vesicles tethered to electron-dense bodies may represent a reservoir of vesicles required for sustained release ( Zhai and Bellen, 2004 ). Consistent with this hypothesis, synaptic stimulation provokes depletion of vesicles tethered at dense bodies ( LoGiudice et al., 2008 ; Jackman et al., 2009 ). While the supply of vesicles appears rate limiting during the train and the first component of recovery ( Saviane and Silver, 2006 ), the maturation of vesicles closer to Ca 2+ channels appears rate limiting during the second component of recovery [cf. brp 1.3 and brp 5.45 ( Kittel et al., 2006 ; Fouquet et al., 2009 )]. One may argue that the rapid component of depression observed at brp nude synapses ( Fig. 3 A , B ) could be partially attributed to fewer docked vesicles (though not significantly; cf. Fig. 1 G ) with a higher initial release probability. However, a functional estimation of the number of readily releasable vesicles using back-extrapolation from the cumulative EPSC amplitudes in the trains ( Schneggenburger et al., 1999 ) revealed similar numbers of readily releasable vesicles in brp nude and controls (supplemental Fig. S3, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). Finally, we would like to point out that the C-term of BRP could be involved in endocytotic mechanisms, which have been shown to be crucial for sustained release ( Koenig et al., 1998 ; Kawasaki et al., 2000 ; Dickman et al., 2005 ; Hosoi et al., 2009 ; Yao et al., 2009 ). Novel techniques have begun to address the spatial organization of local vesicle reuse within active zones ( Zhang et al., 2009 ). It will have to be clarified via which routes vesicles move within active zones and in which direction Bruchpilot steers their translocation.
