---
pmid: '9512561'
title: Interaction between the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and SV40 large
  T antigen.
authors:
- Haluska P Jr
- Saleem A
- Edwards TK
- Rubin EH
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC147454
doi: 10.1093/nar/26.7.1841
---

# Interaction between the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and SV40 large T antigen.
**Authors:** Haluska P Jr, Saleem A, Edwards TK, Rubin EH
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/26.7.1841](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/26.7.1841)
**PMC:** [PMC147454](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC147454/)

## Abstract

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Apr 1;26(7):1841-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/26.7.1841.

Interaction between the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and SV40 large T 
antigen.

Haluska P Jr(1), Saleem A, Edwards TK, Rubin EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School and the Cancer 
Institute of New Jersey, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New 
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

We have attempted to identify human topoisomerase I-binding proteins in order to 
gain information regarding the cellular roles of this protein and the cytotoxic 
mechanisms of the anticancer drug camptothecin, which specifically targets 
topoisomerase I. In the course of this work we identified an interaction between 
the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and the SV40 T antigen that is 
detectable in vitro using both affinity chromatography and 
co-immunoprecipitation. Additional results indicate that this interaction does 
not require intermediary DNA or stoichiometric quantities of other proteins. 
Furthermore, the interaction is detectable in vivo using a yeast two-hybrid 
assay. Two binding sites for T antigen are apparent on the topoisomerase I 
protein: one consisting of amino acids 1-139, the other present in the 383-765 
region of the protein. Interestingly, nucleolin, which binds the 166-210 region 
of topoisomerase I, is able to bind an N-terminal fragment of topoisomerase I 
concurrently with T antigen. Taken together with our prior identification of 
nucleolin as a topoisomerase I-binding protein, the current results suggest that 
helicase-binding is a major role of the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and 
that the resultant helicase-topoisomerase complex may function as a eukaryotic 
gyrase.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/26.7.1841
PMCID: PMC147454
PMID: 9512561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We have attempted to identify human topoisomerase I-binding proteins in order to gain information regarding the cellular roles of this protein and the cytotoxic mechanisms of the anticancer drug camptothecin, which specifically targets topoisomerase I. In the course of this work we identified an interaction between the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and the SV40 T antigen that is detectable in vitro using both affinity chromatography and co-immunoprecipitation. Additional results indicate that this interaction does not require intermediary DNA or stoichiometric quantities of other proteins. Furthermore, the interaction is detectable in vivo using a yeast two-hybrid assay. Two binding sites for T antigen are apparent on the topoisomerase I protein: one consisting of amino acids 1-139, the other present in the 383-765 region of the protein. Interestingly, nucleolin, which binds the 166-210 region of topoisomerase I, is able to bind an N-terminal fragment of topoisomerase I concurrently with T antigen. Taken together with our prior identification of nucleolin as a topoisomerase I-binding protein, the current results suggest that helicase-binding is a major role of the N-terminus of human topoisomerase I and that the resultant helicase-topoisomerase complex may function as a eukaryotic gyrase.
