---
pmid: '15161938'
title: Sensitization of Dictyostelium chemotaxis by phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated
  self-organizing signalling patches.
authors:
- Postma M
- Roelofs J
- Goedhart J
- Loovers HM
- Visser AJ
- Van Haastert PJ
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.01143
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Sensitization of Dictyostelium chemotaxis by phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated self-organizing signalling patches.
**Authors:** Postma M, Roelofs J, Goedhart J, Loovers HM, Visser AJ, Van Haastert PJ
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.01143](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.01143)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2004 Jun 15;117(Pt 14):2925-35. doi: 10.1242/jcs.01143. Epub 2004 
May 25.

Sensitization of Dictyostelium chemotaxis by phosphoinositide-3-kinase-mediated 
self-organizing signalling patches.

Postma M(1), Roelofs J, Goedhart J, Loovers HM, Visser AJ, Van Haastert PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 AG 
Groningen, The Netherlands.

The leading edge of Dictyostelium cells in chemoattractant gradients can be 
visualized using green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged to the 
pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain of cytosolic regulator of adenylyl cyclase 
(CRAC), which presumable binds phosphatidylinositol-(3,4,5)triphosphate 
[PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3)]. Uniform cyclic AMP (cAMP) concentrations induce persistent 
translocation of PH(Crac)-GFP from the cytosol to multiple patches, which are 
similar to the single patch of PH(Crac)-GFP at the leading edge in a cAMP 
gradient. We show that cAMP determines the probability of patch formation 
(half-maximal effect at 0.5 nM cAMP) but not the size, lifetime or intensity of 
patches, indicating that patches are self-organizing structures. A pseudopod is 
extended from the area of the cell with a PH(Crac)-GFP patch at about 10 seconds 
after patch formation. Cells treated with the F-actin inhibitor latrunculin A 
are round without pseudopodia; uniform cAMP still induces localized patches of 
PH(Crac)-GFP. Inhibition of phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) activity with 
LY294002 inhibits PH(Crac)-GFP patches and inhibits chemotaxis towards nanomolar 
cAMP but has no effect at higher cAMP concentrations. Thus, very low cAMP 
concentrations induce self-organizing PH(Crac)-GFP patches that serve as a 
spatial cue for pseudopod formation, which enhances the sensitivity and 
amplitude of chemotactic movement.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01143
PMID: 15161938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
