---
pmid: '3934167'
title: Inhibition of cell-cell binding at the aggregation stage of Dictyostelium discoideum
  development by monoclonal antibodies directed against an 80,000-dalton surface glycoprotein.
authors:
- Siu CH
- Lam TY
- Choi AH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1985'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Inhibition of cell-cell binding at the aggregation stage of Dictyostelium discoideum development by monoclonal antibodies directed against an 80,000-dalton surface glycoprotein.
**Authors:** Siu CH, Lam TY, Choi AH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1985)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1985 Dec 15;260(29):16030-6.

Inhibition of cell-cell binding at the aggregation stage of Dictyostelium 
discoideum development by monoclonal antibodies directed against an 
80,000-dalton surface glycoprotein.

Siu CH, Lam TY, Choi AH.

Monoclonal antibodies were prepared against a putative cell-cell adhesion 
molecule, a surface glycoprotein with an apparent Mr of 80,000 (gp80), from 
Dictyostelium discoideum. Seven monoclonal antibodies directed against gp80 were 
characterized and found to fall into three distinct classes. Class I consisted 
of one monoclonal antibody, is monospecific for gp80, and probably recognizes 
the peptide portion of the molecule. This class was capable of blocking the 
EDTA-resistant contact sites effectively. Class II recognized the carbohydrate 
moiety of gp80 and cross-reacted with a large number of glycoproteins. These 
monoclonal antibodies partially inhibited cell reassociation. Class III 
recognized gp80 and one other glycoprotein of Mr 95,000. This class had no 
effect on cell-cell binding. The class I monoclonal antibody was most potent in 
inhibiting cell reassociation at the aggregation stage of development. Its 
effect decreased drastically as development progressed and became negligible by 
the culmination stage. These observations are consistent with a direct role of 
gp80 in cell-cell binding and suggest a transient function for gp80 at the 
aggregation stage.

PMID: 3934167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
