---
pmid: '16884690'
title: Copper-dependent interaction of glutaredoxin with the N termini of the copper-ATPases
  (ATP7A and ATP7B) defective in Menkes and Wilson diseases.
authors:
- Lim CM
- Cater MA
- Mercer JF
- La Fontaine S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.07.067
---

# Copper-dependent interaction of glutaredoxin with the N termini of the copper-ATPases (ATP7A and ATP7B) defective in Menkes and Wilson diseases.
**Authors:** Lim CM, Cater MA, Mercer JF, La Fontaine S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.07.067](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.07.067)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 22;348(2):428-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.07.067. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Copper-dependent interaction of glutaredoxin with the N termini of the 
copper-ATPases (ATP7A and ATP7B) defective in Menkes and Wilson diseases.

Lim CM(1), Cater MA, Mercer JF, La Fontaine S.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, School of Life and Environmental 
Sciences, Deakin University, Burwood, Vic. 3125, Australia.

The P-type ATPases affected in Menkes and Wilson diseases, ATP7A and ATP7B, 
respectively, are key copper transporters that regulate copper homeostasis. The 
N termini of these proteins are critical in regulating their function and 
activity, and contain six copper-binding motifs MxCxxC. In this study, we 
describe the identification of glutaredoxin (GRX1) as an interacting partner of 
both ATP7A and ATP7B, confirmed by yeast two-hybrid technology and by 
co-immunoprecipitation from mammalian cells. The interaction required the 
presence of copper and intact metal-binding motifs. In addition, the interaction 
was related to the number of metal-binding domains available. GRX1 catalyses the 
reduction of disulphide bridges and reverses the glutathionylation of proteins 
to regulate and/or protect protein activity. We propose that GRX1 is essential 
for ATPase function and catalyses either the reduction of intramolecular 
disulphide bonds or the deglutathionylation of the cysteine residues within the 
CxxC motifs to facilitate copper-binding for subsequent transport.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.07.067
PMID: 16884690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
