---
pmid: '23093407'
title: Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) protein controls microtubule dynamics
  in a novel signaling pathway that regulates cell migration.
authors:
- Schofield AV
- Steel R
- Bernard O
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3527948
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.394965
---

# Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) protein controls microtubule dynamics in a novel signaling pathway that regulates cell migration.
**Authors:** Schofield AV, Steel R, Bernard O
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.394965](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.394965)
**PMC:** [PMC3527948](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3527948/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Dec 21;287(52):43620-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.394965. Epub 
2012 Oct 23.

Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) protein controls microtubule dynamics 
in a novel signaling pathway that regulates cell migration.

Schofield AV(1), Steel R, Bernard O.

Author information:
(1)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research Cytoskeleton and Cancer Unit, 
University of Melbourne, 3065 Victoria, Australia.

The two members of the Rho-associated coiled-coil kinase (ROCK1 and 2) family 
are established regulators of actin dynamics that are involved in the regulation 
of the cell cycle as well as cell motility and invasion. Here, we discovered a 
novel signaling pathway whereby ROCK regulates microtubule (MT) acetylation via 
phosphorylation of the tubulin polymerization promoting protein 1 (TPPP1/p25). 
We show that ROCK phosphorylation of TPPP1 inhibits the interaction between 
TPPP1 and histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6), which in turn results in increased 
HDAC6 activity followed by a decrease in MT acetylation. As a consequence, we 
show that TPPP1 phosphorylation by ROCK increases cell migration and invasion 
via modulation of cellular acetyl MT levels. We establish here that the 
ROCK-TPPP1-HDAC6 signaling pathway is important for the regulation of cell 
migration and invasion.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.394965
PMCID: PMC3527948
PMID: 23093407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
