---
pmid: '11150296'
title: Arginine/lysine-rich structural element is involved in interferon-induced nuclear
  import of STATs.
authors:
- Melen K
- Kinnunen L
- Julkunen I
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008821200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Arginine/lysine-rich structural element is involved in interferon-induced nuclear import of STATs.
**Authors:** Melen K, Kinnunen L, Julkunen I
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M008821200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M008821200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16447-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008821200. Epub 
2001 Jan 9.

Arginine/lysine-rich structural element is involved in interferon-induced 
nuclear import of STATs.

Melen K(1), Kinnunen L, Julkunen I.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Immunology, Department of Microbiology, 
National Public Health Institute, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are latent 
cytoplasmic transcription factors, which mediate interferon (IFN), interleukin, 
and some growth factor and peptide hormone signaling in cells. IFN stimulation 
results in tyrosine phosphorylation, dimerization, and nuclear import of STATs. 
In response to IFN-gamma stimulation, STAT1 forms homodimers, whereas IFN-alpha 
induction results in the formation of STAT1.STAT2 heterodimers, which assemble 
with p48 protein in the nucleus. Phosphorylation as such is not sufficient to 
target STATs into the nucleus; rather, the dimerization triggered by 
phosphorylation is essential. Although IFN-induced nuclear import of STATs is 
mediated by the importin/Ran transport system, no classic nuclear localization 
signal (NLS) has been found in STATs. In the three-dimensional structure of 
STAT1, we observed a structural arginine/lysine-rich element within the 
DNA-binding domain of the molecule. We created a series of point mutations in 
these elements of STAT1 and STAT2 and showed by transient transfection/IFN 
stimulation assay that this site is essential for the nuclear import of both 
STAT1 and STAT2. The results suggest that two arginine/lysine-rich elements, one 
in each STAT monomer, are required for IFN-induced nuclear import of STAT 
dimers. Import-defective STAT1 and STAT2 proteins were readily phosphorylated 
and dimerized, but they functioned as dominant negative molecules inhibiting the 
nuclear import of heterologous STAT protein.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008821200
PMID: 11150296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
