---
pmid: '9916797'
title: Primary systemic carnitine deficiency is caused by mutations in a gene encoding
  sodium ion-dependent carnitine transporter.
authors:
- Nezu J
- Tamai I
- Oku A
- Ohashi R
- Yabuuchi H
- Hashimoto N
- Nikaido H
- Sai Y
- Koizumi A
- Shoji Y
- Takada G
- Matsuishi T
- Yoshino M
- Kato H
- Ohura T
- Tsujimoto G
- Hayakawa J
- Shimane M
- Tsuji A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/5030
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Primary systemic carnitine deficiency is caused by mutations in a gene encoding sodium ion-dependent carnitine transporter.
**Authors:** Nezu J, Tamai I, Oku A, Ohashi R, Yabuuchi H, Hashimoto N, Nikaido H, Sai Y, Koizumi A, Shoji Y, Takada G, Matsuishi T, Yoshino M, Kato H, Ohura T, Tsujimoto G, Hayakawa J, Shimane M, Tsuji A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/5030](https://doi.org/10.1038/5030)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Jan;21(1):91-4. doi: 10.1038/5030.

Primary systemic carnitine deficiency is caused by mutations in a gene encoding 
sodium ion-dependent carnitine transporter.

Nezu J(1), Tamai I, Oku A, Ohashi R, Yabuuchi H, Hashimoto N, Nikaido H, Sai Y, 
Koizumi A, Shoji Y, Takada G, Matsuishi T, Yoshino M, Kato H, Ohura T, Tsujimoto 
G, Hayakawa J, Shimane M, Tsuji A.

Author information:
(1)Chugai Research Institute for Molecular Medicine, Ibaraki, Japan.

Primary systemic carnitine deficiency (SCD; OMIM 212140) is an autosomal 
recessive disorder characterized by progressive cardiomyopathy, skeletal 
myopathy, hypoglycaemia and hyperammonaemia. SCD has also been linked to sudden 
infant death syndrome. Membrane-physiological studies have suggested a defect of 
the carnitine transport system in the plasma membrane in SCD patients and in the 
mouse model, juvenile visceral steatosis. Although the responsible loci have 
been mapped in both human and mouse, the underlying gene has not yet been 
identified. Recently, we cloned and analysed the function of a novel transporter 
protein termed OCTN2. Our observation that OCTN2 has the ability to transport 
carnitine in a sodium-dependent manner prompted us to search for mutations in 
the gene encoding OCTN2, SLC22A5. Initially, we analysed the mouse gene and 
found a missense mutation in Slc22a5 in jvs mice. Biochemical analysis revealed 
that this mutation abrogates carnitine transport. Subsequent analysis of the 
human gene identified four mutations in three SCD pedigrees. Affected 
individuals in one family were homozygous for the deletion of a 113-bp region 
containing the start codon. In the second pedigree, the affected individual was 
shown to be a compound heterozygote for two mutations that cause a frameshift 
and a premature stop codon, respectively. In an affected individual belonging to 
a third family, we found a homozygous splice-site mutation also resulting in a 
premature stop codon. These mutations provide the first evidence that loss of 
OCTN2 function causes SCD.

DOI: 10.1038/5030
PMID: 9916797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
