---
pmid: '23238014'
title: CRL4B catalyzes H2AK119 monoubiquitination and coordinates with PRC2 to promote
  tumorigenesis.
authors:
- Hu H
- Yang Y
- Ji Q
- Zhao W
- Jiang B
- Liu R
- Yuan J
- Liu Q
- Li X
- Zou Y
- Shao C
- Shang Y
- Wang Y
- Gong Y
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.024
---

# CRL4B catalyzes H2AK119 monoubiquitination and coordinates with PRC2 to promote tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Hu H, Yang Y, Ji Q, Zhao W, Jiang B, Liu R, Yuan J, Liu Q, Li X, Zou Y, Shao C, Shang Y, Wang Y, Gong Y
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.024)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2012 Dec 11;22(6):781-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.024.

CRL4B catalyzes H2AK119 monoubiquitination and coordinates with PRC2 to promote 
tumorigenesis.

Hu H(1), Yang Y, Ji Q, Zhao W, Jiang B, Liu R, Yuan J, Liu Q, Li X, Zou Y, Shao 
C, Shang Y, Wang Y, Gong Y.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Institute 
of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, 
Jinan, Shandong 250012, China.

We reported that Cullin4B-Ring E3 ligase complex (CRL4B) is physically 
associated with Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2). We showed that CRL4B 
possesses an intrinsic transcription repressive activity by promoting H2AK119 
monoubiquitination. Ablation of Cul4b or depletion of CUL4B, the main component 
of CRL4B, resulted in loss of not only H2AK119 monoubiquitination but also H3K27 
trimethylation, leading to derepression of target genes that are critically 
involved in cell growth and migration. We demonstrated that CUL4B promotes cell 
proliferation, invasion, and tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo and found that 
its expression is markedly upregulated in various human cancers. Our data 
indicate that CUL4B promotes tumorigenesis, supporting the pursuit of CUL4B as a 
target for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.10.024
PMID: 23238014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
