---
pmid: '9219684'
title: 'The Ras-RasGAP complex: structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss
  in oncogenic Ras mutants.'
authors:
- Scheffzek K
- Ahmadian MR
- Kabsch W
- Wiesm端ller L
- Lautwein A
- Schmitz F
- Wittinghofer A
journal: Science
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/science.277.5324.333
---

# The Ras-RasGAP complex: structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants.
**Authors:** Scheffzek K, Ahmadian MR, Kabsch W, Wiesm端ller L, Lautwein A, Schmitz F, Wittinghofer A
**Journal:** Science (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.277.5324.333](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.277.5324.333)

## Abstract

1. Science. 1997 Jul 18;277(5324):333-8. doi: 10.1126/science.277.5324.333.

The Ras-RasGAP complex: structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in 
oncogenic Ras mutants.

Scheffzek K(1), Ahmadian MR, Kabsch W, Wiesm端ller L, Lautwein A, Schmitz F, 
Wittinghofer A.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut f端r molekulare Physiologie, Abteilung Strukturelle 
Biologie, Rheinlanddamm 201, 44139 Dortmund, Germany.

Comment in
    Science. 1997 Jul 18;277(5324):329-30. doi: 10.1126/science.277.5324.329.

The three-dimensional structure of the complex between human H-Ras bound to 
guanosine diphosphate and the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-activating 
domain of the human GTPase-activating protein p120GAP (GAP-334) in the presence 
of aluminum fluoride was solved at a resolution of 2.5 angstroms. The structure 
shows the partly hydrophilic and partly hydrophobic nature of the communication 
between the two molecules, which explains the sensitivity of the interaction 
toward both salts and lipids. An arginine side chain (arginine-789) of GAP-334 
is supplied into the active site of Ras to neutralize developing charges in the 
transition state. The switch II region of Ras is stabilized by GAP-334, thus 
allowing glutamine-61 of Ras, mutation of which activates the oncogenic 
potential, to participate in catalysis. The structural arrangement in the active 
site is consistent with a mostly associative mechanism of phosphoryl transfer 
and provides an explanation for the activation of Ras by glycine-12 and 
glutamine-61 mutations. Glycine-12 in the transition state mimic is within van 
der Waals distance of both arginine-789 of GAP-334 and glutamine-61 of Ras, and 
even its mutation to alanine would disturb the arrangements of residues in the 
transition state.

DOI: 10.1126/science.277.5324.333
PMID: 9219684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
