---
pmid: '7813017'
title: Autoregulatory frameshifting in decoding mammalian ornithine decarboxylase
  antizyme.
authors:
- Matsufuji S
- Matsufuji T
- Miyazaki Y
- Murakami Y
- Atkins JF
- Gesteland RF
- Hayashi S
journal: Cell
year: '1995'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC7133313
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90450-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Autoregulatory frameshifting in decoding mammalian ornithine decarboxylase antizyme.
**Authors:** Matsufuji S, Matsufuji T, Miyazaki Y, Murakami Y, Atkins JF, Gesteland RF, Hayashi S
**Journal:** Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(95)90450-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90450-6)
**PMC:** [PMC7133313](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7133313/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1995 Jan 13;80(1):51-60. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90450-6.

Autoregulatory frameshifting in decoding mammalian ornithine decarboxylase 
antizyme.

Matsufuji S(1), Matsufuji T, Miyazaki Y, Murakami Y, Atkins JF, Gesteland RF, 
Hayashi S.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112.

Rat antizyme gene expression requires programmed, ribosomal frameshifting. A 
novel autoregulatory mechanism enables modulation of frameshifting according to 
the cellular concentration of polyamines. Antizyme binds to, and destabilizes, 
ornithine decarboxylase, a key enzyme in polyamine synthesis. Rapid degradation 
ensues, thus completing a regulatory circuit. In vitro experiments with a fusion 
construct using reticulocyte lysates demonstrate polyamine-dependent expression 
with a frameshift efficiency of 19% at the optimal concentration of spermidine. 
The frameshift is +1 and occurs at the codon just preceding the terminator of 
the initiating frame. Both the termination codon of the initiating frame and a 
pseudoknot downstream in the mRNA have a stimulatory effect. The shift site 
sequence, UCC-UGA-U, is not similar to other known frameshift sites. The 
mechanism does not seem to involve re-pairing of peptidyl-tRNA in the new frame 
but rather reading or occlusion of a fourth base.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90450-6
PMCID: PMC7133313
PMID: 7813017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
