---
pmid: '12534345'
title: Physical interaction of tumour suppressor p53/p73 with CCAAT-binding transcription
  factor 2 (CTF2) and differential regulation of human high-mobility group 1 (HMG1)
  gene expression.
authors:
- Uramoto H
- Izumi H
- Nagatani G
- Ohmori H
- Nagasue N
- Ise T
- Yoshida T
- Yasumoto K
- Kohno K
journal: Biochem J
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1223307
doi: 10.1042/BJ20021646
---

# Physical interaction of tumour suppressor p53/p73 with CCAAT-binding transcription factor 2 (CTF2) and differential regulation of human high-mobility group 1 (HMG1) gene expression.
**Authors:** Uramoto H, Izumi H, Nagatani G, Ohmori H, Nagasue N, Ise T, Yoshida T, Yasumoto K, Kohno K
**Journal:** Biochem J (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20021646](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20021646)
**PMC:** [PMC1223307](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1223307/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2003 Apr 15;371(Pt 2):301-10. doi: 10.1042/BJ20021646.

Physical interaction of tumour suppressor p53/p73 with CCAAT-binding 
transcription factor 2 (CTF2) and differential regulation of human high-mobility 
group 1 (HMG1) gene expression.

Uramoto H(1), Izumi H, Nagatani G, Ohmori H, Nagasue N, Ise T, Yoshida T, 
Yasumoto K, Kohno K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

The CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CTF)/nuclear factor I (NF-I) group of 
cellular DNA-binding proteins recognizes the sequence GCCAAT and is implicated 
in eukaryotic transcription, as well as DNA replication. Molecular analysis of 
human CTF/NF-I cDNA clones revealed multiple mRNA species that contain 
alternative coding regions, apparently as a result of differential splicing. 
Expression and functional analysis established that individual gene products can 
bind to GCCAAT recognition sites and serve as both promoter-selective 
transcriptional activators and initiation factors for DNA replication. The 
interaction between CTF2 and p53/p73 was shown to modulate their ability to 
regulate transcription of their respective target genes. In the present paper, 
we report that p53 down-regulates the activity of the high mobility group 1 
(HMG1) gene promoter, whereas p73alpha up-regulates the activity of this 
promoter. Furthermore, CTF2 transactivates p53-induced p21 promoter activity, 
but inhibits p73alpha-induced p21 promoter activity. Using deletion mutants, we 
found that the DNA-binding domains of both p53 and p73alpha are required for 
physical interaction with CTF2 via the regions between amino acid residues 161 
and 223, and 228 and 312 respectively. CTF2 enhances the DNA-binding activity of 
p53 and inhibits the DNA-binding activity of p73alpha. These results provide 
novel information on the functional interplay between CTF2 and p53/p73 as 
important determinants of their function in cell proliferation, apoptosis, DNA 
repair and cisplatin resistance.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20021646
PMCID: PMC1223307
PMID: 12534345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CTF)/nuclear factor I (NF-I) group of cellular DNA-binding proteins recognizes the sequence GCCAAT and is implicated in eukaryotic transcription, as well as DNA replication. Molecular analysis of human CTF/NF-I cDNA clones revealed multiple mRNA species that contain alternative coding regions, apparently as a result of differential splicing. Expression and functional analysis established that individual gene products can bind to GCCAAT recognition sites and serve as both promoter-selective transcriptional activators and initiation factors for DNA replication. The interaction between CTF2 and p53/p73 was shown to modulate their ability to regulate transcription of their respective target genes. In the present paper, we report that p53 down-regulates the activity of the high mobility group 1 (HMG1) gene promoter, whereas p73alpha up-regulates the activity of this promoter. Furthermore, CTF2 transactivates p53-induced p21 promoter activity, but inhibits p73alpha-induced p21 promoter activity. Using deletion mutants, we found that the DNA-binding domains of both p53 and p73alpha are required for physical interaction with CTF2 via the regions between amino acid residues 161 and 223, and 228 and 312 respectively. CTF2 enhances the DNA-binding activity of p53 and inhibits the DNA-binding activity of p73alpha. These results provide novel information on the functional interplay between CTF2 and p53/p73 as important determinants of their function in cell proliferation, apoptosis, DNA repair and cisplatin resistance.
