---
pmid: '8625802'
title: A comparison of the properties of Sox-3 with Sry and two related genes, Sox-1
  and Sox-2.
authors:
- Collignon J
- Sockanathan S
- Hacker A
- Cohen-Tannoudji M
- Norris D
- Rastan S
- Stevanovic M
- Goodfellow PN
- Lovell-Badge R
journal: Development
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.122.2.509
---

# A comparison of the properties of Sox-3 with Sry and two related genes, Sox-1 and Sox-2.
**Authors:** Collignon J, Sockanathan S, Hacker A, Cohen-Tannoudji M, Norris D, Rastan S, Stevanovic M, Goodfellow PN, Lovell-Badge R
**Journal:** Development (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.122.2.509](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.122.2.509)

## Abstract

1. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):509-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.122.2.509.

A comparison of the properties of Sox-3 with Sry and two related genes, Sox-1 
and Sox-2.

Collignon J(1), Sockanathan S, Hacker A, Cohen-Tannoudji M, Norris D, Rastan S, 
Stevanovic M, Goodfellow PN, Lovell-Badge R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, MRC National Institute for Medical 
Research, London, UK.

The Sox gene family consists of a large number of embryonically expressed genes 
related via the possession of a 79-amino-acid DNA-binding domain known as the 
HMG box. Partial clones for the first three Sox genes (al-a3) were isolated by 
homology to the HMG box of the testis-determining gene Sry and are now termed 
Sox-1, Sox-2 and Sox-3, Sox-3 is highly conserved amongst mammalian species and 
is located on the X chromosome. This has led to the proposal that Sry evolved 
from Sox-3. We present the cloning and sequencing of Sox-1, Sox-2 and Sox-3 from 
the mouse and show that Sox-3 is most closely relate to Sry. We also confirm 
that mouse Sox-3 is located on the X chromosome between Hprt and Dmd. Analysis 
of the distribution of Sox-3 RNA shows that its main site of expression is in 
the developing central nervous system, suggesting a role for Sox-3 in neural 
development. Moreover, we demonstrate that Sox-3, as well as Sox-1 and Sox-2, 
are expressed in the urogenital ridge and that their protein products are able 
to bind the same DNA sequence motif as Sry in vitro, but with different 
affinities. These observations prompt discussion of an evolutionary link between 
the genes and support the model that Sry has evolved from Sox-3. However our 
findings imply that if this is true, then Sry has undergone concomitant changes 
resulting in loss of CNS expression and altered DNA-binding properties.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.122.2.509
PMID: 8625802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
