---
pmid: '9187108'
title: TEP1, encoded by a candidate tumor suppressor locus, is a novel protein tyrosine
  phosphatase regulated by transforming growth factor beta.
authors:
- Li DM
- Sun H
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
---

# TEP1, encoded by a candidate tumor suppressor locus, is a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase regulated by transforming growth factor beta.
**Authors:** Li DM, Sun H
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1997)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 1997 Jun 1;57(11):2124-9.

TEP1, encoded by a candidate tumor suppressor locus, is a novel protein tyrosine 
phosphatase regulated by transforming growth factor beta.

Li DM(1), Sun H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 06520, USA.

It has long been postulated that protein tyrosine phosphatases may act as tumor 
suppressors because of their ability to counteract the oncogenic actions of 
protein tyrosine kinases. Here we report the cloning and characterization of a 
novel human protein tyrosine phosphatase, TEP1. TEP1 contains the protein 
tyrosine phosphatase signature motif, and we show that it possesses an intrinsic 
protein tyrosine phosphatase activity. TEP1 also shares extensive homology with 
tensin, a cytoskeletal protein localized to focal adhesions, and with auxilin, a 
protein involved in synaptic vesicle transport. Immunofluorescence studies show 
that TEP1 is a cytoplasmic protein. The abundance of TEP1 transcription is 
altered in many transformed cells. In the transforming growth factor 
beta-sensitive cells, TEP1 expression is rapidly down-regulated by transforming 
growth factor beta, a cytokine shown to be involved in regulating cell adhesion 
and cell motility. We have also mapped the gene encoding TEP1 to chromosome 
10q23, a locus that is frequently deleted in a variety of human cancers. TEP1 
protein is identical to the protein encoded by the candidate tumor suppressor 
gene PTEN/MMAC1. Our functional studies of the TEP1 protein suggest that its 
tumor suppressor function may associate with its intrinsic protein tyrosine 
phosphatase activity and its cytoplasmic localization.

PMID: 9187108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
