---
pmid: '33805'
title: The charge heterogeneity of soluble human galactosyltransferases isolated from
  milk, amniotic fluid and malignant ascites.
authors:
- Gerber AC
- Kozdrowski I
- Wyss SR
- Berger EG
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '1979'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb12843.x
pubmed_publication_types:
- Comparative Study
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The charge heterogeneity of soluble human galactosyltransferases isolated from milk, amniotic fluid and malignant ascites.
**Authors:** Gerber AC, Kozdrowski I, Wyss SR, Berger EG
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb12843.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb12843.x)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Biochem. 1979 Feb 1;93(3):453-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb12843.x.

The charge heterogeneity of soluble human galactosyltransferases isolated from 
milk, amniotic fluid and malignant ascites.

Gerber AC, Kozdrowski I, Wyss SR, Berger EG.

UDP-galactose: N-acetylglucosamine galactosyltransferase was isolated from 
pooled human milk, pooled amniotic fluid and from two different individual 
samples of malignant ascites. The purification procedure involving two 
successive affinity chromatography steps on N-acetylglucosamine--agarose and 
alpha-lactalbumin--agarose yielded an enzyme preparation homogeneous by size. 
Under non-denaturing conditions the ascites and amniotic fluid enzymes had 
identical electrophoretic mobility, but they moved faster than the milk enzyme. 
Isoelectric analysis in the presence and absence of urea resolved the milk 
enzyme into at least 13 different forms, nine of which had the same isoelectric 
points after refocusing. All enzyme forms showed similar activity when free 
N-acetylglucosamine, ovalbumin, sialic-acid-free ovine submaxillary mucin and 
glucose, in the presence of alpha-lactalbumin, were used as acceptor substrates. 
Comparative isoelectric focusing of the three galactosyltransferases revealed 
identical patterns of the amniotic and ascites enzymes, but only partial overlap 
with the milk enzyme, which was less negatively charged. Neuraminidase treatment 
of ascites and milk galactosyltransferases produced very similar focusing 
patterns. The possible structural basis for this charge heterogeneity is briefly 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1979.tb12843.x
PMID: 33805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
