---
pmid: '20236161'
title: Transient alginate gene expression by Pseudomonas putida biofilm residents
  under water-limiting conditions reflects adaptation to the local environment.
authors:
- Li X
- Nielsen L
- Nolan C
- Halverson LJ
journal: Environ Microbiol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02186.x
---

# Transient alginate gene expression by Pseudomonas putida biofilm residents under water-limiting conditions reflects adaptation to the local environment.
**Authors:** Li X, Nielsen L, Nolan C, Halverson LJ
**Journal:** Environ Microbiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02186.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02186.x)

## Abstract

1. Environ Microbiol. 2010 Jun;12(6):1578-90. doi: 
10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02186.x. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Transient alginate gene expression by Pseudomonas putida biofilm residents under 
water-limiting conditions reflects adaptation to the local environment.

Li X(1), Nielsen L, Nolan C, Halverson LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Under water-limiting conditions Pseudomonas putida produces the 
exopolysaccharide alginate, which influences biofilm development and facilitates 
maintaining a hydrated microenvironment. Since alginate is a minor biofilm 
matrix component it is important to determine whether alginate production occurs 
by all or a subset of residents, and when and to what extent cells contribute to 
alginate production. To address these questions we employed stable and unstable 
fluorescent reporters to measure alginate biosynthesis (algD) operon expression 
and metabolic activity in vivo quantitatively by flow cytometry and visually by 
microscopy. Here we report that during growth under water-limiting conditions 
and when biofilms become dehydrated most residents transiently express the 
alginate biosynthesis genes leading to distinct spatial patterns as the biofilm 
ages. Transient alginate gene expression was not a consequence of decreased 
metabolic activity, since metabolic reporters were still expressed, nor was it 
likely due to transient cytosolic availability of the alternative sigma factor 
AlgT, based on qRT-PCR. Our findings also indicate that one or more biofilm 
attribute, other than alginate, provides protection from desiccation stress. 
Collectively, our findings suggest that differentiated cells dedicated to 
alginate production are not part of the P. putida biofilm lifestyle under 
water-limiting conditions. Alternatively, P. putida biofilm cells may be 
responding to their own local environment, producing alginate because of the 
fitness advantage it confers under those particular conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02186.x
PMID: 20236161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
