---
pmid: '28931551'
title: EMC10 (Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Protein Complex Subunit 10) Is a Bone
  Marrow-Derived Angiogenic Growth Factor Promoting Tissue Repair After Myocardial
  Infarction.
authors:
- Reboll MR
- Korf-Klingebiel M
- Klede S
- Polten F
- Brinkmann E
- Reimann I
- Schönfeld HJ
- Bobadilla M
- Faix J
- Kensah G
- Gruh I
- Klintschar M
- Gaestel M
- Niessen HW
- Pich A
- Bauersachs J
- Gogos JA
- Wang Y
- Wollert KC
journal: Circulation
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029980
---

# EMC10 (Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Protein Complex Subunit 10) Is a Bone Marrow-Derived Angiogenic Growth Factor Promoting Tissue Repair After Myocardial Infarction.
**Authors:** Reboll MR, Korf-Klingebiel M, Klede S, Polten F, Brinkmann E, Reimann I, Schönfeld HJ, Bobadilla M, Faix J, Kensah G, Gruh I, Klintschar M, Gaestel M, Niessen HW, Pich A, Bauersachs J, Gogos JA, Wang Y, Wollert KC
**Journal:** Circulation (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029980](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029980)

## Abstract

1. Circulation. 2017 Nov 7;136(19):1809-1823. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029980. Epub 2017 Sep 20.

EMC10 (Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane Protein Complex Subunit 10) Is a Bone 
Marrow-Derived Angiogenic Growth Factor Promoting Tissue Repair After Myocardial 
Infarction.

Reboll MR(1), Korf-Klingebiel M(1), Klede S(1), Polten F(1), Brinkmann E(1), 
Reimann I(1), Schönfeld HJ(1), Bobadilla M(1), Faix J(1), Kensah G(1), Gruh 
I(1), Klintschar M(1), Gaestel M(1), Niessen HW(1), Pich A(1), Bauersachs J(1), 
Gogos JA(1), Wang Y(1), Wollert KC(2).

Author information:
(1)From Division of Molecular and Translational Cardiology, Department of 
Cardiology and Angiology (M.R.R., M.K.-K., S.K., E.B., I.R., Y.W., K.C.W.), Core 
Unit Proteomics, Institute of Toxicology (F.P., A.P.), Department of Biophysical 
Chemistry (J.F.), Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial 
Organs, Department of Cardiothoracic, Transplantation, and Vascular Surgery 
(G.K., I.G.), Institute of Legal Medicine (M.K.), Institute of Physiological 
Chemistry (M.G.), and Department of Cardiology and Angiology (J.B.), Hannover 
Medical School, Germany; F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Pharma Research and Early 
Development, Basel, Switzerland (H.-J.S., M.B.); Department of Pathology and 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Vrije 
Universiteit University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (H.W.N.); and 
Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics and Department of Neuroscience, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY (J.A.G.).
(2)From Division of Molecular and Translational Cardiology, Department of 
Cardiology and Angiology (M.R.R., M.K.-K., S.K., E.B., I.R., Y.W., K.C.W.), Core 
Unit Proteomics, Institute of Toxicology (F.P., A.P.), Department of Biophysical 
Chemistry (J.F.), Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial 
Organs, Department of Cardiothoracic, Transplantation, and Vascular Surgery 
(G.K., I.G.), Institute of Legal Medicine (M.K.), Institute of Physiological 
Chemistry (M.G.), and Department of Cardiology and Angiology (J.B.), Hannover 
Medical School, Germany; F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Pharma Research and Early 
Development, Basel, Switzerland (H.-J.S., M.B.); Department of Pathology and 
Department of Cardiac Surgery, Institute for Cardiovascular Research, Vrije 
Universiteit University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (H.W.N.); and 
Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics and Department of Neuroscience, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY (J.A.G.). 
wollert.kai@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND: Clinical trials of bone marrow cell-based therapies after acute 
myocardial infarction (MI) have produced mostly neutral results. Treatment with 
specific bone marrow cell-derived secreted proteins may provide an alternative 
biological approach to improving tissue repair and heart function after MI. We 
recently performed a bioinformatic secretome analysis in bone marrow cells from 
patients with acute MI and discovered a poorly characterized secreted protein, 
EMC10 (endoplasmic reticulum membrane protein complex subunit 10), showing 
activity in an angiogenic screen.
METHODS: We investigated the angiogenic potential of EMC10 and its mouse homolog 
(Emc10) in cultured endothelial cells and infarcted heart explants. We defined 
the cellular sources and function of Emc10 after MI using wild-type, 
Emc10-deficient, and Emc10 bone marrow-chimeric mice subjected to transient 
coronary artery ligation. Furthermore, we explored the therapeutic potential of 
recombinant Emc10 delivered by osmotic minipumps after MI in heart failure-prone 
FVB/N mice.
RESULTS: Emc10 signaled through small GTPases, p21-activated kinase, and the p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) 
pathway to promote actin polymerization and endothelial cell migration. 
Confirming the importance of these signaling events in the context of acute MI, 
Emc10 stimulated endothelial cell outgrowth from infarcted mouse heart explants 
via p38 MAPK-MK2. Emc10 protein abundance was increased in the infarcted region 
of the left ventricle and in the circulation of wild-type mice after MI. Emc10 
expression was also increased in left ventricular tissue samples from patients 
with acute MI. Bone marrow-derived monocytes and macrophages were the 
predominant sources of Emc10 in the infarcted murine heart. Emc10 KO mice showed 
no cardiovascular phenotype at baseline. After MI, however, capillarization of 
the infarct border zone was impaired in KO mice, and the animals developed 
larger infarct scars and more pronounced left ventricular remodeling compared 
with wild-type mice. Transplanting KO mice with wild-type bone marrow cells 
rescued the angiogenic defect and ameliorated left ventricular remodeling. 
Treating FVB/N mice with recombinant Emc10 enhanced infarct border-zone 
capillarization and exerted a sustained beneficial effect on left ventricular 
remodeling.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified Emc10 as a previously unknown angiogenic growth 
factor that is produced by bone marrow-derived monocytes and macrophages as part 
of an endogenous adaptive response that can be enhanced therapeutically to 
repair the heart after MI.

© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.029980
PMID: 28931551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
