---
pmid: '18077395'
title: Ubc13/Rnf8 ubiquitin ligases control foci formation of the Rap80/Abraxas/Brca1/Brcc36
  complex in response to DNA damage.
authors:
- Wang B
- Elledge SJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2410075
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0710061104
---

# Ubc13/Rnf8 ubiquitin ligases control foci formation of the Rap80/Abraxas/Brca1/Brcc36 complex in response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Wang B, Elledge SJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0710061104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0710061104)
**PMC:** [PMC2410075](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2410075/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 26;104(52):20759-63. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0710061104. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Ubc13/Rnf8 ubiquitin ligases control foci formation of the 
Rap80/Abraxas/Brca1/Brcc36 complex in response to DNA damage.

Wang B(1), Elledge SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Center for Genetics 
and Genomics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard University Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 26;104(52):20645-6. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0710916105.

The Brca1 A complex contains Brca1/Bard1, Abraxas, Rap80, and Brcc36; however, 
with the exception of the Brca1-Abraxas interaction, how the A complex is 
assembled is not known. The A complex is localized to sites of DNA damage 
through the UIM domains of RAP80, which bind K63-linked polyubiquitin chains. In 
this study, we identified an FHA domain RING finger E3 ubiquitin ligase, RNF8, 
and an E2-conjugating enzyme known to form K63-polyubiquitin chains, Ubc13, each 
of which is required to recruit the Brca1 A complex to sites of DNA damage. Rnf8 
localizes to sites of DNA damage through an FHA-domain-containing region. We 
found that Rap80 contains an Abraxas interaction domain [AIR 
(Abraxas-interacting region)], required for association of Rap80 with Abraxas, 
Brca1, and Brcc36. Abraxas and Brcc36 associate through coiled-coil domains on 
each protein. These data suggest a model through which Ubc13 and Rnf8 are 
recruited to sites of DNA damage through DNA-damage-induced phosphorylation of a 
chromatin-associated protein and generate polyubiquitin chains that then recruit 
Rap80 and the entire Brca1 A complex to DNA-damage foci. This sequential E3 
ubiquitin ligase recruitment constitutes a ubiquitin ligase cascade required for 
DNA repair and checkpoint signaling.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0710061104
PMCID: PMC2410075
PMID: 18077395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
