---
pmid: '12950278'
title: 'Caenorhabditis elegans DAF-21 (HSP90) is characteristically and predominantly
  expressed in germline cells: spatial and temporal analysis.'
authors:
- Inoue T
- Takamura K
- Yamae H
- Ise N
- Kawakami M
- Tabuse Y
- Miwa J
- Yamaguchi Y
journal: Dev Growth Differ
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-169x.2003.00706.x
---

# Caenorhabditis elegans DAF-21 (HSP90) is characteristically and predominantly expressed in germline cells: spatial and temporal analysis.
**Authors:** Inoue T, Takamura K, Yamae H, Ise N, Kawakami M, Tabuse Y, Miwa J, Yamaguchi Y
**Journal:** Dev Growth Differ (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-169x.2003.00706.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-169x.2003.00706.x)

## Abstract

1. Dev Growth Differ. 2003 Aug;45(4):369-76. doi:
10.1046/j.1440-169x.2003.00706.x.

Caenorhabditis elegans DAF-21 (HSP90) is characteristically and predominantly 
expressed in germline cells: spatial and temporal analysis.

Inoue T(1), Takamura K, Yamae H, Ise N, Kawakami M, Tabuse Y, Miwa J, Yamaguchi 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Fukuyama University, Fukuyama 729-0292, Japan.

Three monoclonal antibodies against antigens that exist in the Caenorhabditis 
elegans germ line have previously been described. In the present study, a 
full-length mRNA for one of these antigens was isolated, and by sequencing its 
corresponding cDNA, it was predicted that the protein would show a high homology 
with the 90 kDa heat shock protein (HSP90) in other species, and with the 
protein of daf-21, a previously identified hsp90 homologue. The spatial and 
temporal distribution of the antigen (DAF-21) was analyzed in C. elegans, and 
the localization of daf-21 mRNA, as detected by in situ hybridization, agreed 
with that detected by the monoclonal antibody. Under normal conditions, daf-21 
mRNA is characteristically distributed in postembryonic germ cells derived from 
Z2 and Z3 cells in both hermaphrodites and males. Under heat stress conditions, 
however, daf-21 mRNA was not only detected in germ cells, but also apparently 
expressed all over the body. In addition, the DAF-21 protein seemed to be 
localized in the perinuclear region of somatic cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-169x.2003.00706.x
PMID: 12950278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
