---
pmid: '9372918'
title: Role of Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ homolog, recombination, and checkpoint
  genes in UV damage tolerance.
authors:
- Murray JM
- Lindsay HD
- Munday CA
- Carr AM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC232543
doi: 10.1128/MCB.17.12.6868
---

# Role of Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ homolog, recombination, and checkpoint genes in UV damage tolerance.
**Authors:** Murray JM, Lindsay HD, Munday CA, Carr AM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.17.12.6868](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.17.12.6868)
**PMC:** [PMC232543](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC232543/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):6868-75. doi: 10.1128/MCB.17.12.6868.

Role of Schizosaccharomyces pombe RecQ homolog, recombination, and checkpoint 
genes in UV damage tolerance.

Murray JM(1), Lindsay HD, Munday CA, Carr AM.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Sussex University, Falmer, Brighton, United 
Kingdom. j.m.murray@sussex.ac.uk

The cellular responses to DNA damage are complex and include direct DNA repair 
pathways that remove the damage and indirect damage responses which allow cells 
to survive DNA damage that has not been, or cannot be, removed. We have 
identified the gene mutated in the rad12.502 strain as a Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe recQ homolog. The same gene (designated rqh1) is also mutated in the 
hus2.22 mutant. We show that Rqhl is involved in a DNA damage survival mechanism 
which prevents cell death when UV-induced DNA damage cannot be removed. This 
pathway also requires the correct functioning of the recombination machinery and 
the six checkpoint rad gene products plus the Cdsl kinase. Our data suggest that 
Rqh1 operates during S phase as part of a mechanism which prevents DNA damage 
causing cell lethality. This process may involve the bypass of DNA damage sites 
by the replication fork. Finally, in contrast with the reported literature, we 
do not find that rqh1 (rad12) mutant cells are defective in UV dimer 
endonuclease activity.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.17.12.6868
PMCID: PMC232543
PMID: 9372918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The cellular responses to DNA damage are complex and include direct DNA repair pathways that remove the damage and indirect damage responses which allow cells to survive DNA damage that has not been, or cannot be, removed. We have identified the gene mutated in the rad12.502 strain as a Schizosaccharomyces pombe recQ homolog. The same gene (designated rqh1) is also mutated in the hus2.22 mutant. We show that Rqhl is involved in a DNA damage survival mechanism which prevents cell death when UV-induced DNA damage cannot be removed. This pathway also requires the correct functioning of the recombination machinery and the six checkpoint rad gene products plus the Cdsl kinase. Our data suggest that Rqh1 operates during S phase as part of a mechanism which prevents DNA damage causing cell lethality. This process may involve the bypass of DNA damage sites by the replication fork. Finally, in contrast with the reported literature, we do not find that rqh1 (rad12) mutant cells are defective in UV dimer endonuclease activity.
