---
pmid: '17114044'
title: The familial Parkinsonism gene LRRK2 regulates neurite process morphology.
authors:
- MacLeod D
- Dowman J
- Hammond R
- Leete T
- Inoue K
- Abeliovich A
journal: Neuron
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.008
---

# The familial Parkinsonism gene LRRK2 regulates neurite process morphology.
**Authors:** MacLeod D, Dowman J, Hammond R, Leete T, Inoue K, Abeliovich A
**Journal:** Neuron (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.008)

## Abstract

1. Neuron. 2006 Nov 22;52(4):587-93. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.008.

The familial Parkinsonism gene LRRK2 regulates neurite process morphology.

MacLeod D(1), Dowman J, Hammond R, Leete T, Inoue K, Abeliovich A.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pathology and Neurology, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior 
and Taub Institute, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons 
15-403, 630 West 168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Mutations in LRRK2 underlie an autosomal-dominant, inherited form of Parkinson's 
disease (PD) that mimics the clinical features of the common "sporadic" form of 
PD. The LRRK2 protein includes putative GTPase, protein kinase, WD40 repeat, and 
leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains of unknown function. Here we show that 
PD-associated LRRK2 mutations display disinhibited kinase activity and induce a 
progressive reduction in neurite length and branching both in primary neuronal 
cultures and in the intact rodent CNS. In contrast, LRRK2 deficiency leads to 
increased neurite length and branching. Neurons that express PD-associated LRRK2 
mutations additionally harbor prominent phospho-tau-positive inclusions with 
lysosomal characteristics and ultimately undergo apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.10.008
PMID: 17114044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
