---
pmid: '22761016'
title: Downregulation of galectin-3 by EGF mediates the apoptosis of HepG2 cells.
authors:
- Hu Z
- Jiang X
- Xu Y
- Lu N
- Wang W
- Luo J
- Zou H
- Zheng D
- Feng X
journal: Mol Cell Biochem
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1378-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Downregulation of galectin-3 by EGF mediates the apoptosis of HepG2 cells.
**Authors:** Hu Z, Jiang X, Xu Y, Lu N, Wang W, Luo J, Zou H, Zheng D, Feng X
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biochem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11010-012-1378-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11010-012-1378-8)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Oct;369(1-2):157-65. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1378-8.
Epub  2012 Jul 4.

Downregulation of galectin-3 by EGF mediates the apoptosis of HepG2 cells.

Hu Z(1), Jiang X, Xu Y, Lu N, Wang W, Luo J, Zou H, Zheng D, Feng X.

Author information:
(1)The Research Core, Second Hospital, The Second Clinical School, Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. ansel.zzhu@gmail.com

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) in high concentrations induces apoptosis of the 
tumor cells which express high levels of epidermal growth factor receptor. 
However, the precise mechanism for this induction is not clear. Galectin-3 is 
the most probable candidate for mediating this effect, as it is known to induce 
anti-apoptotic activity in a variety of tumor cells exposed to diverse apoptotic 
stimuli. In this study, we determined whether galectin-3 plays a role in high 
concentrations of EGF-induced apoptosis of HepG2 cells. We found that EGF in 
high concentrations led to the growth inhibition of HepG2 cells, which were 
associated with promotion of cell death. High concentrations of EGF suppressed 
cytoplasmic expression of galectin-3. Moreover, we demonstrated overexpression 
of galectin-3 could reduce EGF-induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells. Our study 
demonstrated for the first time that downregulation of cytoplasmic galectin-3 
was essential for high concentrations of EGF-induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-012-1378-8
PMID: 22761016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
