---
pmid: '14593114'
title: Human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in degradation of proteins from
  the endoplasmic reticulum.
authors:
- Kikkert M
- Doolman R
- Dai M
- Avner R
- Hassink G
- van Voorden S
- Thanedar S
- Roitelman J
- Chau V
- Wiertz E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307453200
---

# Human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in degradation of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.
**Authors:** Kikkert M, Doolman R, Dai M, Avner R, Hassink G, van Voorden S, Thanedar S, Roitelman J, Chau V, Wiertz E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M307453200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M307453200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 30;279(5):3525-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M307453200. Epub
2003  Oct 30.

Human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in degradation of proteins from 
the endoplasmic reticulum.

Kikkert M(1), Doolman R, Dai M, Avner R, Hassink G, van Voorden S, Thanedar S, 
Roitelman J, Chau V, Wiertz E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, P. O. 
Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

The ubiquitin system plays an important role in endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER)-associated degradation of proteins that are misfolded, that fail to 
associate with their oligomerization partners, or whose levels are metabolically 
regulated. E3 ubiquitin ligases are key enzymes in the ubiquitination process as 
they recognize the substrate and facilitate coupling of multiple ubiquitin units 
to the protein that is to be degraded. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ER-resident 
E3 ligase Hrd1p/Der3p functions in the metabolically regulated degradation of 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase and additionally facilitates the 
degradation of a number of misfolded proteins from the ER. In this study we 
characterized the structure and function of the putative human orthologue of 
yeast Hrd1p/Der3p, designated human HRD1. We show that human HRD1 is a 
non-glycosylated, stable ER protein with a cytosolic RING-H2 finger domain. In 
the presence of the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC7, the RING-H2 finger has in 
vitro ubiquitination activity for Lys(48)-specific polyubiquitin linkage, 
suggesting that human HRD1 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in protein 
degradation. Human HRD1 appears to be involved in the basal degradation of 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase but not in the degradation that 
is regulated by sterols. Additionally we show that human HRD1 is involved in the 
elimination of two model ER-associated degradation substrates, TCR-alpha and 
CD3-delta.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M307453200
PMID: 14593114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
