---
pmid: '24746703'
title: Small GTPase RBJ mediates nuclear entrapment of MEK1/MEK2 in tumor progression.
authors:
- Chen T
- Yang M
- Yu Z
- Tang S
- Wang C
- Zhu X
- Guo J
- Li N
- Zhang W
- Hou J
- Liu H
- Han C
- Liu Q
- Gu Y
- Qian C
- Wan T
- Cui L
- Zhu M
- Zheng W
- Cao X
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.009
---

# Small GTPase RBJ mediates nuclear entrapment of MEK1/MEK2 in tumor progression.
**Authors:** Chen T, Yang M, Yu Z, Tang S, Wang C, Zhu X, Guo J, Li N, Zhang W, Hou J, Liu H, Han C, Liu Q, Gu Y, Qian C, Wan T, Cui L, Zhu M, Zheng W, Cao X
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.009)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2014 May 12;25(5):682-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.009. Epub
2014  Apr 17.

Small GTPase RBJ mediates nuclear entrapment of MEK1/MEK2 in tumor progression.

Chen T(1), Yang M(1), Yu Z(2), Tang S(2), Wang C(3), Zhu X(3), Guo J(3), Li 
N(3), Zhang W(3), Hou J(3), Liu H(3), Han C(3), Liu Q(3), Gu Y(3), Qian C(3), 
Wan T(3), Cui L(4), Zhu M(5), Zheng W(5), Cao X(6).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China; National Key 
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of Immunology, Institute 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, 
China.
(2)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 
310058, China.
(3)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(4)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(6)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of Immunology, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China; National Key 
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of Immunology, Institute 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, 
China; Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 
310058, China. Electronic address: caoxt@immunol.org.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2021 Mar 8;39(3):438-440. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.02.010.

Ras-related small GTPases play important roles in cancer. However, the roles of 
RBJ, a representative of the sixth subfamily of Ras-related small GTPases, in 
tumorigenesis and tumor progression remain unknown. Here, we report that RBJ is 
dysregulated in human gastrointestinal cancers and can promote carcinogenesis 
and tumor progression via nuclear entrapment of mitogen-activated 
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase (MEK)1/MEK2 and 
activation of ERK1/ERK2. Nucleus-localized RBJ interacts with MEK/ERK and 
prolongs the duration of MEK/ERK activation. Rbj deficiency abrogates nuclear 
accumulation of MEK1/MEK2, attenuates ERK1/ERK2 activation, and impairs 
AOM/DSS-induced colonic carcinogenesis. Moreover, Rbj knockdown inhibits growth 
of established tumors. Our data suggest that RBJ may be an oncogenic Ras-related 
small GTPase mediating nuclear accumulation of active MEK1/MEK2 in tumor 
progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.009
PMID: 24746703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
