---
pmid: '8175795'
title: CD45 regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation and enzyme activity of src family
  kinases.
authors:
- Burns CM
- Sakaguchi K
- Appella E
- Ashwell JD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
---

# CD45 regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation and enzyme activity of src family kinases.
**Authors:** Burns CM, Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Ashwell JD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1994)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1994 May 6;269(18):13594-600.

CD45 regulation of tyrosine phosphorylation and enzyme activity of src family 
kinases.

Burns CM(1), Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Ashwell JD.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Previous analyses have suggested that the CD45 tyrosine phosphatase activates 
src family tyrosine kinases p56lck and p59fyn by dephosphorylating regulatory 
COOH-terminal residues. We have examined the status of p56lck and p59fyn in 
murine and human CD45- T cell lines. Surprisingly, despite the fact that p56lck 
and p59fyn were spontaneously hyperphosphorylated, the tyrosine kinase activity 
of both enzymes was increased in CD45- versus CD45+ cells. In vitro exposure of 
hyperphosphorylated p56lck to CD45 decreased enzyme activity to near-basal 
levels. Lck from CD45- cells was hyperphosphorylated on the cyanogen bromide 
digestion fragment that contains the negative regulatory residue Tyr-505, and 
the identity of this site of phosphorylation was confirmed by trypsin digestion 
followed by high performance liquid chromatography. Loss of CD45 results, 
therefore, in a paradoxical hyperphosphorylation of the COOH-terminal tyrosine 
and increased src family kinase enzymatic activity.

PMID: 8175795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
