---
pmid: '24459106'
title: Sensory neuropathy with bone destruction due to a mutation in the membrane-shaping
  atlastin GTPase 3.
authors:
- Kornak U
- Mademan I
- Schinke M
- Voigt M
- Krawitz P
- Hecht J
- Barvencik F
- Schinke T
- Gießelmann S
- Beil FT
- Pou-Serradell A
- Vílchez JJ
- Beetz C
- Deconinck T
- Timmerman V
- Kaether C
- De Jonghe P
- Hübner CA
- Gal A
- Amling M
- Mundlos S
- Baets J
- Kurth I
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/brain/awt357
---

# Sensory neuropathy with bone destruction due to a mutation in the membrane-shaping atlastin GTPase 3.
**Authors:** Kornak U, Mademan I, Schinke M, Voigt M, Krawitz P, Hecht J, Barvencik F, Schinke T, Gießelmann S, Beil FT, Pou-Serradell A, Vílchez JJ, Beetz C, Deconinck T, Timmerman V, Kaether C, De Jonghe P, Hübner CA, Gal A, Amling M, Mundlos S, Baets J, Kurth I
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awt357](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt357)

## Abstract

1. Brain. 2014 Mar;137(Pt 3):683-92. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt357. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Sensory neuropathy with bone destruction due to a mutation in the 
membrane-shaping atlastin GTPase 3.

Kornak U(1), Mademan I, Schinke M, Voigt M, Krawitz P, Hecht J, Barvencik F, 
Schinke T, Gießelmann S, Beil FT, Pou-Serradell A, Vílchez JJ, Beetz C, 
Deconinck T, Timmerman V, Kaether C, De Jonghe P, Hübner CA, Gal A, Amling M, 
Mundlos S, Baets J, Kurth I.

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Brain. 2014 Jul;137(Pt 7):e286. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu091.

Many neurodegenerative disorders present with sensory loss. In the group of 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies loss of nociception is one of the 
disease hallmarks. To determine underlying factors of sensory neurodegeneration 
we performed whole-exome sequencing in affected individuals with the disorder. 
In a family with sensory neuropathy with loss of pain perception and destruction 
of the pedal skeleton we report a missense mutation in a highly conserved amino 
acid residue of atlastin GTPase 3 (ATL3), an endoplasmic reticulum-shaping 
GTPase. The same mutation (p.Tyr192Cys) was identified in a second family with 
similar clinical outcome by screening a large cohort of 115 patients with 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies. Both families show an autosomal 
dominant pattern of inheritance and the mutation segregates with complete 
penetrance. ATL3 is a paralogue of ATL1, a membrane curvature-generating 
molecule that is involved in spastic paraplegia and hereditary sensory 
neuropathy. ATL3 proteins are enriched in three-way junctions, branch points of 
the endoplasmic reticulum that connect membranous tubules to a continuous 
network. Mutant ATL3 p.Tyr192Cys fails to localize to branch points, but instead 
disrupts the structure of the tubular endoplasmic reticulum, suggesting that the 
mutation exerts a dominant-negative effect. Identification of ATL3 as novel 
disease-associated gene exemplifies that long-term sensory neuronal maintenance 
critically depends on the structural organisation of the endoplasmic reticulum. 
It emphasizes that alterations in membrane shaping-proteins are one of the major 
emerging pathways in axonal degeneration and suggests that this group of 
molecules should be considered in neuroprotective strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt357
PMID: 24459106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
