---
pmid: '10692450'
title: Thrombin inhibits tumor cell growth in association with up-regulation of p21(waf/cip1)
  and caspases via a p53-independent, STAT-1-dependent pathway.
authors:
- Huang YQ
- Li JJ
- Karpatkin S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.9.6462
---

# Thrombin inhibits tumor cell growth in association with up-regulation of p21(waf/cip1) and caspases via a p53-independent, STAT-1-dependent pathway.
**Authors:** Huang YQ, Li JJ, Karpatkin S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.275.9.6462](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.275.9.6462)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6462-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.9.6462.

Thrombin inhibits tumor cell growth in association with up-regulation of 
p21(waf/cip1) and caspases via a p53-independent, STAT-1-dependent pathway.

Huang YQ(1), Li JJ, Karpatkin S.

Author information:
(1)New York University Medical School and Kaplan Cancer Center, New York, New 
York 10016, USA. Huangyo2@mcrcr6.med.nyu.edu

Thrombin, a multifunctional protein, has been found to be involved in cellular 
mitogenesis, tumor growth, and metastasis, in addition to its well known effects 
on the initiation of platelet aggregation and secretion and the conversion of 
fibrinogen to fibrin to form blood clots. These properties of thrombin rely on 
its action as a serine protease, which cleaves the N-terminal region of a 
7-transmembrane G protein receptor (protease-activated receptor, PAR-1), thus 
exposing a tethered end hexapeptide sequence capable of activating its receptor. 
Little is known about its effect on genes that regulate the cell cycle. This 
study was undertaken to investigate the possible mechanisms by which thrombin 
regulates tumor cell growth in several tumor cell lines: human CHRF 
megakaryocyte, DU145 prostate, MDAMB231 and MCF7 breast, U3A fibrosarcoma, and 2 
murine fibroblast cell lines, MEFp53(-/-) and CD STAT(-/-). We have found that 
thrombin under the conditions of culture employed inhibits cell growth by both 
up-regulation of p21(waf/cip1) and induction of caspases via its PAR-1 receptor. 
The increased expression of p21(waf/cip1) by thrombin was p53 independent, STAT1 
dependent, and protein synthesis independent. This was associated with tyrosine 
phosphorylation of JAK2 and STAT1, and nuclear translocation of STAT1. Induction 
of apoptosis is also PAR-1-specific, STAT1-dependent, and associated with 
up-regulation of caspases 1, 2, and 3. Our study establishes, for the first 
time, a link between PAR-1 receptor activation with the STAT signal pathway, 
which leads to cell cycle control and apoptosis. This observation broadens our 
understanding of the mechanism of PAR-1 activation and its effect on cell 
growth, and could possibly lead to therapeutic approaches for the treatment of 
cancer.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.9.6462
PMID: 10692450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
