---
pmid: '10849341'
title: Diverse effects of overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF, a poplar (Populus) homolog
  of LEAFY/FLORICAULA, in transgenic poplar and Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Rottmann WH
- Meilan R
- Sheppard LA
- Brunner AM
- Skinner JS
- Ma C
- Cheng S
- Jouanin L
- Pilate G
- Strauss SH
journal: Plant J
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00734.x
---

# Diverse effects of overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF, a poplar (Populus) homolog of LEAFY/FLORICAULA, in transgenic poplar and Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Rottmann WH, Meilan R, Sheppard LA, Brunner AM, Skinner JS, Ma C, Cheng S, Jouanin L, Pilate G, Strauss SH
**Journal:** Plant J (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00734.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00734.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2000 May;22(3):235-45. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00734.x.

Diverse effects of overexpression of LEAFY and PTLF, a poplar (Populus) homolog 
of LEAFY/FLORICAULA, in transgenic poplar and Arabidopsis.

Rottmann WH(1), Meilan R, Sheppard LA, Brunner AM, Skinner JS, Ma C, Cheng S, 
Jouanin L, Pilate G, Strauss SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Forest Science, Richardson Hall 321, College of Forestry, 
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-5752, USA. de

PTLF, the Populus trichocarpa homolog of LEAFY (LFY) and FLORICAULA, was cloned 
to assess its function in a dioecious tree species. In situ hybridization 
studies showed that the gene was expressed most strongly in developing 
inflorescences. Expression was also seen in leaf primordia and very young 
leaves, most notably in apical vegetative buds near inflorescences, but also in 
seedlings. Although ectopic expression of the PTLF cDNA in Arabidopsis 
accelerated flowering, only one of the many tested transgenic lines of Populus 
flowered precociously. The majority of trees within a population of 3-year-old 
transgenic hybrid Populus lines with PTLF constitutively expressed showed few 
differences when compared to controls. However, phenotypic effects on growth 
rate and crown development, but not flowering, were seen in some trees with 
strong PTLF expression and became manifest only as the trees aged. Competence to 
respond to overexpression of LFY varied widely among Populus genotypes, giving 
consistent early flowering in only a single male P. tremula x P. tremuloides 
hybrid and causing gender change in another hybrid genotype. PTLF activity 
appears to be subject to regulation that does not affect heterologously 
expressed LFY, and is dependent upon tree maturation. Both genes provide tools 
for probing the mechanisms of delayed competence to flower in woody plants.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-313x.2000.00734.x
PMID: 10849341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
