---
pmid: '18977201'
title: Physical association of GPR54 C-terminal with protein phosphatase 2A.
authors:
- Evans BJ
- Wang Z
- Mobley L
- Khosravi D
- Fujii N
- Navenot JM
- Peiper SC
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.108
---

# Physical association of GPR54 C-terminal with protein phosphatase 2A.
**Authors:** Evans BJ, Wang Z, Mobley L, Khosravi D, Fujii N, Navenot JM, Peiper SC
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.108](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.108)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 26;377(4):1067-71. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.108. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

Physical association of GPR54 C-terminal with protein phosphatase 2A.

Evans BJ(1), Wang Z, Mobley L, Khosravi D, Fujii N, Navenot JM, Peiper SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

KiSS1 was discovered as a metastasis suppressor gene and subsequently found to 
encode kisspeptins (KP), ligands for a G protein coupled receptor (GPCR), GPR54. 
This ligand-receptor pair was later shown to play a critical role in the 
neuro-endocrine regulation of puberty. The C-terminal cytoplasmic (C-ter) domain 
of GPR54 contains a segment rich in proline and arginine residues that 
corresponds to the primary structure of four overlapping SH3 binding motifs. 
Yeast two hybrid experiments identified the catalytic subunit of protein 
phosphatase 2A (PP2A-C) as an interacting protein. Pull-down experiments with 
GST fusion proteins containing the GPR54 C-ter confirmed binding to PP2A-C in 
cell lysates and these complexes contained phosphatase activity. The proline 
arginine rich segment is necessary for these interactions. The GPR54 C-ter bound 
directly to purified recombinant PP2A-C, indicating the GPR54 C-ter may form 
complexes involving the catalytic subunit of PP2A that regulate phosphorylation 
of critical signaling intermediates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.10.108
PMID: 18977201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
