---
pmid: '22451927'
title: Role of the translationally controlled tumor protein in DNA damage sensing
  and repair.
authors:
- Zhang J
- de Toledo SM
- Pandey BN
- Guo G
- Pain D
- Li H
- Azzam EI
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3341051
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106300109
---

# Role of the translationally controlled tumor protein in DNA damage sensing and repair.
**Authors:** Zhang J, de Toledo SM, Pandey BN, Guo G, Pain D, Li H, Azzam EI
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1106300109](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1106300109)
**PMC:** [PMC3341051](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3341051/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):E926-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1106300109. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

Role of the translationally controlled tumor protein in DNA damage sensing and 
repair.

Zhang J(1), de Toledo SM, Pandey BN, Guo G, Pain D, Li H, Azzam EI.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Radiology, Pharmacology and Physiology, and Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School Cancer Center, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103.

The translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) is essential for survival by 
mechanisms that as yet are incompletely defined. Here we describe an important 
role of TCTP in response to DNA damage. Upon exposure of normal human cells to 
low-dose γ rays, the TCTP protein level was greatly increased, with a 
significant enrichment in nuclei. TCTP up-regulation occurred in a manner 
dependent on ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase and the DNA-dependent 
protein kinase and was associated with protective effects against DNA damage. In 
chromatin of irradiated cells, coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that 
TCTP forms a complex with ATM and γH2A.X, in agreement with its distinct 
localization with the foci of the DNA damage-marker proteins γH2A.X, 53BP1, and 
P-ATM. In cells lacking TCTP, repair of chromosomal damage induced by γ rays was 
compromised significantly. TCTP also was shown to interact with p53 and the 
DNA-binding subunits, Ku70 and Ku80, of DNA-dependent protein kinase. TCTP 
knockdown led to decreased levels of Ku70 and Ku80 in nuclei of irradiated cells 
and attenuated their DNA-binding activity. It also attenuated the 
radiation-induced G(1) delay but prolonged the G(2) delay. TCTP therefore may 
play a critical role in maintaining genomic integrity in response to 
DNA-damaging agents.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1106300109
PMCID: PMC3341051
PMID: 22451927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The translationally controlled tumor protein (TCTP) is essential for survival by mechanisms that as yet are incompletely defined. Here we describe an important role of TCTP in response to DNA damage. Upon exposure of normal human cells to low-dose γ rays, the TCTP protein level was greatly increased, with a significant enrichment in nuclei. TCTP up-regulation occurred in a manner dependent on ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) kinase and the DNA-dependent protein kinase and was associated with protective effects against DNA damage. In chromatin of irradiated cells, coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that TCTP forms a complex with ATM and γH2A.X, in agreement with its distinct localization with the foci of the DNA damage-marker proteins γH2A.X, 53BP1, and P-ATM. In cells lacking TCTP, repair of chromosomal damage induced by γ rays was compromised significantly. TCTP also was shown to interact with p53 and the DNA-binding subunits, Ku70 and Ku80, of DNA-dependent protein kinase. TCTP knockdown led to decreased levels of Ku70 and Ku80 in nuclei of irradiated cells and attenuated their DNA-binding activity. It also attenuated the radiation-induced G 1 delay but prolonged the G 2 delay. TCTP therefore may play a critical role in maintaining genomic integrity in response to DNA-damaging agents.

Discussion

TCTP is thought to protect cells against harmful conditions through antiapoptotic and antioxidant roles ( 19 ). The results described here identify TCTP as a member of the DDR group of proteins. Specifically, the protein is essential for eliciting effective responses to radiation-induced genotoxic stress. Our data establish a functional relation between TCTP and several key proteins such as ATM, Ku70, Ku80, and p53 that participate in DSB sensing and repair and/or regulation of the radiation-induced cell-cycle checkpoints. They are consistent with recent findings identifying p53 as a TCTP-interacting protein ( 20 ). In human cells exposed to low/moderate doses of γ rays, TCTP is up-regulated rapidly in an ATM- and DNA-PK–dependent manner ( Fig. 3 ), followed by posttranslational stabilization ( Fig. 1 D ). TCTP forms foci ( Fig. 2 D ) that colocalize with those of P-ATM (S1981), γH2A.X, and 53BP1 that reflect sites of DNA damage ( Fig. 4 D and E ). This phenomenon is consistent with the observation that TCTP interaction with ATM and γH2A.X is enhanced in chromatin-enriched fractions following exposure to ionizing radiation ( Fig. 4 A ). However, the exact nature of the interaction (direct or indirect) between TCTP and ATM kinase remains unknown. TCTP contains putative PI3KK phosphorylation sites (e.g., T39, S46, and S53), but in experiments involving IP of TCTP from AG1522 (WT ATM), U2OS (WT ATM), or AG4405 (mutated ATM) cells exposed to 50 cGy of γ rays, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion and analysis by liquid chromatography tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) on the LTC Orbitrap Velos instrument, we did not detect any phosphorylation site within the protein.

Further, TCTP coimmunoprecipitated with the Ku proteins ( Fig. 4 C ) involved in NHEJ of DSBs. TCTP therefore may participate in repair of DSBs. This notion is substantiated further by the observation that TCTP knockdown prevents the repair of radiation-induced DNA damage leading to the accumulation of MN and γH2A.X foci ( Fig. 2 A and B and Fig. S2 B ). The DSB is a serious DNA lesion that leads to cell death ( 21 ). Consistent with this concept, the accumulation of DNA damage in siTCTP cells results in enhanced cell killing ( Fig. 2 E ). Importantly, TCTP is required for the DNA-binding activity of Ku70 and Ku80 in response to irradiation ( Fig. 5 B ). Moreover, in TCTP-depleted cells exposed to radiation, Ku70 and Ku80 levels in nuclei are reduced ( Fig. 5 A and Fig. S3 B ), probably by disruption of the events implicated in Ku translocation to the nucleus. This reduction may imply a chaperone role of TCTP as described previously ( 22 ). In this context, our IP and MS analyses indicated that in irradiated cells TCTP also interacts with the stress-induced molecular chaperones, heat shock 90-kDa, 70-kDa, and 60-kDa proteins.

Damage to DNA in the form of DSBs can lead to carcinogenesis and cell death ( 23 ). Two mechanisms participate in the repair of DSBs: homologous recombination repair (HRR), acting mainly in the S and G 2 phases of the cell cycle, and NHEJ, acting throughout the cell cycle ( 13 ). Our data show that TCTP has important effects on the Ku proteins. This finding is particularly important because Ku proteins are involved in DSB repair by NHEJ, and inactivation of Ku proteins leads to defects in telomere maintenance and chromosomal end fusion ( 24 ). Our IP/MS experiments also indicate that TCTP interacts with filamin A, which appears to be required for efficient HRR ( 25 ). The role of TCTP in such critical mechanisms that maintain genomic integrity may explain in part why homozygous mutation in TCTP is embryonically lethal ( 2 ).

TCTP is coimmunoprecipitated with p53 ( Fig. 4 B ), a protein with an essential function in the radiation-induced G 1 checkpoint ( 12 ). The knockdown of TCTP attenuates the γ-ray–induced G 1 delay in p53 WT AG1522 cells but has no effect on normal progression from G 1 to S phase ( Fig. 6 A ). The attenuated stress-induced G 1 checkpoint in these cells correlates well with the attenuated increase in the levels of p53 and of p21 Waf1 that inhibits the activity of cyclin-dependent kinases involved in proliferation ( Fig. 6 B ). A reduction in the duration of the G 1 checkpoint presumably deprives irradiated cells of crucial time to repair DNA damage before DNA replication. These data are consistent with yet another role for TCTP in p53-dependent mechanisms that maintain genome integrity in normal cells under stressful conditions. Further, knockdown of TCTP modulates the γ-ray–induced G 2 checkpoint ( Fig. 6 C ). Ten to twenty-five hours after exposure to 400 cGy, greater fractions of cells were delayed in G 2 phase, likely as a result of accumulation of DNA damage in these cells ( Fig. 2 ). Recently, overexpression of TCTP was shown to destabilize p53 in lung carcinoma cells ( 20 ), and knockdown of TCTP interfered with the p53–MDM2 axis ( 26 ). Therefore TCTP effects on p53 are multifaceted and may depend on cell type, cellular microenvironment, inherent sensitivity, and whether cells are challenged with low or high doses of environmental agents.

Low doses of toxic agents, including chemicals and ionizing radiation, often induce protective mechanisms that enhance the ability of the organism to cope with stress from normal metabolism or exposures to exogenous agents ( 27 ). Here, we show that doses of γ rays as low as 1–10 cGy ( Fig. S1 A – E ), particularly when delivered at a low dose rate (0.2 cGy/h), up-regulate TCTP expression and reduce the frequency of MN formation to below the spontaneous rate in human fibroblasts ( Fig. 1 A ). MN arise predominantly from DSBs, and in the case of spontaneous formation, such as when TCTP was knocked down in AG1522 cells ( Fig. 2 A ), they likely are induced by closely spaced oxidative base lesions caused by reactive oxygen species generated during normal cellular metabolism ( 23 ). These MN formation results and those showing that knockdown of TCTP attenuates the repair of radiation-induced DNA breaks (DSBs, closely spaced single-strand breaks) that lead to MN formation and γH2A.X foci ( Fig. 2 ) suggest a role for TCTP in the expression of radiation-induced adaptive responses ( 27 , 28 ).

TCTP up-regulation by ionizing radiation is not restricted to tissue-culture phenomena but also occurs in tissues of mice after low-dose irradiation to the whole body ( Fig. S1 E ). The fact that TCTP induction occurs in cells at all phases of the cell cycle and is of long (at least 48 h) duration ( Fig. S1 A ) is consistent with its role as a surveillance sentinel that guards against prolonged radiation-induced oxidative damage ( 29 ). In addition, TCTP also is responsive to high-dose irradiation ( Figs. 2 , 5 , and 6 ). Understanding the role of TCTP in the sensing and repair of radiation-induced DNA damage as described here (schematic in Fig. 7 ) will be informative for understanding the system responses to low-dose radiation exposures, and this understanding would help in estimating the health risks of such exposures. It also may lead to greater insight in the molecular events induced by therapeutic doses of radiation.
