---
pmid: '18356165'
title: HDAC6 is required for epidermal growth factor-induced beta-catenin nuclear
  localization.
authors:
- Li Y
- Zhang X
- Polakiewicz RD
- Yao TP
- Comb MJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3762558
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C700185200
---

# HDAC6 is required for epidermal growth factor-induced beta-catenin nuclear localization.
**Authors:** Li Y, Zhang X, Polakiewicz RD, Yao TP, Comb MJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C700185200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C700185200)
**PMC:** [PMC3762558](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3762558/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):12686-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C700185200. Epub
2008  Mar 20.

HDAC6 is required for epidermal growth factor-induced beta-catenin nuclear 
localization.

Li Y(1), Zhang X, Polakiewicz RD, Yao TP, Comb MJ.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Massachusetts 01923, USA.

Nuclear translocation of beta-catenin is a hallmark of Wnt signaling and is 
associated with various cancers. In addition to the canonical Wnt pathway 
activated by Wnt ligands, growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
also induce beta-catenin dissociation from the adherens junction complex, 
translocation into the nucleus, and activation of target genes such as c-myc. 
Here we report that EGF-induced beta-catenin nuclear localization and activation 
of c-myc are dependent on the deacetylase HDAC6. We show that EGF induces HDAC6 
translocation to the caveolae membrane and association with beta-catenin. HDAC6 
deacetylates beta-catenin at lysine 49, a site frequently mutated in anaplastic 
thyroid cancer, and inhibits beta-catenin phosphorylation at serine 45. HDAC6 
inactivation blocks EGF-induced beta-catenin nuclear localization and decreases 
c-Myc expression, leading to inhibition of tumor cell proliferation. These 
results suggest that EGF-induced nuclear localization of beta-catenin is 
regulated by HDAC6-dependent deacetylation and provide a new mechanism by which 
HDAC inhibitors prevent tumor growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C700185200
PMCID: PMC3762558
PMID: 18356165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
