---
pmid: '22031603'
title: Human gene SLC41A1 encodes for the Na+/Mg²+ exchanger.
authors:
- Kolisek M
- Nestler A
- Vormann J
- Schweigel-Röntgen M
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00289.2011
---

# Human gene SLC41A1 encodes for the Na+/Mg²+ exchanger.
**Authors:** Kolisek M, Nestler A, Vormann J, Schweigel-Röntgen M
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00289.2011](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00289.2011)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):C318-26. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00289.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Human gene SLC41A1 encodes for the Na+/Mg²+ exchanger.

Kolisek M(1), Nestler A, Vormann J, Schweigel-Röntgen M.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Veterinary Physiology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany.

Magnesium (Mg(2+)), the second most abundant divalent intracellular cation, is 
involved in the vast majority of intracellular processes, including the 
synthesis of nucleic acids, proteins, and energy metabolism. The concentration 
of intracellular free Mg(2+) ([Mg(2+)](i)) in mammalian cells is therefore 
tightly regulated to its optimum, mainly by an exchange of intracellular Mg(2+) 
for extracellular Na(+). Despite the importance of this process for cellular 
Mg(2+) homeostasis, the gene(s) encoding for the functional Na(+)/Mg(2+) 
exchanger is (are) still unknown. Here, using the fluorescent probe mag-fura 2 
to measure [Mg(2+)](i) changes, we examine Mg(2+) extrusion from 
hSLC41A1-overexpressing human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cells. A three- to 
fourfold elevation of [Mg(2+)](i) was accompanied by a five- to ninefold 
increase of Mg(2+) efflux. The latter was strictly dependent on extracellular 
Na(+) and reduced by 91% after complete replacement of Na(+) with 
N-methyl-d-glucamine. Imipramine and quinidine, known unspecific Na(+)/Mg(2+) 
exchanger inhibitors, led to a strong 88% to 100% inhibition of hSLC41A1-related 
Mg(2+) extrusion. In addition, our data show regulation of the transport 
activity via phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A. As these are 
the typical characteristics of a Na(+)/Mg(2+) exchanger, we conclude that the 
human SLC41A1 gene encodes for the Na(+)/Mg(2+) exchanger, the predominant 
Mg(2+) efflux system. Based on this finding, the analysis of Na(+)/Mg(2+) 
exchanger regulation and its involvement in the pathogenesis of diseases such as 
Parkinson's disease and hypertension at the molecular level should now be 
possible.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00289.2011
PMID: 22031603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
