---
pmid: '12029088'
title: Identification of novel SH3 domain ligands for the Src family kinase Hck. Wiskott-Aldrich
  syndrome protein (WASP), WASP-interacting protein (WIP), and ELMO1.
authors:
- Scott MP
- Zappacosta F
- Kim EY
- Annan RS
- Miller WT
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202783200
---

# Identification of novel SH3 domain ligands for the Src family kinase Hck. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), WASP-interacting protein (WIP), and ELMO1.
**Authors:** Scott MP, Zappacosta F, Kim EY, Annan RS, Miller WT
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M202783200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M202783200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):28238-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M202783200. Epub
2002  May 23.

Identification of novel SH3 domain ligands for the Src family kinase Hck. 
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), WASP-interacting protein (WIP), and 
ELMO1.

Scott MP(1), Zappacosta F, Kim EY, Annan RS, Miller WT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, School of Medicine, State University 
of New York, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8661, USA.

The importance of the SH3 domain of Hck in kinase regulation, substrate 
phosphorylation, and ligand binding has been established. However, few in vivo 
ligands are known for the SH3 domain of Hck. In this study, we used mass 
spectrometry to identify approximately 25 potential binding partners for the SH3 
domain of Hck from the monocyte cell line U937. Two major interacting proteins 
were the actin binding proteins Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) and 
WASP-interacting protein (WIP). We also focused on a novel interaction between 
Hck and ELMO1, an 84-kDa protein that was recently identified as the mammalian 
ortholog of the Caenorhabditis elegans gene, ced-12. In mammalian cells, ELMO1 
interacts with Dock180 as a component of the CrkII/Dock180/Rac pathway 
responsible for phagocytosis and cell migration. Using purified proteins, we 
confirmed that WASP-interacting protein and ELMO1 interact directly with the SH3 
domain of Hck. We also show that Hck and ELMO1 interact in intact cells and that 
ELMO1 is heavily tyrosine-phosphorylated in cells that co-express Hck, 
suggesting that it is a substrate of Hck. The binding of ELMO1 to Hck is 
specifically dependent on the interaction of a polyproline motif with the SH3 
domain of Hck. Our results suggest that these proteins may be novel 
activators/effectors of Hck.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M202783200
PMID: 12029088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
