---
pmid: '10207062'
title: Alien, a highly conserved protein with characteristics of a corepressor for
  members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.
authors:
- Dressel U
- Thormeyer D
- Altincicek B
- Paululat A
- Eggert M
- Schneider S
- Tenbaum SP
- Renkawitz R
- Baniahmad A
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC84131
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.5.3383
---

# Alien, a highly conserved protein with characteristics of a corepressor for members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.
**Authors:** Dressel U, Thormeyer D, Altincicek B, Paululat A, Eggert M, Schneider S, Tenbaum SP, Renkawitz R, Baniahmad A
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.5.3383](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.5.3383)
**PMC:** [PMC84131](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC84131/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3383-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.5.3383.

Alien, a highly conserved protein with characteristics of a corepressor for 
members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily.

Dressel U(1), Thormeyer D, Altincicek B, Paululat A, Eggert M, Schneider S, 
Tenbaum SP, Renkawitz R, Baniahmad A.

Author information:
(1)Genetisches Institut der Justus-Liebig-Universität, D-35392 Giessen, Germany.

Some members of nuclear hormone receptors, such as the thyroid hormone receptor 
(TR), silence gene expression in the absence of the hormone. Corepressors, which 
bind to the receptor's silencing domain, are involved in this repression. 
Hormone binding leads to dissociation of corepressors and binding of 
coactivators, which in turn mediate gene activation. Here, we describe the 
characteristics of Alien, a novel corepressor. Alien interacts with TR only in 
the absence of hormone. Addition of thyroid hormone leads to dissociation of 
Alien from the receptor, as shown by the yeast two-hybrid system, glutathione 
S-transferase pull-down, and coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Reporter assays 
indicate that Alien increases receptor-mediated silencing and that it harbors an 
autonomous silencing function. Immune staining shows that Alien is localized in 
the cell nucleus. Alien is a highly conserved protein showing 90% identity 
between human and Drosophila. Drosophila Alien shows similar activities in that 
it interacts in a hormone-sensitive manner with TR and harbors an autonomous 
silencing function. Specific interaction of Alien is seen with Drosophila 
nuclear hormone receptors, such as the ecdysone receptor and Seven-up, the 
Drosophila homologue of COUP-TF1, but not with retinoic acid receptor, RXR/USP, 
DHR 3, DHR 38, DHR 78, or DHR 96. These properties, taken together, show that 
Alien has the characteristics of a corepressor. Thus, Alien represents a member 
of a novel class of corepressors specific for selected members of the nuclear 
hormone receptor superfamily.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.5.3383
PMCID: PMC84131
PMID: 10207062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
