---
pmid: '17425515'
title: A reversible form of lysine acetylation in the ER and Golgi lumen controls
  the molecular stabilization of BACE1.
authors:
- Costantini C
- Ko MH
- Jonas MC
- Puglielli L
journal: Biochem J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2275071
doi: 10.1042/BJ20070040
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A reversible form of lysine acetylation in the ER and Golgi lumen controls the molecular stabilization of BACE1.
**Authors:** Costantini C, Ko MH, Jonas MC, Puglielli L
**Journal:** Biochem J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1042/BJ20070040](https://doi.org/10.1042/BJ20070040)
**PMC:** [PMC2275071](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2275071/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2007 Nov 1;407(3):383-95. doi: 10.1042/BJ20070040.

A reversible form of lysine acetylation in the ER and Golgi lumen controls the 
molecular stabilization of BACE1.

Costantini C(1), Ko MH, Jonas MC, Puglielli L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Madison-Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705, 
USA.

The lipid second messenger ceramide regulates the rate of beta cleavage of the 
Alzheimer's disease APP (amyloid precursor protein) by affecting the molecular 
stability of the beta secretase BACE1 (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme 1). Such an 
event is stimulated in the brain by the normal process of aging, and is under 
the control of the general aging programme mediated by the insulin-like growth 
factor 1 receptor. In the present study we report that BACE1 is acetylated on 
seven lysine residues of the N-terminal portion of the nascent protein. This 
process involves lysine acetylation in the lumen of the ER (endoplasmic 
reticulum) and is followed by deacetylation in the lumen of the Golgi apparatus, 
once the protein is fully mature. We also show that specific enzymatic 
activities acetylate (in the ER) and deacetylate (in the Golgi apparatus) the 
lysine residues. This process requires carrier-mediated translocation of 
acetyl-CoA into the ER lumen and is stimulated by ceramide. Site-directed 
mutagenesis indicates that lysine acetylation is necessary for nascent BACE1 to 
leave the ER and move ahead in the secretory pathway, and for the molecular 
stabilization of the protein.

DOI: 10.1042/BJ20070040
PMCID: PMC2275071
PMID: 17425515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
