---
pmid: '9802883'
title: 'Identification of a new inborn error in bile acid synthesis: mutation of the
  oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene causes severe neonatal liver disease.'
authors:
- Setchell KD
- Schwarz M
- O'Connell NC
- Lund EG
- Davis DL
- Lathe R
- Thompson HR
- Weslie Tyson R
- Sokol RJ
- Russell DW
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC509117
doi: 10.1172/JCI2962
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Identification of a new inborn error in bile acid synthesis: mutation of the oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene causes severe neonatal liver disease.
**Authors:** Setchell KD, Schwarz M, O'Connell NC, Lund EG, Davis DL, Lathe R, Thompson HR, Weslie Tyson R, Sokol RJ, Russell DW
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI2962](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI2962)
**PMC:** [PMC509117](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC509117/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1998 Nov 1;102(9):1690-703. doi: 10.1172/JCI2962.

Identification of a new inborn error in bile acid synthesis: mutation of the 
oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene causes severe neonatal liver disease.

Setchell KD(1), Schwarz M, O'Connell NC, Lund EG, Davis DL, Lathe R, Thompson 
HR, Weslie Tyson R, Sokol RJ, Russell DW.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Mass Spectrometry Center, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. setck0@chmcc.org

We describe a metabolic defect in bile acid synthesis involving a deficiency in 
7alpha-hydroxylation due to a mutation in the gene for the microsomal oxysterol 
7alpha-hydroxylase enzyme, active in the acidic pathway for bile acid synthesis. 
The defect, identified in a 10-wk-old boy presenting with severe cholestasis, 
cirrhosis, and liver synthetic failure, was established by fast atom bombardment 
ionization-mass spectrometry, which revealed elevated urinary bile acid 
excretion, a mass spectrum with intense ions at m/z 453 and m/z 510 
corresponding to sulfate and glycosulfate conjugates of unsaturated 
monohydroxy-cholenoic acids, and an absence of primary bile acids. Gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis confirmed the major products of 
hepatic synthesis to be 3beta-hydroxy-5-cholenoic and 
3beta-hydroxy-5-cholestenoic acids, which accounted for 96% of the total serum 
bile acids. Levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol were > 4,500 times normal. The 
biochemical findings were consistent with a deficiency in 7alpha-hydroxylation, 
leading to the accumulation of hepatotoxic unsaturated monohydroxy bile acids. 
Hepatic microsomal oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase activity was undetectable in the 
patient. Gene analysis revealed a cytosine to thymidine transition mutation in 
exon 5 that converts an arginine codon at position 388 to a stop codon. The 
truncated protein was inactive when expressed in 293 cells. These findings 
indicate the quantitative importance of the acidic pathway in early life in 
humans and define a further inborn error in bile acid synthesis as a metabolic 
cause of severe cholestatic liver disease.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI2962
PMCID: PMC509117
PMID: 9802883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
