---
pmid: '21602787'
title: Nephrocystins and MKS proteins interact with IFT particle and facilitate transport
  of selected ciliary cargos.
authors:
- Zhao C
- Malicki J
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3155299
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.165
---

# Nephrocystins and MKS proteins interact with IFT particle and facilitate transport of selected ciliary cargos.
**Authors:** Zhao C, Malicki J
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.165](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.165)
**PMC:** [PMC3155299](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3155299/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 May 20;30(13):2532-44. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.165.

Nephrocystins and MKS proteins interact with IFT particle and facilitate 
transport of selected ciliary cargos.

Zhao C(1), Malicki J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Craniofacial and Molecular Genetics, and Program in Genetics, 
Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Studies, Tufts University, Boston, MA, 
USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Jul 06;30(13):2518-9. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.196.

Cilia are required for the development and function of many organs. Efficient 
transport of protein cargo along ciliary axoneme is necessary to sustain these 
processes. Despite its importance, the mode of interaction between the 
intraflagellar ciliary transport (IFT) mechanism and its cargo proteins remains 
poorly understood. Our studies demonstrate that IFT particle components, and a 
Meckel-Gruber syndrome 1 (MKS1)-related, B9 domain protein, B9d2, bind each 
other and contribute to the ciliary localization of Inversin (Nephrocystin 2). 
B9d2, Inversin, and Nephrocystin 5 support, in turn, the transport of a cargo 
protein, Opsin, but not another photoreceptor ciliary transmembrane protein, 
Peripherin. Interestingly, the components of this mechanism also contribute to 
the formation of planar cell polarity in mechanosensory epithelia. These studies 
reveal a molecular mechanism that mediates the transport of selected ciliary 
cargos and is of fundamental importance for the differentiation and survival of 
sensory cells.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.165
PMCID: PMC3155299
PMID: 21602787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
