---
pmid: '9546399'
title: Human Tra2 proteins are sequence-specific activators of pre-mRNA splicing.
authors:
- Tacke R
- Tohyama M
- Ogawa S
- Manley JL
journal: Cell
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81153-8
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human Tra2 proteins are sequence-specific activators of pre-mRNA splicing.
**Authors:** Tacke R, Tohyama M, Ogawa S, Manley JL
**Journal:** Cell (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81153-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81153-8)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1998 Apr 3;93(1):139-48. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81153-8.

Human Tra2 proteins are sequence-specific activators of pre-mRNA splicing.

Tacke R(1), Tohyama M, Ogawa S, Manley JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10027, USA.

The RNA-binding protein Tra2 is an important regulator of sex determination in 
Drosophila. Recently, two mammalian Tra2 homologs of unknown function have been 
described. Here, we show that human Tra2 proteins are present in HeLa cell 
nuclear extracts and that they bind efficiently and specifically to a previously 
characterized pre-mRNA splicing enhancer element. Indeed, both purified proteins 
bound preferentially to RNA sequences containing GAA repeats, characteristic of 
many enhancer elements. Neither Tra2 protein functioned in constitutive splicing 
in vitro, but both activated enhancer-dependent splicing in a sequence-specific 
manner and restored it after inhibition with competitor RNA. Our findings 
indicate that mammalian Tra2 proteins are sequence-specific splicing activators 
that likely participate in the control of cell-specific splicing patterns.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81153-8
PMID: 9546399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
