---
pmid: '38912572'
title: Engrailed transcription factors direct excitatory cerebellar neuron diversity
  and survival.
authors:
- Krishnamurthy A
- Lee AS
- Bayin NS
- Stephen DN
- Nasef O
- Lao Z
- Joyner AL
journal: Development
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC11369685
doi: 10.1242/dev.202502
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Engrailed transcription factors direct excitatory cerebellar neuron diversity and survival.
**Authors:** Krishnamurthy A, Lee AS, Bayin NS, Stephen DN, Nasef O, Lao Z, Joyner AL
**Journal:** Development (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.202502](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.202502)
**PMC:** [PMC11369685](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC11369685/)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2024 Jul 15;151(14):dev202502. doi: 10.1242/dev.202502. Epub 2024
 Jul 26.

Engrailed transcription factors direct excitatory cerebellar neuron diversity 
and survival.

Krishnamurthy A(1)(2), Lee AS(1)(2), Bayin NS(1), Stephen DN(1), Nasef O(1), Lao 
Z(1), Joyner AL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(2)Neuroscience Program, Weill Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences, New 
York, NY 10065, USA.
(3)Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Weill Cornell Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Dec 01:2023.11.30.569445. doi: 10.1101/2023.11.30.569445.

The neurons of the three cerebellar nuclei (CN) are the primary output neurons 
of the cerebellum. The excitatory neurons (e) of the medial (m) CN (eCNm) were 
recently divided into molecularly defined subdomains in the adult; however, how 
they are established during development is not known. We define molecular 
subdomains of the mouse embryonic eCNm using single-cell RNA-sequencing and 
spatial expression analysis, showing that they evolve during embryogenesis to 
prefigure the adult. Furthermore, eCNm are transcriptionally divergent from 
cells in the other nuclei by embryonic day 14.5. We previously showed that loss 
of the homeobox genes En1 and En2 leads to loss of approximately half of the 
embryonic eCNm. We demonstrate that mutation of En1/2 in the embryonic eCNm 
results in death of specific posterior eCNm molecular subdomains and 
downregulation of TBR2 (EOMES) in an anterior embryonic subdomain, as well as 
reduced synaptic gene expression. We further reveal a similar function for EN1/2 
in mediating TBR2 expression, neuron differentiation and survival in the other 
excitatory neurons (granule and unipolar brush cells). Thus, our work defines 
embryonic eCNm molecular diversity and reveals conserved roles for EN1/2 in the 
cerebellar excitatory neuron lineage.

© 2024. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.202502
PMCID: PMC11369685
PMID: 38912572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.
