---
pmid: '11163187'
title: Human Upf proteins target an mRNA for nonsense-mediated decay when bound downstream
  of a termination codon.
authors:
- Lykke-Andersen J
- Shu MD
- Steitz JA
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00214-2
---

# Human Upf proteins target an mRNA for nonsense-mediated decay when bound downstream of a termination codon.
**Authors:** Lykke-Andersen J, Shu MD, Steitz JA
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00214-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00214-2)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2000 Dec 22;103(7):1121-31. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00214-2.

Human Upf proteins target an mRNA for nonsense-mediated decay when bound 
downstream of a termination codon.

Lykke-Andersen J(1), Shu MD, Steitz JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, 295 Congress Avenue, New Haven, 
CT 06536, USA.

Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) rids eukaryotic cells of aberrant mRNAs containing 
premature termination codons. These are discriminated from true termination 
codons by downstream cis-elements, such as exon-exon junctions. We describe 
three novel human proteins involved in NMD, hUpf2, hUpf3a, and hUpf3b. While in 
HeLa cell extracts these proteins are complexed with hUpf1, in intact cells 
hUpf3a and hUpf3b are nucleocytoplasmic shuttling proteins, hUpf2 is 
perinuclear, and hUpf1 cytoplasmic. hUpf3a and hUpf3b associate selectively with 
spliced beta-globin mRNA in vivo, and tethering of any hUpf protein to the 3'UTR 
of beta-globin mRNA elicits NMD. These data suggest that assembly of a dynamic 
hUpf complex initiates in the nucleus at mRNA exon-exon junctions and triggers 
NMD in the cytoplasm when recognized downstream of a translation termination 
site.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)00214-2
PMID: 11163187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
