---
pmid: '15657060'
title: c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates caspase-9 autocleavage in the apoptotic response
  to DNA damage.
authors:
- Raina D
- Pandey P
- Ahmad R
- Bharti A
- Ren J
- Kharbanda S
- Weichselbaum R
- Kufe D
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413787200
---

# c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates caspase-9 autocleavage in the apoptotic response to DNA damage.
**Authors:** Raina D, Pandey P, Ahmad R, Bharti A, Ren J, Kharbanda S, Weichselbaum R, Kufe D
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413787200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413787200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11147-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413787200. Epub 
2005 Jan 18.

c-Abl tyrosine kinase regulates caspase-9 autocleavage in the apoptotic response 
to DNA damage.

Raina D(1), Pandey P, Ahmad R, Bharti A, Ren J, Kharbanda S, Weichselbaum R, 
Kufe D.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115, USA.

Activation of the initiator caspase-9 is essential for induction of apoptosis by 
developmental signals, oncogenic transformation, and genotoxic stress. The c-Abl 
tyrosine kinase is also involved in the apoptotic response to DNA damage. The 
present results demonstrate that c-Abl binds directly to caspase-9. We show that 
c-Abl phosphorylates caspase-9 on Tyr-153 in vitro and in cells treated with DNA 
damaging agents. Moreover, inhibition of c-Abl with STI571 blocked DNA 
damage-induced autoprocessing of caspase-9 to the p35 subunit and activation of 
caspase-3. Caspase-9(Y153F) also attenuated DNA damage-induced processing of 
caspase-9 to p35, activation of caspase-3, and apoptosis. These findings 
indicate that caspase-9 autoprocessing is regulated by c-Abl in the apoptotic 
response to genotoxic stress.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413787200
PMID: 15657060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
