---
pmid: '18059284'
title: Evidence of fibril-like β-sheet structures in a neurotoxic amyloid intermediate
  of Alzheimer's β-amyloid.
authors:
- Chimon S
- Shaibat MA
- Jones CR
- Calero DC
- Aizezi B
- Ishii Y
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1345
---

# Evidence of fibril-like β-sheet structures in a neurotoxic amyloid intermediate of Alzheimer's β-amyloid.
**Authors:** Chimon S, Shaibat MA, Jones CR, Calero DC, Aizezi B, Ishii Y
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1345](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1345)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Dec;14(12):1157-64. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1345.

Evidence of fibril-like β-sheet structures in a neurotoxic amyloid intermediate 
of Alzheimer's β-amyloid.

Chimon S(1), Shaibat MA, Jones CR, Calero DC, Aizezi B, Ishii Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 
60607, USA.

Diffusible subfibrillar aggregates of amyloid proteins are potent neurotoxins 
and primary suspects in amyloid diseases including Alzheimer's disease. Despite 
widespread interest, the molecular structures of the amyloid intermediates and 
the conformational conversions in amyloid misfolding are poorly understood. Here 
we present a molecular-level examination of sequence-specific secondary 
structures and supramolecular structures of a neurotoxic amyloid intermediate of 
the 40-residue β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide involved in Alzheimer's disease. Using 
solid-state NMR and electron microscopy, we show that, before fibrillization, 
natively unstructured monomeric Aβ is subject to large conformational changes 
into a spherical amyloid intermediate of 15–35 nm diameter, which has 
predominantly parallel β-sheet structures. Structural comparison with Aβ fibrils 
demonstrates that formation of this β-sheet intermediate I(β) largely defines 
conformational transitions in amyloid misfolding. Neurotoxicity assays on PC12 
cells show that I(β) shows higher toxicity than the fibril, indicating that the 
β-sheet formation may trigger neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1345
PMID: 18059284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
