---
pmid: '18177895'
title: Role of intrinsic flexibility in signal transduction mediated by the cell cycle
  regulator, p27 Kip1.
authors:
- Galea CA
- Nourse A
- Wang Y
- Sivakolundu SG
- Heller WT
- Kriwacki RW
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC2350195
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.016
---

# Role of intrinsic flexibility in signal transduction mediated by the cell cycle regulator, p27 Kip1.
**Authors:** Galea CA, Nourse A, Wang Y, Sivakolundu SG, Heller WT, Kriwacki RW
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.016)
**PMC:** [PMC2350195](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2350195/)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Biol. 2008 Feb 22;376(3):827-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.016. Epub
2007  Dec 14.

Role of intrinsic flexibility in signal transduction mediated by the cell cycle 
regulator, p27 Kip1.

Galea CA(1), Nourse A, Wang Y, Sivakolundu SG, Heller WT, Kriwacki RW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
North Lauderdale St., Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

p27(Kip1) (p27), which controls eukaryotic cell division through interactions 
with cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), integrates and transduces promitogenic 
signals from various nonreceptor tyrosine kinases by orchestrating its own 
phosphorylation, ubiquitination and degradation. Intrinsic flexibility allows 
p27 to act as a "conduit" for sequential signaling mediated by tyrosine and 
threonine phosphorylation and ubiquitination. While the structural features of 
the Cdk/cyclin-binding domain of p27 are understood, how the C-terminal 
regulatory domain coordinates multistep signaling leading to p27 degradation is 
poorly understood. We show that the 100-residue p27 C-terminal domain is 
extended and flexible when p27 is bound to Cdk2/cyclin A. We propose that the 
intrinsic flexibility of p27 provides a molecular basis for the sequential 
signal transduction conduit that regulates p27 degradation and cell division. 
Other intrinsically unstructured proteins possessing multiple sites of 
posttranslational modification may participate in similar signaling conduits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.12.016
PMCID: PMC2350195
PMID: 18177895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CKI) p27 Kip1 1,2,3 is a small intrinsically unstructured protein (IUP) 4 that regulates cell proliferation through interactions with cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). 5 For example, in G 1 phase, an initially high level of p27 blocks progression from G 1 to S phase of the cell division cycle by inhibiting Cdk2/cyclin A and Cdk2/cyclin E. 6 , 7 The level of p27, which is controlled by translational regulation 8 and ubiquitination-dependent proteolysis, 8 , 9 must drop for Cdk2 complexes to be fully activated and for cell division to progress. Ubiquitination of p27 at the G 1 /S transition is regulated by a two-step mechanism that involves phosphorylation of p27, first on tyrosine 88 (Y88) by one of several non-receptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs) and second on threonine 187 (T187) by Cdk2. 10

Enhanced ubiquitination-mediated degradation of p27 11 is common in human tumors 12 and is associated with poor clinical prognosis. 13 p27 is ubiquitinated through at least two pathways: 1) free, unphosphorylated p27 is ubiquitinated by KPC1 14 , 15 and 2) p27 bound to Cdk2/cyclin complexes is ubiquitinated by SCF/Skp2. 12 , 16 Up-regulation of the two-step p27 phosphorylation mechanism by the oncogenic NRTKs, Bcr-Abl and Src, 10 , 17 was recently shown to promote SCF/Skp2-mediated p27 loss in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 10 and breast cancer cells, 17 respectively. While the general features of the two-step phosphorylation mechanism are understood, the full extent to which the unusual structural features of p27—an intrinsically unstructured protein 4 —contribute to the mechanism is poorly understood.

The intrinsic flexibility of p27 allows its interactions with Cdk2/cyclin A and SCF/Skp2 to be modulated by phosphorylation of tyrosine and threonine residues at opposite ends of the p27 polypeptide chain. Prior to phosphorylation, Y88, which is found at the C-terminal end of the so called “kinase inhibitory domain” (KID) of p27 that binds and inhibits Cdk2 ( Fig. 1a ), is lodged in the ATP binding pocket of Cdk2 thereby inhibiting catalysis by blocking access to ATP. However, due to putative dynamics involving the 3 10 helix containing Y88 fluctuating into and out of the ATP binding pocket, 18 Y88 within p27/Cdk2/cyclin A complexes is accessible for phosphorylation by NRTKs. 10 Following phosphorylation — step 1 of the two-step mechanism —Y88 and the entire 3 10 helical segment of the KID are ejected from the ATP binding pocket of Cdk2. While p27 remains bound to Cdk2/cyclin A, ejection of phosphorylated Y88 and the 3 10 helix restores significant catalytic activity, allowing Cdk2 to phosphorylate T187 within the C-terminus of the same p27 molecule that is bound to Cdk2—step 2 of the two-step mechanism. The uni-molecular nature of step 2 10 requires that the C-terminus of p27 “folds back” to allow T187 to be phosphorylated by Cdk2. While much is known about the structural and dynamic features of the KID of p27 both in the free state 4 , 19 and when bound to Cdk2/cyclin A, 18 detailed information on these properties for the C-terminal region of p27 is not available. Herein we report results from a number of techniques that fully describe the structural features of full-length p27 and explain how T187 can be phosphorylated by Cdk2 via the pseudo uni-molecular mechanism. These results highlight the importance of the intrinsic flexibility of p27 in mediating the multi-step signal transduction pathway which controls cell division in eukaryotes.

Discussion

The results of our study provide the first detailed insights into the conformation of full-length p27 when bound to Cdk2/cyclin A, the form of p27 that blocks eukaryotic cell division by inhibiting the catalytic activity of this and several other Cdk/cyclin complexes. The crystal structure of p27-KID bound to Cdk2/cyclin A determined by x-ray diffraction 18 provided the first insights into how p27 binds and inhibits Cdks. More recently, NMR spectroscopy studies have provided detailed insights into how the Cdk2/cyclin A-bound conformation of p27-KID is altered by phosphorylation of Y88. 10 These studies showed that the C-terminus of p27 does not interact extensively with the Cdk/cyclin complex, even though it plays an important role in the regulation of p27-mediated cell cycle arrest. We and others have previously reported that CD spectropolarimetry analysis showed that full-length p27 is intrinsically unstructured. 4 , 28 While the N-terminal KID of free p27 contained regions of transient structure, the C-terminal domain (p27-C, residues 105–198) lacked detectable secondary structure. In addition, analysis by NMR spectroscopy showed that, in the absence of its Cdk/cyclin binding partners, the N- and C-termini of p27 do not interact. 4 However, these studies did not provide a detailed understanding of the structure of p27-C either in isolation or when the KID of full-length p27 is bound to the Cdk/cyclin complex.

In the present study, we have used a variety of techniques to gain a comprehensive understanding of the structure of p27-C. First, we studied average secondary structure and ps-ns time scale dynamics of individual residues of p27-C using NMR spectroscopy. Δδ 13 C α values for residues of p27-C indicated a general lack of secondary structure, while most backbone amide moieties exhibited negative hetNOE values, demonstrating that long-range interactions between different regions within p27-C do not occur.

Second, based on our past experience using unrestrained MD computations to explore the inherent conformational properties of p27-KID, 20 we used MD to explore the conformational features of p27-C when p27 was bound to Cdk2/cyclin A. Surprisingly, p27-C remained quite highly extended during the trajectory, rather than assuming more compact conformations as might be expected. Analysis of phi and psi torsion angles showed that conformational freedom was limited for residues in p27-C that were close to the surface of Cdk2/cyclin A, and that RMSD values for these torsion angles increased toward the extreme C-terminus furthest away from Cdk2/cyclin A. Visual inspection of the p27/Cdk2/cyclin A complex indicated that this restricted motion may be due to electrostatic repulsion between the molecular surface of Cdk2/cyclin A and p27-C which “steers” the p27 polypeptide backbone away from the globular core of Cdk2/cyclin A. Finally, torsion angles and RMSD values observed for p27-C during the MD trajectory were consistent with Δδ 13 C α values determined by NMR spectroscopy. The overall general agreement of results obtained by NMR spectroscopy and MD, regarding the conformation of p27-C, allowed us to use evenly sampled molecular structures from the MD trajectory to represent the solution conformation of full-length p27/Cdk2/cyclin A.

The third approach employed to characterize the conformation of p27-C was to use AUC and SAXS to analyze the hydrodynamic properties of the p27/Cdk2/cyclin A complex. These techniques allowed direct measurement of hydrodynamic properties that reflect the average, global conformation of this protein complex in solution, in contrast to the local nature of chemical shift and hetNOE values determined by NMR spectroscopy. We showed that molecular structures obtained during the MD trajectory, in which p27-C is highly extended, were consistent with both AUC sedimentation velocity and SAXS data by calculating s -values (AUC) and intensity profiles (SAXS) using an ensemble of MD-generated molecular structures. The agreement between computed and experimentally determined values from AUC and SAXS strongly suggested that the MD structures are a true representation of the solution structure of p27/Cdk/cyclin A and the extent to which the p27-C portion of this complex samples conformational space.

Two types of post-translational modification, phosphorylation and ubiquitination, regulate the Cdk inhibitory activity and degradation of p27 in eukaryotic cells. These modifications occur in sequential order, and include a two-step phosphorylation mechanism followed by ubiquitination. The first step involves phosphorylation of Y88 by NRTKs and partial “re-activation” of Cdk2 within the p27/Cdk2/cyclin A complex 10 . In the second step, re-activated Cdk2 phosphorylates T187 located toward the C-terminus of the 100-residue long C-terminal domain of p27. Subsequently, phosphorylated T187 and several neighboring residues are recognized by the SCF/Skp2 E3 ubiquitin ligase and p27 is poly-ubiquitinated at currently unknown sites. This modification cascade finally leads to the elimination of p27 through 26S proteasome-mediated degradation and, consequently, de-repression of the major blockade to progression of the cell division cycle from G 1 to S phase. Although the degradation mechanism described above applies specifically to the interaction of p27 with Cdk2/cyclin A, p27 binds to many different Cdk/cyclin targets in vivo and it is likely that this multi-step modification cascade regulates p27 within its complex with Cdk2/cyclin E and possibly within complexes comprising Cdk1 and either cyclin A or cyclin E.

Here we have shown that the C-terminal domain of p27 adopts a disordered and quite highly extended conformation when p27 is bound to Cdk2/cyclin A. The p27 C-terminus functions as a regulatory domain that is structurally independent of the N-terminal domain, which itself binds tightly and specifically to several different Cdk/cyclin complexes involved in regulating the G 1 /S cell cycle transition. The C-terminal domain acts as a flexible “conduit” for signal transduction, which detects a specific signal from NRTKs (phosphotyrosine 88) and, through the catalytic activity of Cdk2, mediates conversion of this signal into a second signal, phospho-threonine 187 (pT187). The phospho-threonine 187 signal, in turn, is functionally transduced through poly-ubiquitination (of p27) by SCF/Skp2 in a pT187-dependent manner which signals the 26S proteasomal degradation of p27. While not sampled in our brief MD trajectory, our previous biochemical data 10 support the view that T187 within the p27 C-terminus frequently approaches the Cdk2 active site within individual ternary complexes. The results of the structural analysis reported herein support this model by showing that p27-C lacks discreet structure and is highly flexible. While extended in the MD trajectory, p27-C appears to be sufficiently unrestrained to occasionally sample conformations in which T187 “folds back” to encounter the Cdk2 active site ( Fig. 5 ). Based on our observation that the surface of Cdk2/cyclin A near the ATP binding site bears negative charge, we propose that electrostatic interactions between this surface and a cluster of positively charged residues at the p27 C-terminus adjacent to T187 facilitate interactions between T187 and the Cdk2 substrate binding site. If Y88 of p27 is phosphorylated when these interactions occur, then the oncogenic signal from NRTKs can be transduced through phosphorylation of T187 and subsequent ubiquitination and degradation of p27. If Y88 is not phosphorylated, no signal is transduced and Cdk2/T187 encounters are catalytically unproductive. The extended nature and flexibility of the 100 residue-long p27 C-terminus makes it possible for T187 to constantly sense the signaling status of Y88 (i.e. absence or presence of phosphorylation). In addition to flexibility within p27-C being critical for signaling along this conduit, we previously discussed the importance of Y88 being able to fluctuate between ATP binding pocket-bound and solvent-exposed conformations so that Y88 is accessible for phosphorylation by NRTKs. 10 More recently, tyrosine 88 and a second tyrosine residue of p27, tyrosine 74 (Y74), were shown to be phosphorylated by the NRTK, Src, in breast cancer cells. 17 This observation suggests that not only does the Y88-containing segment of p27 experience conformational fluctuations, but that the segment containing Y74, within the β-hairpin that is sandwiched against the N-terminal β-sheet lobe of Cdk2 18 ( Fig. 1 ), also experiences conformational fluctuations that make its side-chain available for phosphorylation by Src. Phosphorylation of Y74 by Src may disrupt local interactions between p27 and Cdk2, which may in turn enhance the accessibility of Y88 to NRTKs and its subsequent phosphorylation. This proposal is supported by data showing that mutation of Y74 to glutamic acid disrupts interactions between p27-KID and Cdk2/cyclin A (Yuefeng Wang and Richard Kriwacki, unpublished data). Thus, this signal transduction conduit may have evolved to allow signal amplification through multiple tyrosine phosphorylation events, one at Y88 which partially re-activates Cdk2 and a second at Y74 which amplifies the initial signal. Importantly, coupling of these elements within this signal transduction conduit entirely depends on the ability of p27 to sample multiple conformations, even when bound to Cdk2/cyclin A. Finally, the flexibility and solvent accessibility of the segment of p27 containing phosphorylated T187, allow it to be readily recognized and bound by SCF/Skp2, 29 and subsequently ubiquitinated and degraded thus terminating the signaling pathway.

We conclude that the extensive flexibility of p27, which stems from its general character as an intrinsically unstructured protein, is of central importance in the multi-step phosphorylation/ubiquitination signal transduction pathway that regulates cell division. Protein flexibility has been shown to be critical in other signaling pathways. For example, the ability of the Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein to undergo structural rearrangements in response to allosteric signals is critical for remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. 30 Further, substrates of kinases and phosphatases are often specifically targeted for catalysis not only through specific interactions at or near the catalytic site, but also through remote docking interactions mediated by short recognition elements; 31 , 32 these two types of recognition sites are often connected by intrinsically unstructured polypeptide segments. 31 , 32 , 33 p27, both a Cdk inhibitor and substrate, exhibits these latter features. p27 specifically recognizes Cdk/cyclin complexes through interactions mediated by multiple short recognition elements connected by flexible polypeptide segments. For example, the RxLFG motif at the N-terminus of the p27 KID binds specifically to cyclin A, a second region within the KID (residues 60–82) binds specifically to the N-terminal β-sheet lobe of Cdk2, the Y88 region binds in the ATP binding pocket of Cdk2 and, finally, the region near T187 binds the substrate binding site of Cdk2. Polypeptide flexibility between the multiple recognition elements in p27, and those in many other examples, 31 affords the potential to interact with multiple targets. This concept was first proposed as the basis for the ability of p21 Waf1 , a p27 homolog, to promiscuously inhibit several different Cdk/cyclin complexes that regulate cell division. 33 While previous studies established the importance of flexibility in molecular recognition by kinase substrates and inhibitors, the coupling of post-translational modifications within the multiple, flexible short recognition elements of p27 affords a level of signaling complexity that has not previously been observed. Flexible regions containing tyrosines 74 and 88 coordinate responses to signaling by NRTKs, which are integrated and transduced through partial reactivation of Cdk2, phosphorylation of T187 within the flexible C-terminus and recognition of this flexible phospho-threonine-specific recognition element by SCF/Skp2 which poly-ubiquitinates p27. The end point of this signaling conduit is recognition and degradation of poly-ubiquitinated p27 by the 26S proteasome. The lack of tertiary structure and intrinsic flexibility within p27 allows its many short recognition elements to orchestrate signaling along this conduit. We propose that many of the thousands of other eukaryotic IUPs known to play roles in signaling and regulation do so through similarly complex, multi-step signaling pathways and that the molecular events which transmit these molecular signals depend on intrinsic protein flexibility. Utilizing intrinsic protein flexibility in this way allows the transduction of multiple signals within a single protein complex due to the ability of different motifs within one polypeptide to “communicate” with each other. A challenge for the future is to identify the sequence signatures of the individual recognition elements within IUPs that comprise multi-step signaling pathways (e.g. Y88 as a target of NRTKs, T187 as a target of Cdk2, and unknown sites as targets for ubiquitination by SCF/Skp2) and to begin to decipher the complex signaling pathways that they control.
