---
pmid: '10548741'
title: 'Human phosphoribosylformylglycineamide amidotransferase (FGARAT): regional
  mapping, complete coding sequence, isolation of a functional genomic clone, and
  DNA sequence analysis.'
authors:
- Patterson D
- Bleskan J
- Gardiner K
- Bowersox J
journal: Gene
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00378-9
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Human phosphoribosylformylglycineamide amidotransferase (FGARAT): regional mapping, complete coding sequence, isolation of a functional genomic clone, and DNA sequence analysis.
**Authors:** Patterson D, Bleskan J, Gardiner K, Bowersox J
**Journal:** Gene (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00378-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00378-9)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1999 Nov 1;239(2):381-91. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00378-9.

Human phosphoribosylformylglycineamide amidotransferase (FGARAT): regional 
mapping, complete coding sequence, isolation of a functional genomic clone, and 
DNA sequence analysis.

Patterson D(1), Bleskan J, Gardiner K, Bowersox J.

Author information:
(1)Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, 1899 Gaylord Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA. 
davepatt@eri.uchsc.edu

Purines play essential roles in many cellular functions, including DNA 
replication, transcription, intra- and extra-cellular signaling, energy 
metabolism, and as coenzymes for many biochemical reactions. The de-novo 
synthesis of purines requires 10 enzymatic steps for the production of inosine 
monophosphate (IMP). Defects in purine metabolism are associated with human 
diseases. Further, many anticancer agents function as inhibitors of the de-novo 
biosynthetic pathway. Genes or cDNAs for most of the enzymes comprising this 
pathway have been isolated from humans or other mammals. One notable exception 
is the phosphoribosylformylglycineamide amidotransferase (FGARAT) gene, which 
encodes the fourth step of this pathway. This gene has been cloned from numerous 
microorganisms and from Drosophila melanogaster and C. elegans. We report here 
the identification of a human cDNA containing the coding region of the FGARAT 
mRNA and the isolation of a P1 clone that contains an intact human FGARAT gene. 
The P1 clone corrects the purine auxotrophy and protein deficiency of Chinese 
hamster ovary (CHO) cell mutants (AdeB) deficient in both the activity and the 
protein for FGARAT. The P1 clone was used to regionally map the FGARAT gene to 
chromosome region 17p13, a location consistent with our prior assignment of this 
gene to chromosome 17. A comparison of the DNA sequence of the human FGARAT and 
FGARAT DNA sequence from 17 other organisms is reported. The isolation of this 
gene means that DNA clones for all the 10 steps of IMP synthesis have been 
isolated from humans or other mammals.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(99)00378-9
PMID: 10548741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
