---
pmid: '15813749'
title: Requirement for microtubules and dynein motors in the earliest stages of peroxisome
  biogenesis.
authors:
- Brocard CB
- Boucher KK
- Jedeszko C
- Kim PK
- Walton PA
journal: Traffic
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00283.x
---

# Requirement for microtubules and dynein motors in the earliest stages of peroxisome biogenesis.
**Authors:** Brocard CB, Boucher KK, Jedeszko C, Kim PK, Walton PA
**Journal:** Traffic (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00283.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00283.x)

## Abstract

1. Traffic. 2005 May;6(5):386-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00283.x.

Requirement for microtubules and dynein motors in the earliest stages of 
peroxisome biogenesis.

Brocard CB(1), Boucher KK, Jedeszko C, Kim PK, Walton PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5C1.

Our aim was to determine the role of microtubules in the biogenesis of 
peroxisomes. Fusion experiments between human PEX16- and PEX1-mutant cells in 
the presence of nocodazol implied that microtubules were not required for import 
of proteins into the peroxisomal matrix after cell fusion complementation. We 
further studied the importance of microtubules in the early stages of peroxisome 
biogenesis following the microinjection complementation of PEX16-mutant cells. 
In the absence of nocodazol, nuclear microinjection of plasmids expressing 
EGFP-SKL and Pex16p in PEX16-mutant cells resulted in the accumulation of 
EGFP-SKL into newly formed peroxisomes. However, pretreatment of the cells with 
nocodazol, prior to microinjection, resulted in the inhibition of 
complementation of the PEX16 mutant and the cytosolic location of the EGFP-SKL. 
In addition, coexpression of a dominant-negative CC1 subunit of the 
dynein/dynactin motor complex resulted in the inability to complement 
PEX16-mutant cells. Both of these treatments resulted in the cytosolic 
localization of expressed Pex16p. Our results demonstrate that the formation of 
peroxisomes via the preperoxisomal compartment is dependent upon microtubules 
and minus-end-directed motor proteins and that the inhibition described above 
occurs at a step that precedes the association of Pex16p with the vesicles that 
would otherwise become the peroxisomes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2005.00283.x
PMID: 15813749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
