---
pmid: '19019154'
title: A novel component of the division-site selection system of Bacillus subtilis
  and a new mode of action for the division inhibitor MinCD.
authors:
- Bramkamp M
- Emmins R
- Weston L
- Donovan C
- Daniel RA
- Errington J
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06501.x
---

# A novel component of the division-site selection system of Bacillus subtilis and a new mode of action for the division inhibitor MinCD.
**Authors:** Bramkamp M, Emmins R, Weston L, Donovan C, Daniel RA, Errington J
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06501.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06501.x)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2008 Dec;70(6):1556-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06501.x. 
Epub 2008 Oct 23.

A novel component of the division-site selection system of Bacillus subtilis and 
a new mode of action for the division inhibitor MinCD.

Bramkamp M(1), Emmins R, Weston L, Donovan C, Daniel RA, Errington J.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Zülpicher Str. 47, 
D-50674, Germany. marc.bramkamp@uni-koeln.de

Cell division in bacteria is governed by a complex cytokinetic machinery in 
which the key player is a tubulin homologue, FtsZ. Most rod-shaped bacteria 
divide precisely at mid-cell between segregated sister chromosomes. Selection of 
the correct site for cell division is thought to be determined by two negative 
regulatory systems: the nucleoid occlusion system, which prevents division in 
the vicinity of the chromosomes, and the Min system, which prevents 
inappropriate division at the cell poles. In Bacillus subtilis recruitment of 
the division inhibitor MinCD to cell poles depends on DivIVA, and these proteins 
were thought to be sufficient for Min function. We have now identified a novel 
component of the division-site selection system, MinJ, which bridges DivIVA and 
MinD. minJ mutants are impaired in division because MinCD activity is no longer 
restricted to cell poles. Although MinCD was thought to act specifically on FtsZ 
assembly, analysis of minJ and divIVA mutants showed that their block in 
division occurs downstream of FtsZ. The results support a model in which the 
main function of the Min system lies in allowing only a single round of division 
per cell cycle, and that MinCD acts at multiple levels to prevent inappropriate 
division.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06501.x
PMID: 19019154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
