---
pmid: '31519798'
title: Integrative Analysis from the Epigenome to Translatome Uncovers Patterns of
  Dominant Nuclear Regulation during Transient Stress.
authors:
- Lee TA
- Bailey-Serres J
journal: Plant Cell
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6881120
doi: 10.1105/tpc.19.00463
---

# Integrative Analysis from the Epigenome to Translatome Uncovers Patterns of Dominant Nuclear Regulation during Transient Stress.
**Authors:** Lee TA, Bailey-Serres J
**Journal:** Plant Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1105/tpc.19.00463](https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.19.00463)
**PMC:** [PMC6881120](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6881120/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Cell. 2019 Nov;31(11):2573-2595. doi: 10.1105/tpc.19.00463. Epub 2019
Sep  13.

Integrative Analysis from the Epigenome to Translatome Uncovers Patterns of 
Dominant Nuclear Regulation during Transient Stress.

Lee TA(1), Bailey-Serres J(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Plant Cell Biology and Botany and Plant Sciences Department, 
University of California, Riverside, California 92521.
(2)Center for Plant Cell Biology and Botany and Plant Sciences Department, 
University of California, Riverside, California 92521 serres@ucr.edu.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2019 Nov;31(11):2548-2549. doi: 10.1105/tpc.19.00730.

Gene regulation is a dynamic process involving changes ranging from the 
remodeling of chromatin to preferential translation. To understand integrated 
nuclear and cytoplasmic gene regulatory dynamics, we performed a survey spanning 
the epigenome to translatome of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) seedlings in 
response to hypoxia and reoxygenation. This included chromatin assays (examining 
histones, accessibility, RNA polymerase II [RNAPII], and transcription factor 
binding) and three RNA assays (nuclear, polyadenylated, and 
ribosome-associated). Dynamic patterns of nuclear regulation distinguished 
stress-induced and growth-associated mRNAs. The rapid upregulation of 
hypoxia-responsive gene transcripts and their preferential translation were 
generally accompanied by increased chromatin accessibility, RNAPII engagement, 
and reduced Histone 2A.Z association. Hypoxia promoted a progressive 
upregulation of heat stress transcripts, as evidenced by RNAPII binding and 
increased nuclear RNA, with polyadenylated RNA levels only elevated after 
prolonged stress or reoxygenation. Promoters of rapidly versus progressively 
upregulated genes were enriched for cis-elements of ethylene-responsive and heat 
shock factor transcription factors, respectively. Genes associated with growth, 
including many encoding cytosolic ribosomal proteins, underwent distinct histone 
modifications, yet retained RNAPII engagement and accumulated nuclear 
transcripts during the stress. Upon reaeration, progressively upregulated and 
growth-associated gene transcripts were rapidly mobilized to ribosomes. Thus, 
multilevel nuclear regulation of nucleosomes, transcript synthesis, 
accumulation, and translation tailor transient stress 
responses.plantcell;31/11/2573/FX1F1fx1.

© 2019 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1105/tpc.19.00463
PMCID: PMC6881120
PMID: 31519798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Gene regulation is a dynamic process involving changes ranging from the remodeling of chromatin to preferential translation. To understand integrated nuclear and cytoplasmic gene regulatory dynamics, we performed a survey spanning the epigenome to translatome of Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) seedlings in response to hypoxia and reoxygenation. This included chromatin assays (examining histones, accessibility, RNA polymerase II [RNAPII], and transcription factor binding) and three RNA assays (nuclear, polyadenylated, and ribosome-associated). Dynamic patterns of nuclear regulation distinguished stress-induced and growth-associated mRNAs. The rapid upregulation of hypoxia-responsive gene transcripts and their preferential translation were generally accompanied by increased chromatin accessibility, RNAPII engagement, and reduced Histone 2A.Z association. Hypoxia promoted a progressive upregulation of heat stress transcripts, as evidenced by RNAPII binding and increased nuclear RNA, with polyadenylated RNA levels only elevated after prolonged stress or reoxygenation. Promoters of rapidly versus progressively upregulated genes were enriched for cis -elements of ethylene-responsive and heat shock factor transcription factors, respectively. Genes associated with growth, including many encoding cytosolic ribosomal proteins, underwent distinct histone modifications, yet retained RNAPII engagement and accumulated nuclear transcripts during the stress. Upon reaeration, progressively upregulated and growth-associated gene transcripts were rapidly mobilized to ribosomes. Thus, multilevel nuclear regulation of nucleosomes, transcript synthesis, accumulation, and translation tailor transient stress responses.

INTRODUCTION

The regulated expression of protein-coding genes in eukaryotes involves processes within the nucleus, including the remodeling of chromatin, recruitment of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII), cotranscriptional processing, and export of mature mRNA to the cytoplasm, where it may be translated, sequestered, or degraded. These processes are modulated by conditions that necessitate changes in metabolism and growth to maintain viability. In Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ), cellular hypoxia promotes the activation of anaerobic metabolism to enable ATP production for basic cellular processes. This involves the rapid activation of transcription of 49 hypoxia-responsive genes ( HRG s) followed by the active translation of their mRNAs, while most other transcripts are sequestered from translation complexes until reaeration ( Branco-Price et al., 2005 , 2008 ; Juntawong et al., 2014 ; Sorenson and Bailey-Serres, 2014 ). The well-translated HRG mRNAs lack notable sequences or features that can explain their effective translation and avoidance of sequestration ( Branco-Price et al., 2005 ; Juntawong et al., 2014 ; Sorenson and Bailey-Serres, 2014 ), leading to the hypothesis that their preferential translational reflects aspects of their nuclear regulation.

Transcriptional activation of many HRG s involves the evolutionarily conserved group VII ethylene response factor (ERFVII) transcription factors (TFs), which are required for survival under hypoxia ( Xu et al., 2006 ; Hattori et al., 2009 ; Gibbs et al., 2011 ; Licausi et al., 2011 ; Yang et al., 2011 ; Abbas et al., 2015 ; Paul et al., 2016 ; Eysholdt-Derzsó and Sauter, 2017 ; Giuntoli and Perata, 2018 ). The five Arabidopsis ERFVIIs are stabilized under hypoxia due to attenuation of their oxygen-stimulated proteolysis via the Arg branch of the N-degron pathway ( Gibbs et al., 2011 ; Licausi et al., 2011 ; Paul et al., 2016 ; White et al., 2017 ; Millar et al., 2019 ). These include three constitutively synthesized ERFVIIs (RELATED TO APETALA2.2 [RAP2.2], RAP2.3, and RAP2.12) shown to transactivate HRG promoters in protoplasts through a hypoxia-responsive promoter cis -element (HRPE) identified in ∼50% of the HRG s ( Giuntoli et al., 2014 ; Gasch et al., 2016 ; Giuntoli and Perata, 2018 ). Two other ERFVIIs, HYPOXIA-RESPONSIVE ERF1 and 2 (HRE1/2), are upregulated by hypoxia along with ALCOHOL DEHYDROGENASE1 ( ADH1 ) and PLANT CYSTEINE OXIDASE1 / 2 ( PCO1 / 2 ), which facilitate anaerobic metabolism and catalyze turnover of the ERFVIIs, respectively ( Giuntoli et al., 2014 , 2017 ; Weits et al., 2014 ; White et al., 2017 ).

Transcription requires the binding of TFs to specific cis -elements typically located near the transcription start site (TSS) to facilitate the assembly of an RNAPII initiation complex. The depletion of nucleosomes near a TSS is controlled by ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers and can be influenced by interactions with the transcriptional apparatus. TF binding and RNAPII activity both influence and are influenced by specific modifications and variants of histones ( Gates et al., 2017 ; Talbert and Henikoff, 2017 ), which thereby serve as a proxy of gene activity. For example, tri-methylated Histone 3-lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and H3K4me3 are prevalent in the bodies of genes transcribed at low and high levels, respectively ( Asensi-Fabado et al., 2017 ; Gates et al., 2017 ). Acetylation of Histone H3 Lys residues (H3K9ac, H3K14ac) reduces interactions between DNA and histones and is associated with ongoing transcription ( Gates et al., 2017 ), including genes actively transcribed during environmental stress in plants ( Eberharter and Becker, 2002 ; Kim et al., 2008 , 2012 ). A characteristic of heat-stress–activated genes of Arabidopsis is high levels of the Histone 2A variant H2A.Z at the first nucleosome within the gene body, a feature proposed to reduce the energy required to commence transcriptional elongation at elevated temperatures ( Kumar and Wigge, 2010 ; Cortijo et al., 2017 ; Dai et al., 2017 ; Sura et al., 2017 ; Torres and Deal, 2019 ).

As transcription commences, the phosphorylation of specific residues within the heptad repeats of the carboxyl terminal domain (CTD) of RNAPII orchestrates interactions with factors that facilitate transcription-coupled histone modifications as well as the cotranscriptional 5′ capping, splicing, and polyadenylation of the nascent transcript ( Hajheidari et al., 2013 ; Milligan et al., 2016 ). CTD phosphorylation at Ser 2 (Ser2P) demarks active elongation ( Phatnani and Greenleaf, 2006 ). In animals, pausing of RNAPII downstream of the TSS is common among genes activated by heat stress ( Jonkers and Lis, 2015 ). The mapping of the 5′ ends of nascent transcripts by Native Elongating Transcript sequencing indicated that elongation can be rate-limiting shortly after initiation in Arabidopsis seedlings ( Zhu et al., 2018 ), although this was not discernable when nascent transcripts were surveyed by global nuclear run-on sequencing ( Hetzel et al., 2016 ). Yet, both studies found that transcription becomes rate-limited as RNAPII pauses just beyond the site of cleavage and polyadenylation. After initiation, cotranscriptional intron splicing, polyadenylation, and export are regulated by environmental cues including hypoxia (Branco-Price et al., 2008 ; Mustroph et al., 2009 ; Juntawong et al., 2014 ; Niedojadło et al., 2016 ; van Veen et al., 2016 ; de Lorenzo et al., 2017) .

To better understand the integration of nuclear and cytoplasmic regulation of gene activity in response to hypoxia and reoxygenation, we performed a multiomic study of histone dynamics, open regions of chromatin, HRE2 binding, and RNAPII–Ser2P distribution in Arabidopsis. Eight chromatin readouts were compared with the modulation of nuclear RNA (nRNA), polyadenylated RNA (polyA RNA), and polyadenylated ribosome-associated RNA. The integrated analysis of these data exposed patterns of histone modifications, dynamic regulation of chromatin accessibility, cis -element enrichment, and temporal regulation of nRNA that accompanied dynamics in mRNA abundance and translation. This analysis exposed multiple layers of gene regulation including rapid and complete upregulation of HRGs , progressive upregulation of heat stress-response genes, and incomplete downregulation of genes associated with growth, including ribosomal proteins (RPs). Both transcriptional elongation and nuclear export appear to be points of regulation in response to oxygen availability. The data set produced in this study provides a resource for evaluating epigenetic state and RNAPII activity through translation in a model organism.
