---
pmid: '20550938'
title: C. elegans screen identifies autophagy genes specific to multicellular organisms.
authors:
- Tian Y
- Li Z
- Hu W
- Ren H
- Tian E
- Zhao Y
- Lu Q
- Huang X
- Yang P
- Li X
- Wang X
- Kovács AL
- Yu L
- Zhang H
journal: Cell
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.034
---

# C. elegans screen identifies autophagy genes specific to multicellular organisms.
**Authors:** Tian Y, Li Z, Hu W, Ren H, Tian E, Zhao Y, Lu Q, Huang X, Yang P, Li X, Wang X, Kovács AL, Yu L, Zhang H
**Journal:** Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.034)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2010 Jun 11;141(6):1042-55. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.034.

C. elegans screen identifies autophagy genes specific to multicellular 
organisms.

Tian Y(1), Li Z, Hu W, Ren H, Tian E, Zhao Y, Lu Q, Huang X, Yang P, Li X, Wang 
X, Kovács AL, Yu L, Zhang H.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Jun 11;141(6):922-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.05.036.

The molecular understanding of autophagy has originated almost exclusively from 
yeast genetic studies. Little is known about essential autophagy components 
specific to higher eukaryotes. Here we perform genetic screens in C. elegans and 
identify four metazoan-specific autophagy genes, named epg-2, -3, -4, and -5. 
Genetic analysis reveals that epg-2, -3, -4, and -5 define discrete genetic 
steps of the autophagy pathway. epg-2 encodes a coiled-coil protein that 
functions in specific autophagic cargo recognition. Mammalian homologs of 
EPG-3/VMP1, EPG-4/EI24, and EPG-5/mEPG5 are essential for starvation-induced 
autophagy. VMP1 regulates autophagosome formation by controlling the duration of 
omegasomes. EI24 and mEPG5 are required for formation of degradative 
autolysosomes. This study establishes C. elegans as a multicellular genetic 
model to delineate the autophagy pathway and provides mechanistic insights into 
the metazoan-specific autophagic process.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.04.034
PMID: 20550938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
