---
pmid: '21502521'
title: Modular coherence of protein dynamics in yeast cell polarity system.
authors:
- Gao JT
- Guimerà R
- Li H
- Pinto IM
- Sales-Pardo M
- Wai SC
- Rubinstein B
- Li R
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3088571
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1017567108
---

# Modular coherence of protein dynamics in yeast cell polarity system.
**Authors:** Gao JT, Guimerà R, Li H, Pinto IM, Sales-Pardo M, Wai SC, Rubinstein B, Li R
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1017567108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1017567108)
**PMC:** [PMC3088571](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3088571/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 3;108(18):7647-52. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1017567108. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

Modular coherence of protein dynamics in yeast cell polarity system.

Gao JT(1), Guimerà R, Li H, Pinto IM, Sales-Pardo M, Wai SC, Rubinstein B, Li R.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

In this study, we investigated on a systems level how complex protein 
interactions underlying cell polarity in yeast determine the dynamic association 
of proteins with the polar cortical domain (PCD) where they localize and perform 
morphogenetic functions. We constructed a network of physical interactions among 
>100 proteins localized to the PCD. This network was further divided into five 
robust modules correlating with distinct subprocesses associated with cell 
polarity. Based on this reconstructed network, we proposed a simple model that 
approximates a PCD protein's molecular residence time as the sum of the 
characteristic time constants of the functional modules with which it interacts, 
weighted by the number of edges forming these interactions. Regression analyses 
showed excellent fitting of the model with experimentally measured residence 
times for a large subset of the PCD proteins. The model is able to predict 
residence times using small training sets. Our analysis also revealed a scaffold 
protein that imposes a local constraint of dynamics for certain interacting 
proteins.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1017567108
PMCID: PMC3088571
PMID: 21502521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
