---
pmid: '9773776'
title: Megalin is an endocytic receptor for insulin.
authors:
- Orlando RA
- Rader K
- Authier F
- Yamazaki H
- Posner BI
- Bergeron JJ
- Farquhar MG
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1681/ASN.V9101759
---

# Megalin is an endocytic receptor for insulin.
**Authors:** Orlando RA, Rader K, Authier F, Yamazaki H, Posner BI, Bergeron JJ, Farquhar MG
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.V9101759](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.V9101759)

## Abstract

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 1998 Oct;9(10):1759-66. doi: 10.1681/ASN.V9101759.

Megalin is an endocytic receptor for insulin.

Orlando RA(1), Rader K, Authier F, Yamazaki H, Posner BI, Bergeron JJ, Farquhar 
MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0651, USA.

Renal clearance is a major pathway for regulating the levels of insulin and 
other low molecular weight polypeptide hormones in the systemic circulation. 
Previous studies have shown that the reabsorption of insulin from the glomerular 
filtrate occurs by binding to as yet unidentified sites on the luminal surface 
of proximal tubule cells followed by endocytosis and degradation in lysosomes. 
In this study, an insulin binding site was identified in renal microvillar 
membranes by chemical cross-linking procedures. By immunoprecipitation it was 
demonstrated that this binding site is megalin, the large multiligand binding 
endocytic receptor that is abundantly expressed in clathrin-coated pits on the 
apical surface of proximal tubule cells. Moreover, using cytochemical 
procedures, it was also shown that megalin is able to internalize insulin into 
endocytic vesicles. In ligand blotting assays, megalin also bound several other 
low molecular weight polypeptides, including beta2-microglobulin, epidermal 
growth factor, prolactin, lysozyme, and cytochrome c. These data suggest that 
megalin may play a significant role as a renal reabsorption receptor for the 
uptake of insulin and other low molecular weight polypeptides from the 
glomerular filtrate.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.V9101759
PMID: 9773776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
