---
pmid: '17515907'
title: Structural basis for the transforming activity of human cancer-related signaling
  adaptor protein CRK.
authors:
- Kobashigawa Y
- Sakai M
- Naito M
- Yokochi M
- Kumeta H
- Makino Y
- Ogura K
- Tanaka S
- Inagaki F
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb1241
---

# Structural basis for the transforming activity of human cancer-related signaling adaptor protein CRK.
**Authors:** Kobashigawa Y, Sakai M, Naito M, Yokochi M, Kumeta H, Makino Y, Ogura K, Tanaka S, Inagaki F
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb1241](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb1241)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;14(6):503-10. doi: 10.1038/nsmb1241. Epub 2007
May  21.

Structural basis for the transforming activity of human cancer-related signaling 
adaptor protein CRK.

Kobashigawa Y(1), Sakai M, Naito M, Yokochi M, Kumeta H, Makino Y, Ogura K, 
Tanaka S, Inagaki F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;14(6):465-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb0607-465.

CRKI (SH2-SH3) and CRKII (SH2-SH3-SH3) are splicing isoforms of the oncoprotein 
CRK that regulate transcription and cytoskeletal reorganization for cell growth 
and motility by linking tyrosine kinases to small G proteins. CRKI shows 
substantial transforming activity, whereas the activity of CRKII is low, and 
phosphorylated CRKII has no biological activity whatsoever. The molecular 
mechanisms underlying the distinct biological activities of the CRK proteins 
remain elusive. We determined the solution structures of CRKI, CRKII and 
phosphorylated CRKII by NMR and identified the molecular mechanism that gives 
rise to their activities. Results from mutational analysis using rodent 3Y1 
fibroblasts were consistent with those from the structural studies. Together, 
these data suggest that the linker region modulates the binding of CRKII to its 
targets, thus regulating cell growth and motility.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb1241
PMID: 17515907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
