---
pmid: '9887206'
title: 'Akt kinases and 2-deoxyglucose uptake in rat skeletal muscles in vivo: study
  with insulin and exercise.'
authors:
- Turinsky J
- Damrau-Abney A
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.1.R277
---

# Akt kinases and 2-deoxyglucose uptake in rat skeletal muscles in vivo: study with insulin and exercise.
**Authors:** Turinsky J, Damrau-Abney A
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.1.R277](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.1.R277)

## Abstract

1. Am J Physiol. 1999 Jan;276(1):R277-82. doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.1.R277.

Akt kinases and 2-deoxyglucose uptake in rat skeletal muscles in vivo: study 
with insulin and exercise.

Turinsky J(1), Damrau-Abney A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Albany Medical College, Albany, 
New York 12208, USA.

Activities of Akt1, Akt2, and Akt3 kinases and glucose uptake in hindlimb 
muscles of the rat in vivo were investigated. The rats were studied either after 
intravenous injection of 0.1 U of insulin or during exercise induced by 
stimulating calf muscles electrically at 1 contraction/s. Akt kinases were 
immunoprecipitated from supernatants of muscle homogenates. Glucose uptake by 
muscles in vivo was assessed by cellular accumulation of 2-deoxy-D-[1, 
2-3H(N)]glucose. Administration of insulin resulted in rapid activation of Akt1 
kinase, with peak activity observed 5 min after insulin injection. Soleus 
muscle, a slow-twitch muscle, and plantaris muscle, a fast-twitch muscle, 
differed in their content of Akt1 kinase and in their response to insulin. 
Soleus muscle exhibited a 105% higher abundance of Akt1 kinase, a 101% higher 
insulin-stimulated activity of Akt1 kinase, and 83% higher insulin-stimulated 
2-deoxyglucose uptake compared with plantaris muscle. Additionally, insulin 
administration increased the activities of Akt1, Akt2, and Akt3 kinases in calf 
muscles and caused a sevenfold augmentation in 2-deoxyglucose uptake by these 
muscles. In contrast, the exercised calf muscles exhibited an increase in Akt1 
kinase activity at 5, 15, and 25 min of exercise but no change in activities of 
Akt2 and Akt3 isoforms, and the 2-deoxyglucose uptake by calf muscles exercised 
for 25 min was 11-fold higher compared with muscles of resting rats. The data 
demonstrate that 1) there is a close, direct correlation between the magnitude 
of insulin-stimulated activity of Akt1 kinase and the level of glucose uptake in 
muscles with different fiber populations, 2) insulin activates three isoforms of 
Akt kinase in skeletal muscle, and 3) exercise in vivo is associated with 
activation of Akt1 but not Akt2 and Akt3 kinases in contracting muscles.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.1999.276.1.R277
PMID: 9887206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
