---
pmid: '15840585'
title: The periplasmic chaperone SurA exploits two features characteristic of integral
  outer membrane proteins for selective substrate recognition.
authors:
- Hennecke G
- Nolte J
- Volkmer-Engert R
- Schneider-Mergener J
- Behrens S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413742200
---

# The periplasmic chaperone SurA exploits two features characteristic of integral outer membrane proteins for selective substrate recognition.
**Authors:** Hennecke G, Nolte J, Volkmer-Engert R, Schneider-Mergener J, Behrens S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M413742200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M413742200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 24;280(25):23540-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413742200. Epub
2005  Apr 19.

The periplasmic chaperone SurA exploits two features characteristic of integral 
outer membrane proteins for selective substrate recognition.

Hennecke G(1), Nolte J, Volkmer-Engert R, Schneider-Mergener J, Behrens S.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung Molekulare Genetik und Präparative Molekularbiologie, Institut für 
Mikrobiologie und Genetik, Georg-August-Universität, Grisebachstrasse 8, D-37077 
Göttingen, Germany.

The Escherichia coli periplasmic chaperone and peptidyl-prolyl isomerase 
(PPIase) SurA facilitates the maturation of outer membrane porins. Although the 
PPIase activity exhibited by one of its two parvulin-like domains is dispensable 
for this function, the chaperone activity residing in the non-PPIase regions of 
SurA, a sizable N-terminal domain and a short C-terminal tail, is essential. 
Unlike most cytoplasmic chaperones SurA is selective for particular substrates 
and recognizes outer membrane porins synthesized in vitro much more efficiently 
than other proteins. Thus, SurA may be specialized for the maturation of outer 
membrane proteins. We have characterized the substrate specificity of SurA based 
on its natural, biologically relevant substrates by screening cellulose-bound 
peptide libraries representing outer membrane proteins. We show that two 
features are critical for peptide binding by SurA: specific patterns of aromatic 
residues and the orientation of their side chains, which are found more 
frequently in integral outer membrane proteins than in other proteins. For the 
first time this sufficiently explains the capability of SurA to discriminate 
between outer membrane protein and non-outer membrane protein folding 
intermediates. Furthermore, peptide binding by SurA requires neither an active 
PPIase domain nor the presence of proline, indicating that the observed 
substrate specificity relates to the chaperone function of SurA. Finally, we 
show that SurA is capable of associating with the outer membrane. Together, our 
data support a model in which SurA is specialized to interact with non-native 
periplasmic outer membrane protein folding intermediates and to assist in their 
maturation from early to late outer membrane-associated steps.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413742200
PMID: 15840585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
