---
pmid: '17360613'
title: Evidence for a dual binding mode of dockerin modules to cohesins.
authors:
- Carvalho AL
- Dias FM
- Nagy T
- Prates JA
- Proctor MR
- Smith N
- Bayer EA
- Davies GJ
- Ferreira LM
- Romão MJ
- Fontes CM
- Gilbert HJ
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1805526
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0611173104
---

# Evidence for a dual binding mode of dockerin modules to cohesins.
**Authors:** Carvalho AL, Dias FM, Nagy T, Prates JA, Proctor MR, Smith N, Bayer EA, Davies GJ, Ferreira LM, Romão MJ, Fontes CM, Gilbert HJ
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0611173104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0611173104)
**PMC:** [PMC1805526](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1805526/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3089-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0611173104. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Evidence for a dual binding mode of dockerin modules to cohesins.

Carvalho AL(1), Dias FM, Nagy T, Prates JA, Proctor MR, Smith N, Bayer EA, 
Davies GJ, Ferreira LM, Romão MJ, Fontes CM, Gilbert HJ.

Author information:
(1)Rede de Química e Tecnologia/Centro de Química Fina e Biotecnologia 
(REQUIMTE/CQFB), Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal.

The assembly of proteins that display complementary activities into 
macromolecular complexes is critical to cellular function. One such enzyme 
complex, of environmental significance, is the plant cell wall degrading 
apparatus of anaerobic bacteria, termed the cellulosome. The complex assembles 
through the interaction of enzyme-derived "type I dockerin" modules with the 
multiple "cohesin" modules of the scaffolding protein. Clostridium thermocellum 
type I dockerin modules contain a duplicated 22-residue sequence that comprises 
helix-1 and helix-3, respectively. The crystal structure of a C. thermocellum 
type I cohesin-dockerin complex showed that cohesin recognition was 
predominantly through helix-3 of the dockerin. The sequence duplication is 
reflected in near-perfect 2-fold structural symmetry, suggesting that both 
repeats could interact with cohesins by a common mechanism in wild-type (WT) 
proteins. Here, a helix-3 disrupted mutant dockerin is used to visualize the 
reverse binding in which the dockerin mutant is indeed rotated 180 degrees 
relative to the WT dockerin such that helix-1 now dominates recognition of its 
protein partner. The dual binding mode is predicted to impart significant 
plasticity into the orientation of the catalytic subunits within this 
supramolecular assembly, which reflects the challenges presented by the 
degradation of a heterogeneous, recalcitrant, insoluble substrate by a tethered 
macromolecular complex.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0611173104
PMCID: PMC1805526
PMID: 17360613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
