---
pmid: '20133940'
title: Nucleoporin translocated promoter region (Tpr) associates with dynein complex,
  preventing chromosome lagging formation during mitosis.
authors:
- Nakano H
- Funasaka T
- Hashizume C
- Wong RW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2856290
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.105890
---

# Nucleoporin translocated promoter region (Tpr) associates with dynein complex, preventing chromosome lagging formation during mitosis.
**Authors:** Nakano H, Funasaka T, Hashizume C, Wong RW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M110.105890](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M110.105890)
**PMC:** [PMC2856290](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2856290/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10841-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.105890. Epub
2010  Feb 4.

Nucleoporin translocated promoter region (Tpr) associates with dynein complex, 
preventing chromosome lagging formation during mitosis.

Nakano H(1), Funasaka T, Hashizume C, Wong RW.

Author information:
(1)Frontier Science Organization and Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa 
University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-1192, Japan.

Gain or loss of whole chromosomes is often observed in cancer cells and is 
thought to be due to aberrant chromosome segregation during mitosis. Proper 
chromosome segregation depends on a faithful interaction between spindle 
microtubules and kinetochores. Several components of the nuclear pore 
complex/nucleoporins play critical roles in orchestrating the rapid remodeling 
events that occur during mitosis. Our recent studies revealed that the 
nucleoporin, Rae1, plays critical roles in maintaining spindle bipolarity. Here, 
we show association of another nucleoporin, termed Tpr (translocated promoter 
region), with the molecular motors dynein and dynactin, which both orchestrate 
with the spindle checkpoints Mad1 and Mad2 during cell division. Overexpression 
of Tpr enhanced multinucleated cell formation. RNA interference-mediated 
knockdown of Tpr caused a severe lagging chromosome phenotype and disrupted 
spindle checkpoint proteins expression and localization. Next, we performed a 
series of rescue and dominant negative experiments to confirm that Tpr 
orchestrates proper chromosome segregation through interaction with dynein light 
chain. Our data indicate that Tpr functions as a spatial and temporal regulator 
of spindle checkpoints, ensuring the efficient recruitment of checkpoint 
proteins to the molecular motor dynein to promote proper anaphase formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.105890
PMCID: PMC2856290
PMID: 20133940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
