---
pmid: '12526743'
title: Short-interfering-RNA-mediated gene silencing in mammalian cells requires Dicer
  and eIF2C translation initiation factors.
authors:
- Doi N
- Zenno S
- Ueda R
- Ohki-Hamazaki H
- Ui-Tei K
- Saigo K
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01394-5
---

# Short-interfering-RNA-mediated gene silencing in mammalian cells requires Dicer and eIF2C translation initiation factors.
**Authors:** Doi N, Zenno S, Ueda R, Ohki-Hamazaki H, Ui-Tei K, Saigo K
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01394-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01394-5)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2003 Jan 8;13(1):41-6. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01394-5.

Short-interfering-RNA-mediated gene silencing in mammalian cells requires Dicer 
and eIF2C translation initiation factors.

Doi N(1), Zenno S, Ueda R, Ohki-Hamazaki H, Ui-Tei K, Saigo K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1 Hongo, 113-0033, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

RNA interference (RNAi) is the process of long, double-stranded (ds), 
RNA-dependent posttranscriptional gene silencing (PTGS). In lower eukaryotes, 
dsRNA introduced into the cytoplasm is cleaved by the RNaseIII-like enzyme, 
Dicer, to 21-23 nt RNA (short interfering [si] RNA), which may serve as guide 
for target mRNA degradation. In mammals, long-dsRNA-dependent PTGS is applicable 
only to a limited number of cell types, whereas siRNA synthesized in vitro is 
capable of effectively inducing gene silencing in a wide variety of cells. 
Although biochemical and genetic analyses in lower eukaryotes showed that Dicer 
and some PIWI family member proteins are essential for long-dsRNA-dependent 
PTGS, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying siRNA-based 
PTGS. Here, we show that Dicer and eIF2C translation initiation factors 
belonging to the PIWI family (eIF2C1-4) play an essential role in mammalian 
siRNA-mediated PTGS, most probably through synergistic interactions. 
Immunoprecipitation experiments suggest that, in human and mouse cells, complex 
formation occurs between Dicer and eIF2C1 or 2 and that the PIWI domain of eIF2C 
is essential for the formation of this complex.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01394-5
PMID: 12526743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
