---
pmid: '10792625'
title: Effects of spironolactone on systolic blood pressure in experimental diabetic
  rats.
authors:
- Liu YJ
- Nakagawa Y
- Toya K
- Wang Y
- Saegusa H
- Nakanishi T
- Ohzeki T
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00055.x
---

# Effects of spironolactone on systolic blood pressure in experimental diabetic rats.
**Authors:** Liu YJ, Nakagawa Y, Toya K, Wang Y, Saegusa H, Nakanishi T, Ohzeki T
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00055.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00055.x)

## Abstract

1. Kidney Int. 2000 May;57(5):2064-71. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00055.x.

Effects of spironolactone on systolic blood pressure in experimental diabetic 
rats.

Liu YJ(1), Nakagawa Y, Toya K, Wang Y, Saegusa H, Nakanishi T, Ohzeki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Japan. yjliu@hama-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Mineralocorticoid hormones, which maintain electrolyte balance and 
blood pressure, are thought to be associated not only with the expression of 
renal 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (11beta-HSD2), but also with 
that of intracellular mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs). The present study was 
designed to test whether the mineralocorticoid action of glucocorticoid 
corticosterone on renal MR is involved in the development of diabetes-associated 
hypertension by measuring the alterations of renal 11beta-HSD2.
METHOD: We measured the mean systolic blood pressure, renal 11beta-HSD1, and 
mRNA levels in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats that received 
spironolactone, insulin, or no treatment, and in nondiabetic controls that 
received spironolactone.
RESULTS: Four weeks after an injection of STZ, the renal 11beta-HSD2 and mRNA 
levels were significantly lower in diabetic rats than in control rats, and the 
mean systolic blood pressure was 14.8% higher in diabetic rats than in controls. 
Subcutaneous injections of spironolactone into diabetic rats for three weeks 
partially reversed the decrease in renal 11beta-HSD2 activity and gene 
expression, and prevented the mean systolic blood pressure elevation. 
Spironolactone treatment for one week also resulted in a significant reduction 
in mean systolic blood pressure during the development of diabetic hypertension. 
However, treatment with STZ did not significantly decrease the renal 11beta-HSD1 
activity and mRNA expression, and spironolactone treatment did not exert a 
significant effect on this enzyme in STZ-induced diabetic rats.
CONCLUSION: In the development of diabetes-induced hypertension, the effect of 
spironolactone on mean systolic blood pressure may be associated with the 
mineralocorticoid effects of corticosterone on renal MR, as well as an 
alteration of renal 11beta-HSD2 activity and its mRNA expression in 
insulin-dependent diabetic rats.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2000.00055.x
PMID: 10792625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
