---
pmid: '8947054'
title: 'Ligand interactions with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2: role
  of the gamma-subunit.'
authors:
- Erickson FL
- Hannig EM
journal: EMBO J
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC452454
---

# Ligand interactions with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2: role of the gamma-subunit.
**Authors:** Erickson FL, Hannig EM
**Journal:** EMBO J (1996)
**PMC:** [PMC452454](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC452454/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 15;15(22):6311-20.

Ligand interactions with eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2: role of the 
gamma-subunit.

Erickson FL(1), Hannig EM.

Author information:
(1)University of Texas at Dallas, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
Richardson 75083-0688, USA.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF-2) comprises three non-identical 
subunits alpha, beta and gamma. In vitro, eIF-2 binds the initiator 
methionyl-tRNA in a GTP-dependent fashion. Based on similarities between 
eukaryotic eIF-2gamma proteins and eubacterial EF-Tu proteins, we previously 
proposed a major role for the gamma-subunit in binding guanine nucleotide and 
tRNA. We have tested this hypothesis by examining the biochemical activities of 
yeast eIF-2 purified from wild-type strains and strains harboring mutations in 
the eIF-2gamma structural gene (GCD11) predicted to alter ligand binding by 
eIF-2. The alteration of tyrosine 142 in yeast eIF-2gamma, corresponding to 
histidine 66 in Escherichia coli EF-Tu, dramatically reduced the affinity of 
eIF-2 for Met-tRNAi(Met) without affecting the k(off) value for guanine 
nucleotides. In contrast, non-lethal substitutions at a conserved lysine residue 
(K250) in the putative guanine ring-binding loop increased the off-rate for GDP, 
thereby mimicking the function of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor eIF-2B, 
without altering the apparent dissociation constant for Met-tRNAi(Met). For 
eIF-2[gamma-K250R], the increased off-rate also seen for GTP was masked by the 
presence of Met-tRNAi(Met) in vitro. In vivo, increasing the dose of the yeast 
initiator tRNA gene suppressed the slow-growth phenotype and reduced GCN4 
expression in gcd11-K250R and gcd11-Y142H strains. These studies indicate that 
the gamma-subunit of eIF-2 does indeed provide EF-Tu-like function to the eIF-2 
complex, and further suggest that the level of Met-tRNAi(Met) is critical for 
maintaining wild-type rates of initiation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC452454
PMID: 8947054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
