---
pmid: '22366686'
title: Senescence is an endogenous trigger for microRNA-directed transcriptional gene
  silencing in human cells.
authors:
- Benhamed M
- Herbig U
- Ye T
- Dejean A
- Bischof O
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC5423543
doi: 10.1038/ncb2443
---

# Senescence is an endogenous trigger for microRNA-directed transcriptional gene silencing in human cells.
**Authors:** Benhamed M, Herbig U, Ye T, Dejean A, Bischof O
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2443](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2443)
**PMC:** [PMC5423543](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5423543/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Feb 26;14(3):266-75. doi: 10.1038/ncb2443.

Senescence is an endogenous trigger for microRNA-directed transcriptional gene 
silencing in human cells.

Benhamed M(1), Herbig U, Ye T, Dejean A, Bischof O.

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Nuclear Organisation and Oncogenesis Unit, Department of 
Cell Biology and Infection, F-75015 Paris, France.

Cellular senescence is a tumour-suppressor mechanism that is triggered by 
cancer-initiating or promoting events in mammalian cells. The molecular 
underpinnings for this stable arrest involve transcriptional repression of 
proliferation-promoting genes regulated by the retinoblastoma (RB1)/E2F 
repressor complex. Here, we demonstrate that AGO2, RB1 and microRNAs (miRNAs), 
as exemplified here by let-7, physically and functionally interact to repress 
RB1/E2F-target genes in senescence, a process that we call senescence-associated 
transcriptional gene silencing (SA-TGS). Herein, AGO2 acts as the effector 
protein for let-7-directed implementation of silent-state chromatin 
modifications at target promoters, and inhibition of the let-7/AGO2 effector 
complex perturbs the timely execution of senescence. Thus, we identify cellular 
senescence as the an endogenous signal of miRNA/AGO2-mediated TGS in human 
cells. Our results suggest that miRNA/AGO2-mediated SA-TGS may contribute to 
tumour suppression by stably repressing proliferation-promoting genes in 
premalignant cancer cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2443
PMCID: PMC5423543
PMID: 22366686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

IntroductionCellular senescence represents a robust and essentially irreversible
tumor-suppressive barrier that cells must overcome to develop into a full-blown
malignancy 1. Previous studies have
proposed that the irreversibility of the senescence arrest is tightly associated
with the senescent cells' particular chromatin architecture that is
epitomized by the appearance of so-called senescence-associated heterochromatin foci
(SAHF) 2,3. SAHF are a hallmark of senescent cells that contain several
common markers of transcriptionally repressed heterochromatin and were hypothesised
to silence genes important for cell proliferation in particular those regulated by
the E2F-Rb repressor complex (e.g. cyclin A2 (CCNA2), cyclin E
(CCNE) or PCNA) 2. However, whether
or not SAHF really contain E2F-target genes and how the senescence-associated
inactive chromatin state at E2F target genes is implemented and maintained remains
unclear. Recent studies in model organisms have provided a link between argonaute
(AGO) proteins, small interfering (si) RNA-guided heterochromatin formation and
transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) 4. In humans, there are four Ago proteins (Ago1–4) and
AGO1- and 2 were previously implicated in TGS induced by exogenous siRNAs and
microRNAs (miRs) directed against gene promoter transcripts via promotion of changes
in histone covalent modifications and DNA methylation 5-7.
Not-with-standing, many mechanistic details of this process remain poorly defined in
human cells, and very little is known about the identity of possible endogenous
signals, which may drive this process in human cells. Given the evolutionary
conserved role of siRNAs and AGO proteins in TGS and heterochromatin formation, we
set out to analyse their possible involvement in senesence-associated repression of
E2F target genes.

Introduction

Cellular senescence represents a robust and essentially irreversible
tumor-suppressive barrier that cells must overcome to develop into a full-blown
malignancy 1. Previous studies have
proposed that the irreversibility of the senescence arrest is tightly associated
with the senescent cells' particular chromatin architecture that is
epitomized by the appearance of so-called senescence-associated heterochromatin foci
(SAHF) 2,3. SAHF are a hallmark of senescent cells that contain several
common markers of transcriptionally repressed heterochromatin and were hypothesised
to silence genes important for cell proliferation in particular those regulated by
the E2F-Rb repressor complex (e.g. cyclin A2 (CCNA2), cyclin E
(CCNE) or PCNA) 2. However, whether
or not SAHF really contain E2F-target genes and how the senescence-associated
inactive chromatin state at E2F target genes is implemented and maintained remains
unclear. Recent studies in model organisms have provided a link between argonaute
(AGO) proteins, small interfering (si) RNA-guided heterochromatin formation and
transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) 4. In humans, there are four Ago proteins (Ago1–4) and
AGO1- and 2 were previously implicated in TGS induced by exogenous siRNAs and
microRNAs (miRs) directed against gene promoter transcripts via promotion of changes
in histone covalent modifications and DNA methylation 5-7.
Not-with-standing, many mechanistic details of this process remain poorly defined in
human cells, and very little is known about the identity of possible endogenous
signals, which may drive this process in human cells. Given the evolutionary
conserved role of siRNAs and AGO proteins in TGS and heterochromatin formation, we
set out to analyse their possible involvement in senesence-associated repression of
E2F target genes.

ResultsGenome-wide identification of AGO-bound E2F target genes and
AGO/heterochromatin-bound miRs in senescenceTo determine, in an unbiased manner, which genes might be under the
control of AGO proteins we perfomed genome-wide promoter profiling in senescent
and pre-senescent control WI38 primary fibroblasts applying
“ChIP-on-chip” technology using an anti-pan-AGO antibody. The
enrichment value for each promoter was determined (see Methods) and yielded
4,516 potential AGO-promoter binding sites in senescent cells
versus 2,619 in pre-senescent cells. Of these binding
sites, 702 were in common between the two conditions, however, the false
discovery rate (FDR) for AGO binding sites in senescent cells were several fold
lower than in control cells, thus, indicating an enrichment for AGO proteins at
the respective promoters in senescent cells (Fig.
1a; Supplementary
Fig. S1a-f and Table S1). To probe a potential link between AGO proteins and E2F
target promoters, we inspected how many of the E2F-regulated promoters were
AGO-bound. This analysis revealed, that of the currently known top 577
E2F-responsive promoters 8-11, 320 (i.e.
55,5%) were occupied by AGO proteins in senescent cells opposed to only
77 (i.e. 13,3%) in control cells (Fig. 1b). We then correlated AGO-promoter occupancy of
E2F target genes with the comparative gene expression profile of these genes in
senescent versus pre-senescent control cells using
microarray-based transcriptome data. We found that, of the 320 AGO-bound E2F
target genes, 150 (i.e. ∼46,5%) were down-and
65 (i.e. ∼20,6%) were up-regulated (Fig. 1c; Supplementary Table S1). Functional
annotation of the 150 down-regulated E2F target genes showed a clear enrichment
in genes involved in cell cycle control (Supplementary Figure S2a and Supplementary Table S2)
whereas no significant enrichment was found for upregulated E2F target genes
(data not shown). Together, these results suggest that AGO-proteins may be
involved in senescence-associated repression of E2F-target genes.Exogenous miRs with sequence complementarity to promoter regions were
shown to induce AGO-mediated TGS by implementing a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin environment 7. This
led us to investigate whether miRs might be involved in AGO-mediated repression
of E2F target genes in senescence. To obtain a detailed picture of
AGO-immunoprecipitating miRs (RIP) in senescent cells, we used next-generation
sequencing (NGS). Importantly, we included histone H3 dimethylated on lysine 9
(H3K9me2) in this analysis to assign potential AGO2-interacting
miRs to a repressive chromatin state and unfractionated, cellular RNA from
senescent cells for normalization (Supplementary Figure S2b). Small
RNA sequences were determined by NGS producing between 3,2 and 4,5 million 33
nucleotide sequences for the three samples (Supplementary Table S3). To search
for previously known miRs within these results, we ran a string matching
algorithm (allowing one mismatch) to count the number of sequences aligning with
human mature miRs. Of the known 847 human mature and mature-star miRs annotated
in release 12.0 of miR-Base, we identified a total of 451 unique miRs in
unfractionated cellular RNA, 377 in RIP-AGO and 237 in RIP-H3K9me2 of
senescent cells (Supplementary Table S4). After adjusting for sequencing depth by
converting to logarithmic counts per million sequence reads (log cpm), we
computed the degree of association (Pearson coefficient, r; coefficient of
determination, r2) between miR expression in unfractionated, cellular
RNA and RIP-associated miRs and in-between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs (Figs.
1d-f). We found that the degree of association between miR expression
in unfractionated, cellular RNA and AGO-associated miRs is high (r =
0,862; P < 0,000001)(Fig. 1d),
while the degree of association between miR expression in unfractionated,
cellular RNA and H3K9me2-associated miRs is only moderate (r
= 0,686; P < 0,000001)(Fig.
1e). Remarkably, however, the degree of association between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs is high (r = 0,888; P <
0,000001)(Fig. 1f), thus, there exists
a strong positive correlation between AGO-bound and heterochromatin-bound miRs
in senescent cells.AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells to target repressed
E2F-responsive promotersHaving established a link between AGO-proteins and promoters of repressed
E2F target genes on the one hand as well as AGO-bound miRs and a repressive
chromatin state on the other hand, we were then interested whether a specific
AGO-miR effector complex is involved in SA-TGS of E2F genes. There are four AGO
proteins (AGO1–4) in humans. AGO2 was recently shown to undergo
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling 12 and to be differentially expressed in human cancers
13,14,15. Therefore, we focused on AGO2 in the further study.First, we sought to determine whether AGO2 may accumulate in the nucleus
of cells undergoing senescence using an anti-AGO2 specific monoclonal antibody
(Supplementary Fig.
S2c). Senescence was induced either by retroviral introduction of
oncogenic Rasv12 into WI38 primary human diploid fibroblasts,
treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with senescence-inducing concentrations
of doxorubicin or by re-expression of Rb in Rb-inducible SAOS-2 (Rb-negative)
cells. Biochemical fractionation (Fig. 2a;
Supplementary Fig.
S2d) and indirect immunofluorescence studies (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Fig. S2e-f) revealed
that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells when compared to
pre-senescent control cells, although the overall protein levels remain largely
unchanged. To extend the physiological significance of senescence-associated
nuclear accumulation of AGO2 from cell culture to human tissue samples, we
analysed localisation of AGO2 in melanocytic nevi and melanomas by indirect
immunofluorescence. Nevi are archetypes of benign tumours that frequently
harbour oncogenic mutations and are highly enriched in senescent melanocytes,
whereas melanomas are malignant tumors essentially devoid of senescent
melanocytes 16,17,18. Strikingly, we observed a pronounced nuclear enrichment of
AGO2 in senescent melanocytic nevi as evidenced by its colocalisation with the
senescence marker macroH2A 19,20 (Fig. 2c; Supplementary Fig. S3a-d). Conversely, in melanomas AGO2 was
essentially excluded from melanocytic nuclei and predominatly localised to the
cytosol (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Fig. S3e-g). Next, we
quantitatively assessed AGO2's partitioning between heterochromatin and
euchromatin using a histone association assay (HAA) 21. We established that, in senescent
cells, AGO2 predominantly coprecipitates with facultative heterochromatin
markers histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and
H3K9me2 when compared to pre-senescent control cells (Fig. 2e). By contrast, a comparable amount of
AGO2 coprecipitated with the euchromatin marker histone H3 acetylated at lysine
9 (H3K9ac) in both cell states (Fig.
2e). We conclude that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent
cells where it shows an increased affinity to inactive chromatin when compared
to pre-senescent cells.To validate AGO2-bound E2F target promoters as revealed by ChIP-on-chip,
we used qChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation quantified by real-time PCR) for a
selected number of target genes. Simultaneously, we also examined histone
modifications at the respective promoters and the gene expression statuses. We
found that AGO2 levels were elevated ∼2-4-fold on selected E2F target
promoters of CDC2, CDCA8, PCNA, CCNA2 (Fig.
2f) as well as ORC6L, USP1, NEK2, MYC, FANCF, CDC6, BUB1, BRCA2, ATM,
ASF1B and CCNE2 (Supplementary
Fig. S4a) in senescent cells when compared to pre-senescent cells.
The elevated physical presence of AGO2 at the respective promoters was
accompanied by a substantial increase in the negative methyl histone marks
H3K27me3 (∼3-6-fold), H3K9me2
(∼2-4-fold) and by a decrease (∼2-6-fold) in positive methyl
histone mark histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 4 (H3K4me3)(Fig. 2f) and paralleled by a decrease
(∼2-5-fold) in expression of the respective genes (Supplementary Fig. S4b).
Importantly, in senescent cells silenced for AGO2 expression we detected a
largely diminished presence of AGO2 at investigated promoters, thus,
underscoring AGO2 specificity (Supplementary Fig. S4c-d). Together, these results provide strong
evidence for an enrichment of AGO2 at E2F target promoters in senescent cells.
Moreover, they reveal that the repressive histone modification marks
H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 coincide with the presence of
AGO2 at E2F-regulated cell cycle genes in senescence arrest, thus, hinting at an
active contribution of AGO2 in senescence-associated repression of E2F target
genes.Physical and functional interaction between AGO2 and Rb in the regulation of
E2F-target genes in senescent cellsThe Rb protein functions as a repressor of E2F target genes in senescent
cells supposedly by nucleating heterochromatin formation at respective promoters
2, at least partly,
through recruitment of histone deacetylase HDAC1 or histone methyl-transferase
(HMT) Suv39H 22232425. We therefore considered
whether AGO2 might be involved in Rb-mediated repression in senescence. To test
this possibility, we first performed coimmunoprecipitation experiments between
endogenous AGO2, Rb and HDAC1 in cellular lysates prepared from
Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts. As shown in Figure 3a, HDAC1 and AGO2 co-immunoprecipitated with
each other. Moreover, both HDAC1 and AGO2 efficiently co-immunoprecipitated Rb.
Similar results were obtained in SAOS-2 cells undergoing Rb-induced senescence
(Fig. 3b). Consistent with the physical
interaction between AGO2 and Rb, AGO2 showed partial colocalisation with SAHF at
their periphery, a staining pattern that was similar for heterochromatin marker
H3K27me3 (Supplementary Fig. S5a) and Rb 2 and is thus congruent with the peripheral SAHF
localisation of E2F-target genes 3.Next, we investigated whether AGO2 could act as a co-repressor with Rb by
performing promoter-reporter assays using the natural E2F-responsive CCNE
promoter 26. Expression of Rb
repressed E2F-mediated transactivation of the promoter by 79% whereas
increasing amounts of AGO2 led to a 37 to 47% repression (Fig. 3c, columns 2-5). A co-repressive effect was
observed when both AGO2 and Rb were present simultaneously (Fig. 3c, columns 6 and 7) and this effect was further
enhanced in the presence of HDAC1 (data not shown). Co-repression between AGO2
and Rb was specific for AGO2 as its paralog AGO1 had no effect (Fig. 3c, columns 8 and 9). By contrast, Rb and AGO2
did not affect a version of the cyclin E promoter in which the E2F1-recognition
sites were eliminated by mutation (Fig.
3d). The repressive function of AGO2 on expression of endogenous E2F
target genes was then verified using qRT-PCR on total RNA isolated from
RasV12-induced senescent fibroblasts silenced for AGO2 expression
by RNA interference (RNAi). Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts
treated with siAGO2, but not with siAGO1, showed derepression of E2F target
genes (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. S5b) and this
was positively correlated with a decreased presence of H3K27me3 and
Rb at target promoters (Fig. 3f). Combined
these results show that AGO2 and Rb cooperate in the transcriptional repression
of E2F-responsive promoters. Interestingly, AGO2-recruitment to E2F-target
promoters seems to be largely independent from Rb as siRNA-mediated depletion of
Rb only mildy impacts the physical presence of AGO2 at tested promoters (Figs. 3g-i).AGO2-deficiency regulates the onset of senescenceGiven the repressive function of AGO2 on E2F-target genes in senescence,
we tested whether AGO2 plays an active role in the establishment of the
senescent phenotype. To start to address this question, we first overexpressed
RasV12 either in short hairpin RNA control (shC) expressing WI38
fibroblasts, in fibroblasts in which AGO2 expression was stably silenced by
either of two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shAGO2-1 and -2) or in fibroblasts
overexpressing viral oncogene HPV16E7, the latter serving as a positive control
for senescence delay by interfering with the Rb-pathway. Cells expressing
shC:RasV12 ceased proliferation and senesced within 7 days. By
contrast, Rb- and AGO2-deficient RASV12 cells had a slightly
postponed senescence onset by ∼2,5-3 population doublings (PDs) but were
unable to completely bypass senescence (Figs. 4a
and -b). Consistently, in AGO2-deficient RasV12 cells the
percentage of EdU incorporating cells increased and the fraction of SAHF
positive cells decreased transiently when compared to RasV12:shC
control cells (Fig. 4c and -d; Supplementary Fig. S6).
Similar results were obtained in cells treated with siAGO2 molecules (see Fig. 7a). To further corroborate the
functional requirement for AGO2 in cellular senescence, we investigated its role
in replicative senescence. Accordingly, we silenced AGO2 expression in medium
passage fibroblasts with shRNAs and determined their replicative potential using
cells overexpressing viral oncogenes HPV16E7 as a lifespan extension yardstick
for Rb-compromised cells. In AGO2-deficient cells replicative life-span
increased by ∼3-4 PDs while E7-expressing cells showed a life span
extension of ∼5-6 PDs (Fig. 4e). In
line with this finding, the fraction of AGO2-deficient cells incorporating EdU
increased and SA-β-Gal activity decreased transiently when compared to
shC control cells (Figs. 4f and -g). Next,
we overexpressed AGO2 in early passage WI38 fibroblasts. Strinkingly, AGO2
overexpressing cells induced an abrupt proliferative arrest (Fig. 5a) with features of senescence as evidenced by a
decrease in the number of cells incorporating EdU (Fig. 5b) and an increase in the percentage of SAHF positive cells
(Fig. 5c-e). Altogether, these data
indicate that AGO2 actively contributes to the proper execution of the
senescence response.AGO2/miR complexes are involved in senescence-associated transcriptional gene
silencing (SA-TGS) of E2F target genesWe hypothesised that AGO-bound miRs with sequence complementarity to
promoter regions may induce AGO-mediated SA-TGS by implementing a
transcriptionally repressive chromatin environment. On closer inspection of all
detected miRs, we found that the top-ten AGO2-interacting miRs were identical to
the top-ten H3K9me2 heterochromatin-interacting miRs and were all
members of the let-7 family, with let-7a and let-7f having the highest
normalized sequence counts (cpm)(Supplementary Table S5). The
interaction between either H3K9me2 or AGO2 and let-7f was confirmed
by RNA immunoprecipitation combined with small RNA cDNA (srcDNA) cloning and
sequencing 27 in senescent
cells (Fig. 6a). Of note, pre-miR-let-7f2
shows the strongest up-regulation among the let-7 family members in senescent
cells compared to control cells (Supplementary Fig. S7a). In the
further analysis we therefore focused our attention on let-7f function in
SA-TGS. To assess whether let-7f direct TGS in senescent cells, we performed a
bioinfomatic search for potential binding sites in AGO2-repressed E2F target
promoters using RNAhybrid 33.
We found two imperfectly matched, putative let-7f target sites showing very low
minimal free energy (MFE) values of hybridization, one in the
antisense-direction of the CDC2 promoter at position -388 to -410 (mfe =
19,9 kcal/mol) and the other in the sense-direction of the CDCA8 promoter at
position -220 to -241 (mfe = 29,4kcal/mol) relative to the respective
transcriptional start sites (TSSs)(Fig.
6b).To elucidate whether let-7 and the putative let-7 binding site in the
E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter 28 are involved in Rb/AGO2-mediated transcriptional
repression, we initially performed promoter-reporter assays using a wild-type
version of the CDC2 promoter or a derivative there-of in which the putative
let-7 binding site was mutated (Supplementary Fig. S7b-d).
Expression of Rb repressed both the wild-type and let-7 mutated promoter
(∼1.8 vs ∼1,4-fold). When we cotransfected cells either with
Rb/let-7, Rb/AGO2 or Rb/AGO2/let-7 and the respective promoter-reporter
construct, we observed an increasing corepressive effect between let-7, AGO2 and
Rb only for the wild-type (Rb:let-7, ∼3-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼4-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼5-fold) but not the let-7 mutated promoter-reporter
construct (Rb:let-7, ∼1,9-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼1,9-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼2,2-fold). These data argue that let-7, AGO2 and Rb
cooperate in the repression of the E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter and that the
let-7 site at position -388 to -410 is important for optimal repression.Based on the promoter reporter data, we then assessed the susceptibility
of CDCA8 and CDC2 genes to miR-mediated TGS by transiently transfecting let-7f
or control miR into early passage WI38 human fibroblasts and monitoring CDCA8
and CDC2 transcript levels either by nuclear-run-on transcription assay or
qRT-PCR. Transcript abundance was significantly reduced for the two genes in the
presence of let-7f (Fig. 6c) or
pre-miR-let-7f (Supplementary
Fig. S8a) in both assays. The nuclear run-on data, however, indicated
that let-7f-induced gene silencing directly occurs at the transcriptional level.
To examine whether silencing leads to recruitment of AGO2 and changes in histone
marks at the respective promoters, we performed qChIP of let-7f- and
pre-miR-let-7f-treated cells. We observed a pronounced let-7f-dependent
enrichment of AGO2 and H3K27me3 at the CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters
(Fig. 6d, Supplementary Fig. S8b).
Importantly, AGO2 and let-7f were simultaneously present at the CDCA8 and CDC2
promoters as evidenced by a dual pull-down assay (qChIP-ChOP) 29 (Fig. 6e). Using this assay, we also identified ORC6L as an
AGO2/miR-185-bound E2F-response gene (Supplementary Fig. S8c). The
physical interaction between let-7 and the respective promoters was found to be
AGO2-dependent, as in AGO2-depleted cells, let-7 detectablility at the
respective promoters was largely diminished (Fig.
6f). Moreover, let-7 was undetectable at the E2F-responsive AGO2
target promoter of CDC6, which shows no sequence complementarity to let-7 (Supplementary Fig. S8d).
Strikingly, introduction of let-7f or pre-miR-let-7f into pre-senescent WI38
fibroblasts led to proliferation arrest (as did treatment of cells with siCDCA8)
with cellular features reminiscent of senescence while siAGO2/let-7 treated
cells proliferated normally (Fig. 6g and h;
Supplementary Figures
S8e-g). Conversely, senescent fibroblasts treated with a
let-7f-antagomir showed enhanced proliferative capacity as manifested by an
increase both in cell proliferation and positive Ki67 immunostaining (Fig. 7a and b). However, the observed effects
were less prominent as in senescent cells treated with siAGO2, indicating that
AGO2-depletion has a more widespread effect on cell proliferation. Additionally,
let-7f-antagomir-treated senescent cells had decreased amounts (∼2-fold)
of AGO2 at CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters (Fig.
7c), while mRNA levels were increased (Fig. 7d). Collectively, these results support the conclusion that
let-7f, AGO2 and Rb cooperate to nucleate a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin state at selected target promoters during senescence, thus, promoting
the proper execution of the senescence response.

Genome-wide identification of AGO-bound E2F target genes and
AGO/heterochromatin-bound miRs in senescenceTo determine, in an unbiased manner, which genes might be under the
control of AGO proteins we perfomed genome-wide promoter profiling in senescent
and pre-senescent control WI38 primary fibroblasts applying
“ChIP-on-chip” technology using an anti-pan-AGO antibody. The
enrichment value for each promoter was determined (see Methods) and yielded
4,516 potential AGO-promoter binding sites in senescent cells
versus 2,619 in pre-senescent cells. Of these binding
sites, 702 were in common between the two conditions, however, the false
discovery rate (FDR) for AGO binding sites in senescent cells were several fold
lower than in control cells, thus, indicating an enrichment for AGO proteins at
the respective promoters in senescent cells (Fig.
1a; Supplementary
Fig. S1a-f and Table S1). To probe a potential link between AGO proteins and E2F
target promoters, we inspected how many of the E2F-regulated promoters were
AGO-bound. This analysis revealed, that of the currently known top 577
E2F-responsive promoters 8-11, 320 (i.e.
55,5%) were occupied by AGO proteins in senescent cells opposed to only
77 (i.e. 13,3%) in control cells (Fig. 1b). We then correlated AGO-promoter occupancy of
E2F target genes with the comparative gene expression profile of these genes in
senescent versus pre-senescent control cells using
microarray-based transcriptome data. We found that, of the 320 AGO-bound E2F
target genes, 150 (i.e. ∼46,5%) were down-and
65 (i.e. ∼20,6%) were up-regulated (Fig. 1c; Supplementary Table S1). Functional
annotation of the 150 down-regulated E2F target genes showed a clear enrichment
in genes involved in cell cycle control (Supplementary Figure S2a and Supplementary Table S2)
whereas no significant enrichment was found for upregulated E2F target genes
(data not shown). Together, these results suggest that AGO-proteins may be
involved in senescence-associated repression of E2F-target genes.Exogenous miRs with sequence complementarity to promoter regions were
shown to induce AGO-mediated TGS by implementing a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin environment 7. This
led us to investigate whether miRs might be involved in AGO-mediated repression
of E2F target genes in senescence. To obtain a detailed picture of
AGO-immunoprecipitating miRs (RIP) in senescent cells, we used next-generation
sequencing (NGS). Importantly, we included histone H3 dimethylated on lysine 9
(H3K9me2) in this analysis to assign potential AGO2-interacting
miRs to a repressive chromatin state and unfractionated, cellular RNA from
senescent cells for normalization (Supplementary Figure S2b). Small
RNA sequences were determined by NGS producing between 3,2 and 4,5 million 33
nucleotide sequences for the three samples (Supplementary Table S3). To search
for previously known miRs within these results, we ran a string matching
algorithm (allowing one mismatch) to count the number of sequences aligning with
human mature miRs. Of the known 847 human mature and mature-star miRs annotated
in release 12.0 of miR-Base, we identified a total of 451 unique miRs in
unfractionated cellular RNA, 377 in RIP-AGO and 237 in RIP-H3K9me2 of
senescent cells (Supplementary Table S4). After adjusting for sequencing depth by
converting to logarithmic counts per million sequence reads (log cpm), we
computed the degree of association (Pearson coefficient, r; coefficient of
determination, r2) between miR expression in unfractionated, cellular
RNA and RIP-associated miRs and in-between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs (Figs.
1d-f). We found that the degree of association between miR expression
in unfractionated, cellular RNA and AGO-associated miRs is high (r =
0,862; P < 0,000001)(Fig. 1d),
while the degree of association between miR expression in unfractionated,
cellular RNA and H3K9me2-associated miRs is only moderate (r
= 0,686; P < 0,000001)(Fig.
1e). Remarkably, however, the degree of association between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs is high (r = 0,888; P <
0,000001)(Fig. 1f), thus, there exists
a strong positive correlation between AGO-bound and heterochromatin-bound miRs
in senescent cells.

Genome-wide identification of AGO-bound E2F target genes and
AGO/heterochromatin-bound miRs in senescence

To determine, in an unbiased manner, which genes might be under the
control of AGO proteins we perfomed genome-wide promoter profiling in senescent
and pre-senescent control WI38 primary fibroblasts applying
“ChIP-on-chip” technology using an anti-pan-AGO antibody. The
enrichment value for each promoter was determined (see Methods) and yielded
4,516 potential AGO-promoter binding sites in senescent cells
versus 2,619 in pre-senescent cells. Of these binding
sites, 702 were in common between the two conditions, however, the false
discovery rate (FDR) for AGO binding sites in senescent cells were several fold
lower than in control cells, thus, indicating an enrichment for AGO proteins at
the respective promoters in senescent cells (Fig.
1a; Supplementary
Fig. S1a-f and Table S1). To probe a potential link between AGO proteins and E2F
target promoters, we inspected how many of the E2F-regulated promoters were
AGO-bound. This analysis revealed, that of the currently known top 577
E2F-responsive promoters 8-11, 320 (i.e.
55,5%) were occupied by AGO proteins in senescent cells opposed to only
77 (i.e. 13,3%) in control cells (Fig. 1b). We then correlated AGO-promoter occupancy of
E2F target genes with the comparative gene expression profile of these genes in
senescent versus pre-senescent control cells using
microarray-based transcriptome data. We found that, of the 320 AGO-bound E2F
target genes, 150 (i.e. ∼46,5%) were down-and
65 (i.e. ∼20,6%) were up-regulated (Fig. 1c; Supplementary Table S1). Functional
annotation of the 150 down-regulated E2F target genes showed a clear enrichment
in genes involved in cell cycle control (Supplementary Figure S2a and Supplementary Table S2)
whereas no significant enrichment was found for upregulated E2F target genes
(data not shown). Together, these results suggest that AGO-proteins may be
involved in senescence-associated repression of E2F-target genes.

Exogenous miRs with sequence complementarity to promoter regions were
shown to induce AGO-mediated TGS by implementing a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin environment 7. This
led us to investigate whether miRs might be involved in AGO-mediated repression
of E2F target genes in senescence. To obtain a detailed picture of
AGO-immunoprecipitating miRs (RIP) in senescent cells, we used next-generation
sequencing (NGS). Importantly, we included histone H3 dimethylated on lysine 9
(H3K9me2) in this analysis to assign potential AGO2-interacting
miRs to a repressive chromatin state and unfractionated, cellular RNA from
senescent cells for normalization (Supplementary Figure S2b). Small
RNA sequences were determined by NGS producing between 3,2 and 4,5 million 33
nucleotide sequences for the three samples (Supplementary Table S3). To search
for previously known miRs within these results, we ran a string matching
algorithm (allowing one mismatch) to count the number of sequences aligning with
human mature miRs. Of the known 847 human mature and mature-star miRs annotated
in release 12.0 of miR-Base, we identified a total of 451 unique miRs in
unfractionated cellular RNA, 377 in RIP-AGO and 237 in RIP-H3K9me2 of
senescent cells (Supplementary Table S4). After adjusting for sequencing depth by
converting to logarithmic counts per million sequence reads (log cpm), we
computed the degree of association (Pearson coefficient, r; coefficient of
determination, r2) between miR expression in unfractionated, cellular
RNA and RIP-associated miRs and in-between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs (Figs.
1d-f). We found that the degree of association between miR expression
in unfractionated, cellular RNA and AGO-associated miRs is high (r =
0,862; P < 0,000001)(Fig. 1d),
while the degree of association between miR expression in unfractionated,
cellular RNA and H3K9me2-associated miRs is only moderate (r
= 0,686; P < 0,000001)(Fig.
1e). Remarkably, however, the degree of association between AGO- and
H3K9me2-associated miRs is high (r = 0,888; P <
0,000001)(Fig. 1f), thus, there exists
a strong positive correlation between AGO-bound and heterochromatin-bound miRs
in senescent cells.

AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells to target repressed
E2F-responsive promotersHaving established a link between AGO-proteins and promoters of repressed
E2F target genes on the one hand as well as AGO-bound miRs and a repressive
chromatin state on the other hand, we were then interested whether a specific
AGO-miR effector complex is involved in SA-TGS of E2F genes. There are four AGO
proteins (AGO1–4) in humans. AGO2 was recently shown to undergo
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling 12 and to be differentially expressed in human cancers
13,14,15. Therefore, we focused on AGO2 in the further study.First, we sought to determine whether AGO2 may accumulate in the nucleus
of cells undergoing senescence using an anti-AGO2 specific monoclonal antibody
(Supplementary Fig.
S2c). Senescence was induced either by retroviral introduction of
oncogenic Rasv12 into WI38 primary human diploid fibroblasts,
treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with senescence-inducing concentrations
of doxorubicin or by re-expression of Rb in Rb-inducible SAOS-2 (Rb-negative)
cells. Biochemical fractionation (Fig. 2a;
Supplementary Fig.
S2d) and indirect immunofluorescence studies (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Fig. S2e-f) revealed
that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells when compared to
pre-senescent control cells, although the overall protein levels remain largely
unchanged. To extend the physiological significance of senescence-associated
nuclear accumulation of AGO2 from cell culture to human tissue samples, we
analysed localisation of AGO2 in melanocytic nevi and melanomas by indirect
immunofluorescence. Nevi are archetypes of benign tumours that frequently
harbour oncogenic mutations and are highly enriched in senescent melanocytes,
whereas melanomas are malignant tumors essentially devoid of senescent
melanocytes 16,17,18. Strikingly, we observed a pronounced nuclear enrichment of
AGO2 in senescent melanocytic nevi as evidenced by its colocalisation with the
senescence marker macroH2A 19,20 (Fig. 2c; Supplementary Fig. S3a-d). Conversely, in melanomas AGO2 was
essentially excluded from melanocytic nuclei and predominatly localised to the
cytosol (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Fig. S3e-g). Next, we
quantitatively assessed AGO2's partitioning between heterochromatin and
euchromatin using a histone association assay (HAA) 21. We established that, in senescent
cells, AGO2 predominantly coprecipitates with facultative heterochromatin
markers histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and
H3K9me2 when compared to pre-senescent control cells (Fig. 2e). By contrast, a comparable amount of
AGO2 coprecipitated with the euchromatin marker histone H3 acetylated at lysine
9 (H3K9ac) in both cell states (Fig.
2e). We conclude that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent
cells where it shows an increased affinity to inactive chromatin when compared
to pre-senescent cells.To validate AGO2-bound E2F target promoters as revealed by ChIP-on-chip,
we used qChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation quantified by real-time PCR) for a
selected number of target genes. Simultaneously, we also examined histone
modifications at the respective promoters and the gene expression statuses. We
found that AGO2 levels were elevated ∼2-4-fold on selected E2F target
promoters of CDC2, CDCA8, PCNA, CCNA2 (Fig.
2f) as well as ORC6L, USP1, NEK2, MYC, FANCF, CDC6, BUB1, BRCA2, ATM,
ASF1B and CCNE2 (Supplementary
Fig. S4a) in senescent cells when compared to pre-senescent cells.
The elevated physical presence of AGO2 at the respective promoters was
accompanied by a substantial increase in the negative methyl histone marks
H3K27me3 (∼3-6-fold), H3K9me2
(∼2-4-fold) and by a decrease (∼2-6-fold) in positive methyl
histone mark histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 4 (H3K4me3)(Fig. 2f) and paralleled by a decrease
(∼2-5-fold) in expression of the respective genes (Supplementary Fig. S4b).
Importantly, in senescent cells silenced for AGO2 expression we detected a
largely diminished presence of AGO2 at investigated promoters, thus,
underscoring AGO2 specificity (Supplementary Fig. S4c-d). Together, these results provide strong
evidence for an enrichment of AGO2 at E2F target promoters in senescent cells.
Moreover, they reveal that the repressive histone modification marks
H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 coincide with the presence of
AGO2 at E2F-regulated cell cycle genes in senescence arrest, thus, hinting at an
active contribution of AGO2 in senescence-associated repression of E2F target
genes.

AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells to target repressed
E2F-responsive promoters

Having established a link between AGO-proteins and promoters of repressed
E2F target genes on the one hand as well as AGO-bound miRs and a repressive
chromatin state on the other hand, we were then interested whether a specific
AGO-miR effector complex is involved in SA-TGS of E2F genes. There are four AGO
proteins (AGO1–4) in humans. AGO2 was recently shown to undergo
nucleo-cytoplasmic shuttling 12 and to be differentially expressed in human cancers
13,14,15. Therefore, we focused on AGO2 in the further study.

First, we sought to determine whether AGO2 may accumulate in the nucleus
of cells undergoing senescence using an anti-AGO2 specific monoclonal antibody
(Supplementary Fig.
S2c). Senescence was induced either by retroviral introduction of
oncogenic Rasv12 into WI38 primary human diploid fibroblasts,
treatment of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with senescence-inducing concentrations
of doxorubicin or by re-expression of Rb in Rb-inducible SAOS-2 (Rb-negative)
cells. Biochemical fractionation (Fig. 2a;
Supplementary Fig.
S2d) and indirect immunofluorescence studies (Fig. 2b; Supplementary Fig. S2e-f) revealed
that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent cells when compared to
pre-senescent control cells, although the overall protein levels remain largely
unchanged. To extend the physiological significance of senescence-associated
nuclear accumulation of AGO2 from cell culture to human tissue samples, we
analysed localisation of AGO2 in melanocytic nevi and melanomas by indirect
immunofluorescence. Nevi are archetypes of benign tumours that frequently
harbour oncogenic mutations and are highly enriched in senescent melanocytes,
whereas melanomas are malignant tumors essentially devoid of senescent
melanocytes 16,17,18. Strikingly, we observed a pronounced nuclear enrichment of
AGO2 in senescent melanocytic nevi as evidenced by its colocalisation with the
senescence marker macroH2A 19,20 (Fig. 2c; Supplementary Fig. S3a-d). Conversely, in melanomas AGO2 was
essentially excluded from melanocytic nuclei and predominatly localised to the
cytosol (Fig. 2d; Supplementary Fig. S3e-g). Next, we
quantitatively assessed AGO2's partitioning between heterochromatin and
euchromatin using a histone association assay (HAA) 21. We established that, in senescent
cells, AGO2 predominantly coprecipitates with facultative heterochromatin
markers histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and
H3K9me2 when compared to pre-senescent control cells (Fig. 2e). By contrast, a comparable amount of
AGO2 coprecipitated with the euchromatin marker histone H3 acetylated at lysine
9 (H3K9ac) in both cell states (Fig.
2e). We conclude that AGO2 accumulates in the nucleus of senescent
cells where it shows an increased affinity to inactive chromatin when compared
to pre-senescent cells.

To validate AGO2-bound E2F target promoters as revealed by ChIP-on-chip,
we used qChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation quantified by real-time PCR) for a
selected number of target genes. Simultaneously, we also examined histone
modifications at the respective promoters and the gene expression statuses. We
found that AGO2 levels were elevated ∼2-4-fold on selected E2F target
promoters of CDC2, CDCA8, PCNA, CCNA2 (Fig.
2f) as well as ORC6L, USP1, NEK2, MYC, FANCF, CDC6, BUB1, BRCA2, ATM,
ASF1B and CCNE2 (Supplementary
Fig. S4a) in senescent cells when compared to pre-senescent cells.
The elevated physical presence of AGO2 at the respective promoters was
accompanied by a substantial increase in the negative methyl histone marks
H3K27me3 (∼3-6-fold), H3K9me2
(∼2-4-fold) and by a decrease (∼2-6-fold) in positive methyl
histone mark histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 4 (H3K4me3)(Fig. 2f) and paralleled by a decrease
(∼2-5-fold) in expression of the respective genes (Supplementary Fig. S4b).
Importantly, in senescent cells silenced for AGO2 expression we detected a
largely diminished presence of AGO2 at investigated promoters, thus,
underscoring AGO2 specificity (Supplementary Fig. S4c-d). Together, these results provide strong
evidence for an enrichment of AGO2 at E2F target promoters in senescent cells.
Moreover, they reveal that the repressive histone modification marks
H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 coincide with the presence of
AGO2 at E2F-regulated cell cycle genes in senescence arrest, thus, hinting at an
active contribution of AGO2 in senescence-associated repression of E2F target
genes.

Physical and functional interaction between AGO2 and Rb in the regulation of
E2F-target genes in senescent cellsThe Rb protein functions as a repressor of E2F target genes in senescent
cells supposedly by nucleating heterochromatin formation at respective promoters
2, at least partly,
through recruitment of histone deacetylase HDAC1 or histone methyl-transferase
(HMT) Suv39H 22232425. We therefore considered
whether AGO2 might be involved in Rb-mediated repression in senescence. To test
this possibility, we first performed coimmunoprecipitation experiments between
endogenous AGO2, Rb and HDAC1 in cellular lysates prepared from
Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts. As shown in Figure 3a, HDAC1 and AGO2 co-immunoprecipitated with
each other. Moreover, both HDAC1 and AGO2 efficiently co-immunoprecipitated Rb.
Similar results were obtained in SAOS-2 cells undergoing Rb-induced senescence
(Fig. 3b). Consistent with the physical
interaction between AGO2 and Rb, AGO2 showed partial colocalisation with SAHF at
their periphery, a staining pattern that was similar for heterochromatin marker
H3K27me3 (Supplementary Fig. S5a) and Rb 2 and is thus congruent with the peripheral SAHF
localisation of E2F-target genes 3.Next, we investigated whether AGO2 could act as a co-repressor with Rb by
performing promoter-reporter assays using the natural E2F-responsive CCNE
promoter 26. Expression of Rb
repressed E2F-mediated transactivation of the promoter by 79% whereas
increasing amounts of AGO2 led to a 37 to 47% repression (Fig. 3c, columns 2-5). A co-repressive effect was
observed when both AGO2 and Rb were present simultaneously (Fig. 3c, columns 6 and 7) and this effect was further
enhanced in the presence of HDAC1 (data not shown). Co-repression between AGO2
and Rb was specific for AGO2 as its paralog AGO1 had no effect (Fig. 3c, columns 8 and 9). By contrast, Rb and AGO2
did not affect a version of the cyclin E promoter in which the E2F1-recognition
sites were eliminated by mutation (Fig.
3d). The repressive function of AGO2 on expression of endogenous E2F
target genes was then verified using qRT-PCR on total RNA isolated from
RasV12-induced senescent fibroblasts silenced for AGO2 expression
by RNA interference (RNAi). Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts
treated with siAGO2, but not with siAGO1, showed derepression of E2F target
genes (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. S5b) and this
was positively correlated with a decreased presence of H3K27me3 and
Rb at target promoters (Fig. 3f). Combined
these results show that AGO2 and Rb cooperate in the transcriptional repression
of E2F-responsive promoters. Interestingly, AGO2-recruitment to E2F-target
promoters seems to be largely independent from Rb as siRNA-mediated depletion of
Rb only mildy impacts the physical presence of AGO2 at tested promoters (Figs. 3g-i).

Physical and functional interaction between AGO2 and Rb in the regulation of
E2F-target genes in senescent cells

The Rb protein functions as a repressor of E2F target genes in senescent
cells supposedly by nucleating heterochromatin formation at respective promoters
2, at least partly,
through recruitment of histone deacetylase HDAC1 or histone methyl-transferase
(HMT) Suv39H 22232425. We therefore considered
whether AGO2 might be involved in Rb-mediated repression in senescence. To test
this possibility, we first performed coimmunoprecipitation experiments between
endogenous AGO2, Rb and HDAC1 in cellular lysates prepared from
Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts. As shown in Figure 3a, HDAC1 and AGO2 co-immunoprecipitated with
each other. Moreover, both HDAC1 and AGO2 efficiently co-immunoprecipitated Rb.
Similar results were obtained in SAOS-2 cells undergoing Rb-induced senescence
(Fig. 3b). Consistent with the physical
interaction between AGO2 and Rb, AGO2 showed partial colocalisation with SAHF at
their periphery, a staining pattern that was similar for heterochromatin marker
H3K27me3 (Supplementary Fig. S5a) and Rb 2 and is thus congruent with the peripheral SAHF
localisation of E2F-target genes 3.

Next, we investigated whether AGO2 could act as a co-repressor with Rb by
performing promoter-reporter assays using the natural E2F-responsive CCNE
promoter 26. Expression of Rb
repressed E2F-mediated transactivation of the promoter by 79% whereas
increasing amounts of AGO2 led to a 37 to 47% repression (Fig. 3c, columns 2-5). A co-repressive effect was
observed when both AGO2 and Rb were present simultaneously (Fig. 3c, columns 6 and 7) and this effect was further
enhanced in the presence of HDAC1 (data not shown). Co-repression between AGO2
and Rb was specific for AGO2 as its paralog AGO1 had no effect (Fig. 3c, columns 8 and 9). By contrast, Rb and AGO2
did not affect a version of the cyclin E promoter in which the E2F1-recognition
sites were eliminated by mutation (Fig.
3d). The repressive function of AGO2 on expression of endogenous E2F
target genes was then verified using qRT-PCR on total RNA isolated from
RasV12-induced senescent fibroblasts silenced for AGO2 expression
by RNA interference (RNAi). Rasv12-induced senescent fibroblasts
treated with siAGO2, but not with siAGO1, showed derepression of E2F target
genes (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. S5b) and this
was positively correlated with a decreased presence of H3K27me3 and
Rb at target promoters (Fig. 3f). Combined
these results show that AGO2 and Rb cooperate in the transcriptional repression
of E2F-responsive promoters. Interestingly, AGO2-recruitment to E2F-target
promoters seems to be largely independent from Rb as siRNA-mediated depletion of
Rb only mildy impacts the physical presence of AGO2 at tested promoters (Figs. 3g-i).

AGO2-deficiency regulates the onset of senescenceGiven the repressive function of AGO2 on E2F-target genes in senescence,
we tested whether AGO2 plays an active role in the establishment of the
senescent phenotype. To start to address this question, we first overexpressed
RasV12 either in short hairpin RNA control (shC) expressing WI38
fibroblasts, in fibroblasts in which AGO2 expression was stably silenced by
either of two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shAGO2-1 and -2) or in fibroblasts
overexpressing viral oncogene HPV16E7, the latter serving as a positive control
for senescence delay by interfering with the Rb-pathway. Cells expressing
shC:RasV12 ceased proliferation and senesced within 7 days. By
contrast, Rb- and AGO2-deficient RASV12 cells had a slightly
postponed senescence onset by ∼2,5-3 population doublings (PDs) but were
unable to completely bypass senescence (Figs. 4a
and -b). Consistently, in AGO2-deficient RasV12 cells the
percentage of EdU incorporating cells increased and the fraction of SAHF
positive cells decreased transiently when compared to RasV12:shC
control cells (Fig. 4c and -d; Supplementary Fig. S6).
Similar results were obtained in cells treated with siAGO2 molecules (see Fig. 7a). To further corroborate the
functional requirement for AGO2 in cellular senescence, we investigated its role
in replicative senescence. Accordingly, we silenced AGO2 expression in medium
passage fibroblasts with shRNAs and determined their replicative potential using
cells overexpressing viral oncogenes HPV16E7 as a lifespan extension yardstick
for Rb-compromised cells. In AGO2-deficient cells replicative life-span
increased by ∼3-4 PDs while E7-expressing cells showed a life span
extension of ∼5-6 PDs (Fig. 4e). In
line with this finding, the fraction of AGO2-deficient cells incorporating EdU
increased and SA-β-Gal activity decreased transiently when compared to
shC control cells (Figs. 4f and -g). Next,
we overexpressed AGO2 in early passage WI38 fibroblasts. Strinkingly, AGO2
overexpressing cells induced an abrupt proliferative arrest (Fig. 5a) with features of senescence as evidenced by a
decrease in the number of cells incorporating EdU (Fig. 5b) and an increase in the percentage of SAHF positive cells
(Fig. 5c-e). Altogether, these data
indicate that AGO2 actively contributes to the proper execution of the
senescence response.

AGO2-deficiency regulates the onset of senescence

Given the repressive function of AGO2 on E2F-target genes in senescence,
we tested whether AGO2 plays an active role in the establishment of the
senescent phenotype. To start to address this question, we first overexpressed
RasV12 either in short hairpin RNA control (shC) expressing WI38
fibroblasts, in fibroblasts in which AGO2 expression was stably silenced by
either of two distinct short hairpin RNAs (shAGO2-1 and -2) or in fibroblasts
overexpressing viral oncogene HPV16E7, the latter serving as a positive control
for senescence delay by interfering with the Rb-pathway. Cells expressing
shC:RasV12 ceased proliferation and senesced within 7 days. By
contrast, Rb- and AGO2-deficient RASV12 cells had a slightly
postponed senescence onset by ∼2,5-3 population doublings (PDs) but were
unable to completely bypass senescence (Figs. 4a
and -b). Consistently, in AGO2-deficient RasV12 cells the
percentage of EdU incorporating cells increased and the fraction of SAHF
positive cells decreased transiently when compared to RasV12:shC
control cells (Fig. 4c and -d; Supplementary Fig. S6).
Similar results were obtained in cells treated with siAGO2 molecules (see Fig. 7a). To further corroborate the
functional requirement for AGO2 in cellular senescence, we investigated its role
in replicative senescence. Accordingly, we silenced AGO2 expression in medium
passage fibroblasts with shRNAs and determined their replicative potential using
cells overexpressing viral oncogenes HPV16E7 as a lifespan extension yardstick
for Rb-compromised cells. In AGO2-deficient cells replicative life-span
increased by ∼3-4 PDs while E7-expressing cells showed a life span
extension of ∼5-6 PDs (Fig. 4e). In
line with this finding, the fraction of AGO2-deficient cells incorporating EdU
increased and SA-β-Gal activity decreased transiently when compared to
shC control cells (Figs. 4f and -g). Next,
we overexpressed AGO2 in early passage WI38 fibroblasts. Strinkingly, AGO2
overexpressing cells induced an abrupt proliferative arrest (Fig. 5a) with features of senescence as evidenced by a
decrease in the number of cells incorporating EdU (Fig. 5b) and an increase in the percentage of SAHF positive cells
(Fig. 5c-e). Altogether, these data
indicate that AGO2 actively contributes to the proper execution of the
senescence response.

AGO2/miR complexes are involved in senescence-associated transcriptional gene
silencing (SA-TGS) of E2F target genesWe hypothesised that AGO-bound miRs with sequence complementarity to
promoter regions may induce AGO-mediated SA-TGS by implementing a
transcriptionally repressive chromatin environment. On closer inspection of all
detected miRs, we found that the top-ten AGO2-interacting miRs were identical to
the top-ten H3K9me2 heterochromatin-interacting miRs and were all
members of the let-7 family, with let-7a and let-7f having the highest
normalized sequence counts (cpm)(Supplementary Table S5). The
interaction between either H3K9me2 or AGO2 and let-7f was confirmed
by RNA immunoprecipitation combined with small RNA cDNA (srcDNA) cloning and
sequencing 27 in senescent
cells (Fig. 6a). Of note, pre-miR-let-7f2
shows the strongest up-regulation among the let-7 family members in senescent
cells compared to control cells (Supplementary Fig. S7a). In the
further analysis we therefore focused our attention on let-7f function in
SA-TGS. To assess whether let-7f direct TGS in senescent cells, we performed a
bioinfomatic search for potential binding sites in AGO2-repressed E2F target
promoters using RNAhybrid 33.
We found two imperfectly matched, putative let-7f target sites showing very low
minimal free energy (MFE) values of hybridization, one in the
antisense-direction of the CDC2 promoter at position -388 to -410 (mfe =
19,9 kcal/mol) and the other in the sense-direction of the CDCA8 promoter at
position -220 to -241 (mfe = 29,4kcal/mol) relative to the respective
transcriptional start sites (TSSs)(Fig.
6b).To elucidate whether let-7 and the putative let-7 binding site in the
E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter 28 are involved in Rb/AGO2-mediated transcriptional
repression, we initially performed promoter-reporter assays using a wild-type
version of the CDC2 promoter or a derivative there-of in which the putative
let-7 binding site was mutated (Supplementary Fig. S7b-d).
Expression of Rb repressed both the wild-type and let-7 mutated promoter
(∼1.8 vs ∼1,4-fold). When we cotransfected cells either with
Rb/let-7, Rb/AGO2 or Rb/AGO2/let-7 and the respective promoter-reporter
construct, we observed an increasing corepressive effect between let-7, AGO2 and
Rb only for the wild-type (Rb:let-7, ∼3-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼4-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼5-fold) but not the let-7 mutated promoter-reporter
construct (Rb:let-7, ∼1,9-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼1,9-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼2,2-fold). These data argue that let-7, AGO2 and Rb
cooperate in the repression of the E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter and that the
let-7 site at position -388 to -410 is important for optimal repression.Based on the promoter reporter data, we then assessed the susceptibility
of CDCA8 and CDC2 genes to miR-mediated TGS by transiently transfecting let-7f
or control miR into early passage WI38 human fibroblasts and monitoring CDCA8
and CDC2 transcript levels either by nuclear-run-on transcription assay or
qRT-PCR. Transcript abundance was significantly reduced for the two genes in the
presence of let-7f (Fig. 6c) or
pre-miR-let-7f (Supplementary
Fig. S8a) in both assays. The nuclear run-on data, however, indicated
that let-7f-induced gene silencing directly occurs at the transcriptional level.
To examine whether silencing leads to recruitment of AGO2 and changes in histone
marks at the respective promoters, we performed qChIP of let-7f- and
pre-miR-let-7f-treated cells. We observed a pronounced let-7f-dependent
enrichment of AGO2 and H3K27me3 at the CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters
(Fig. 6d, Supplementary Fig. S8b).
Importantly, AGO2 and let-7f were simultaneously present at the CDCA8 and CDC2
promoters as evidenced by a dual pull-down assay (qChIP-ChOP) 29 (Fig. 6e). Using this assay, we also identified ORC6L as an
AGO2/miR-185-bound E2F-response gene (Supplementary Fig. S8c). The
physical interaction between let-7 and the respective promoters was found to be
AGO2-dependent, as in AGO2-depleted cells, let-7 detectablility at the
respective promoters was largely diminished (Fig.
6f). Moreover, let-7 was undetectable at the E2F-responsive AGO2
target promoter of CDC6, which shows no sequence complementarity to let-7 (Supplementary Fig. S8d).
Strikingly, introduction of let-7f or pre-miR-let-7f into pre-senescent WI38
fibroblasts led to proliferation arrest (as did treatment of cells with siCDCA8)
with cellular features reminiscent of senescence while siAGO2/let-7 treated
cells proliferated normally (Fig. 6g and h;
Supplementary Figures
S8e-g). Conversely, senescent fibroblasts treated with a
let-7f-antagomir showed enhanced proliferative capacity as manifested by an
increase both in cell proliferation and positive Ki67 immunostaining (Fig. 7a and b). However, the observed effects
were less prominent as in senescent cells treated with siAGO2, indicating that
AGO2-depletion has a more widespread effect on cell proliferation. Additionally,
let-7f-antagomir-treated senescent cells had decreased amounts (∼2-fold)
of AGO2 at CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters (Fig.
7c), while mRNA levels were increased (Fig. 7d). Collectively, these results support the conclusion that
let-7f, AGO2 and Rb cooperate to nucleate a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin state at selected target promoters during senescence, thus, promoting
the proper execution of the senescence response.

AGO2/miR complexes are involved in senescence-associated transcriptional gene
silencing (SA-TGS) of E2F target genes

We hypothesised that AGO-bound miRs with sequence complementarity to
promoter regions may induce AGO-mediated SA-TGS by implementing a
transcriptionally repressive chromatin environment. On closer inspection of all
detected miRs, we found that the top-ten AGO2-interacting miRs were identical to
the top-ten H3K9me2 heterochromatin-interacting miRs and were all
members of the let-7 family, with let-7a and let-7f having the highest
normalized sequence counts (cpm)(Supplementary Table S5). The
interaction between either H3K9me2 or AGO2 and let-7f was confirmed
by RNA immunoprecipitation combined with small RNA cDNA (srcDNA) cloning and
sequencing 27 in senescent
cells (Fig. 6a). Of note, pre-miR-let-7f2
shows the strongest up-regulation among the let-7 family members in senescent
cells compared to control cells (Supplementary Fig. S7a). In the
further analysis we therefore focused our attention on let-7f function in
SA-TGS. To assess whether let-7f direct TGS in senescent cells, we performed a
bioinfomatic search for potential binding sites in AGO2-repressed E2F target
promoters using RNAhybrid 33.
We found two imperfectly matched, putative let-7f target sites showing very low
minimal free energy (MFE) values of hybridization, one in the
antisense-direction of the CDC2 promoter at position -388 to -410 (mfe =
19,9 kcal/mol) and the other in the sense-direction of the CDCA8 promoter at
position -220 to -241 (mfe = 29,4kcal/mol) relative to the respective
transcriptional start sites (TSSs)(Fig.
6b).

To elucidate whether let-7 and the putative let-7 binding site in the
E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter 28 are involved in Rb/AGO2-mediated transcriptional
repression, we initially performed promoter-reporter assays using a wild-type
version of the CDC2 promoter or a derivative there-of in which the putative
let-7 binding site was mutated (Supplementary Fig. S7b-d).
Expression of Rb repressed both the wild-type and let-7 mutated promoter
(∼1.8 vs ∼1,4-fold). When we cotransfected cells either with
Rb/let-7, Rb/AGO2 or Rb/AGO2/let-7 and the respective promoter-reporter
construct, we observed an increasing corepressive effect between let-7, AGO2 and
Rb only for the wild-type (Rb:let-7, ∼3-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼4-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼5-fold) but not the let-7 mutated promoter-reporter
construct (Rb:let-7, ∼1,9-fold; Rb:AGO2, ∼1,9-fold;
Rb:AGO2:let-7, ∼2,2-fold). These data argue that let-7, AGO2 and Rb
cooperate in the repression of the E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter and that the
let-7 site at position -388 to -410 is important for optimal repression.

Based on the promoter reporter data, we then assessed the susceptibility
of CDCA8 and CDC2 genes to miR-mediated TGS by transiently transfecting let-7f
or control miR into early passage WI38 human fibroblasts and monitoring CDCA8
and CDC2 transcript levels either by nuclear-run-on transcription assay or
qRT-PCR. Transcript abundance was significantly reduced for the two genes in the
presence of let-7f (Fig. 6c) or
pre-miR-let-7f (Supplementary
Fig. S8a) in both assays. The nuclear run-on data, however, indicated
that let-7f-induced gene silencing directly occurs at the transcriptional level.
To examine whether silencing leads to recruitment of AGO2 and changes in histone
marks at the respective promoters, we performed qChIP of let-7f- and
pre-miR-let-7f-treated cells. We observed a pronounced let-7f-dependent
enrichment of AGO2 and H3K27me3 at the CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters
(Fig. 6d, Supplementary Fig. S8b).
Importantly, AGO2 and let-7f were simultaneously present at the CDCA8 and CDC2
promoters as evidenced by a dual pull-down assay (qChIP-ChOP) 29 (Fig. 6e). Using this assay, we also identified ORC6L as an
AGO2/miR-185-bound E2F-response gene (Supplementary Fig. S8c). The
physical interaction between let-7 and the respective promoters was found to be
AGO2-dependent, as in AGO2-depleted cells, let-7 detectablility at the
respective promoters was largely diminished (Fig.
6f). Moreover, let-7 was undetectable at the E2F-responsive AGO2
target promoter of CDC6, which shows no sequence complementarity to let-7 (Supplementary Fig. S8d).
Strikingly, introduction of let-7f or pre-miR-let-7f into pre-senescent WI38
fibroblasts led to proliferation arrest (as did treatment of cells with siCDCA8)
with cellular features reminiscent of senescence while siAGO2/let-7 treated
cells proliferated normally (Fig. 6g and h;
Supplementary Figures
S8e-g). Conversely, senescent fibroblasts treated with a
let-7f-antagomir showed enhanced proliferative capacity as manifested by an
increase both in cell proliferation and positive Ki67 immunostaining (Fig. 7a and b). However, the observed effects
were less prominent as in senescent cells treated with siAGO2, indicating that
AGO2-depletion has a more widespread effect on cell proliferation. Additionally,
let-7f-antagomir-treated senescent cells had decreased amounts (∼2-fold)
of AGO2 at CDCA8 and CDC2 promoters (Fig.
7c), while mRNA levels were increased (Fig. 7d). Collectively, these results support the conclusion that
let-7f, AGO2 and Rb cooperate to nucleate a transcriptionally repressive
chromatin state at selected target promoters during senescence, thus, promoting
the proper execution of the senescence response.

DiscussionSeveral studies have linked synthetic siRNAs and endogenous miRs targeted to
promoter regions to heterochromatin formation and TGS in human cells, however, an
endogenous trigger for this phenomenon has been at large so far 5. Moreover, the global association of
endogenous RNAi components with chromatin and their role in transcriptional gene
silencing has so far not been studied in detail. Here, we report the first
genome-wide chromatin-binding analysis for endogenous AGO proteins and miRs in human
cells and provide direct evidence for cellular senescence as an physiological signal
for miR-mediated TGS to occur. The results of our study strongly suggest that in
particular nuclear AGO2 acts as the effector protein for miR-guided
senescence-associated TGS (SA-TGS) and cooperates with Rb in the stable repression
of certain E2F target genes in senescence (Fig.
8). The role AGO2 and let-7 (plus other miRs) play in SA-TGS are critical
for the implementation of inactive chromatin marks at target promoters and may thus
play an important role for the timely execution of the senescence-arrest, as
exemplified here by their ability to repress expression of the CDC2 and CDCA8
oncogenes. These findings, therefore, extend the well-established role of miRs and
AGO2 in cytosolic post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) to nuclear TGS although
the exact contribution of miR-mediated TGS and PTGS for senescence remains to be
determined.What might be the underlying mechanism for AGO2-miR-mediated SA-TGS? Our
data imply that miR-AGO2 complexes may bring in additional corepressor functions
such as HDACs or HMTs to stably silence gene expression and may constitute an
effective roadblock for productive engagement of RNA-Pol II at targeted promoters.
Alternatively, and not mutually exclusive, they could also enhance the stability of
the Rb-associated repressor complex(es). An important question that needs to be
addressed in the future concerns the mechanism by which AGO2/miR complexes
accumulate in the nucleus of senescent cells. Another important question that awaits
answers regards the mechanism by which AGO2/miR complexes are tethered to their
respective target promoters. The most common mechanism that is put forward in
siRNA-induced TGS and. In conclusion, we provide strong evidence that nuclear
translocation/retention and function of miR-AGO2 complexes involved in SA-TGS may
represent a decisive parameter for tumour suppression. Further studies are now
needed to identify other nuclear AGO-miR complexes regulating both E2F- and non
E2F-responsive genes during senescence.

Several studies have linked synthetic siRNAs and endogenous miRs targeted to
promoter regions to heterochromatin formation and TGS in human cells, however, an
endogenous trigger for this phenomenon has been at large so far 5. Moreover, the global association of
endogenous RNAi components with chromatin and their role in transcriptional gene
silencing has so far not been studied in detail. Here, we report the first
genome-wide chromatin-binding analysis for endogenous AGO proteins and miRs in human
cells and provide direct evidence for cellular senescence as an physiological signal
for miR-mediated TGS to occur. The results of our study strongly suggest that in
particular nuclear AGO2 acts as the effector protein for miR-guided
senescence-associated TGS (SA-TGS) and cooperates with Rb in the stable repression
of certain E2F target genes in senescence (Fig.
8). The role AGO2 and let-7 (plus other miRs) play in SA-TGS are critical
for the implementation of inactive chromatin marks at target promoters and may thus
play an important role for the timely execution of the senescence-arrest, as
exemplified here by their ability to repress expression of the CDC2 and CDCA8
oncogenes. These findings, therefore, extend the well-established role of miRs and
AGO2 in cytosolic post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) to nuclear TGS although
the exact contribution of miR-mediated TGS and PTGS for senescence remains to be
determined.

What might be the underlying mechanism for AGO2-miR-mediated SA-TGS? Our
data imply that miR-AGO2 complexes may bring in additional corepressor functions
such as HDACs or HMTs to stably silence gene expression and may constitute an
effective roadblock for productive engagement of RNA-Pol II at targeted promoters.
Alternatively, and not mutually exclusive, they could also enhance the stability of
the Rb-associated repressor complex(es). An important question that needs to be
addressed in the future concerns the mechanism by which AGO2/miR complexes
accumulate in the nucleus of senescent cells. Another important question that awaits
answers regards the mechanism by which AGO2/miR complexes are tethered to their
respective target promoters. The most common mechanism that is put forward in
siRNA-induced TGS and. In conclusion, we provide strong evidence that nuclear
translocation/retention and function of miR-AGO2 complexes involved in SA-TGS may
represent a decisive parameter for tumour suppression. Further studies are now
needed to identify other nuclear AGO-miR complexes regulating both E2F- and non
E2F-responsive genes during senescence.

Material and MethodsVectors, viruses, cell culture and antibodiesRetroviral vector pBABE-RASV12 and LXSN-HPV16E7 were as
reported 30. MigR and
MigR-AGO2 were from A. Tarakhovsky. Lentiviral shAGO2 constructs TRCN0000007864,
TRCN00000011203 and shControl SHC002 were from SIGMA. Lentiviral infection was
performed by standard procedures. The CDC2 wildtype and mutant promoter
constructs were cloned by PCR into pGL3 (Promega). Low passage, primary human
diploid fibroblast strain WI38 and breast cancer cell line MCF-7 were purchased
from ATCC. Tetracyclin (TET)-Off inducible-Rb SAOS-2 cell line was from L. Zhu
31. Culturing of cells
and infection of primary human diploid fibroblasts strain WI38 by
retroviral-mediated gene transfer were performed at physiological oxygen
concentration of 3% as previously described 30. The following antibodies were used in
this study: mouse or rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti-H3K9-dimethyl- (Millipore
#07-441 and Abcam #1220), anti-H3K27-trimethyl (Upstate and
Millipore #07-449), anti-histone 3 (Millipore #09-838),
anti-pan-AGO (Millipore #07-590), anti-AGO2 9E8.2 (Millipore
#04-642), normal rabbit and mouse IgGs (Millipore #12-370 and
#12-371), anti-lamin-B (Ab-1, Calbiochem), GAPDH and HDAC1 antibodies
(Abcam), mouse monoclonal anti-Rb (Clone G3-245 and XZ-55, Pharmingen), rabbit
polyclonal Ki67 (Vectorlabs) and anti-macroH2A antibody (P. Adams). All
fluorochrome-tagged secondary antibodies were from Molecular probes.Senescence analysisSenescence in MCF-7 cells was induced by 1μM doxorubicin
treatment for 24 hrs 32.
Subsequently, drug was washed out and cells were left in fresh medium for 4-5
days after which they became senescent. TET-off inducible Rb was used to induce
senescence in SAOS-2 cells. TET was washed-out from medium and TET-free fresh
medium was added. Senescence of cells was obtained within 4-5 days. Senescence
was assessed using several assays as previously published 30, 33. Briefly, proliferative capacity was determined by growth
curves, indirect immunofluorescence using anti-Ki67 antibody staining
(Boehringer) or Edu incorporation using Click-iT™ (Invitrogen) as per
the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were also co-stained for
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity.Subcellular FractionationCells were harvested and lysed in CSK-buffer on ice (0.5M sucrose; 15mM
tris pH 7.5; 60mM KCl; 0.25mM EDTA; 0.125mM EGTA; 0.5mM spermidin; 0.15mM
spermin; 1mM DTT). Subsequently, NP-40 was added to a final concentration of
0.5% and lysates were centrifuged to obtain cytosolic supernatant and
nuclear pellet. Nuclei were further purified by centrifugation at 300×g
through a 0,88M sucrose cushion.Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blottingCells were extracted in 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-pH 8.0, 0.5 %
NP-40, 1 mM EDTA and protease inhibitors. For immunoprecipitations, equal
amounts of lysate were incubated with respective antibodies over night at
4°C. Precipitates were prepared and analyzed by Western blotting
according to standard procedures using indicated antibodies. When
immunoprecipitation was not performed, Western blotting of total protein lysates
was peformed according to standard procedures.Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and histone association assay
(HAA)ChIP assay on chromatin from senescent and pre-senescent, control cells
was performed as described 34.
Calculation of the amount of immunoprecipitated E2F target promoter DNA relative
to that present in total input chromatin was calculated according to Frank et
al. (2001) 35. When HAA was
performed crosslinked cellular lysates were immunoprecipitated with the
respective histone antibodies according to Ricke et al.
(2005)21.
Co-immunoprecipitates were analyzed by Western blot using indicated
antibodies.Dual affinity purification (ChIP-ChOP,
Chromatin-Oligo-affinity-Precipitation)Pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts were transfected in multiple replicates
with 100nM antisense 5′-biotin-tagged miR-let-7f (MWG). Cultures were
collected 72 hrs after transfections and ChIP-ChOP assay was performed according
to Han et al. (2007) 29 with minor modifications.Nuclear-run-on50,000 pre-senescent fibroblasts were transfected with indicated miRs.
Nuclear run-on was performed as described in Meng and Lemaux (2007) 36. A dot blot assay of pulled
down RNA was performed using radiolabeled CYP (cyclophylin) for normalisation
and CDC2 and CDCA8 reverse primers as probes and autoradiography for
visualisation.ImmunofluorescenceCells were prepared and immunolabeled with primary and secondary
antibodies as previously described 33. Where noted cells were pre-extracted first with
CSK-buffer (10 mM Pipes pH 6.8, 100 mM NaCl, 300 mM sucrose, 3mM MgCl2, 1mM
EGTA, 0.5% Triton-X100) and Cytoskeleton stripping buffer (10 mM TrisHCl
pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% Tween 40(v/v), 0.5 % sodium
deoxycholate (v/v)) followed by fixation with para-formaldehyde at 4%.
Cells were blocked with 0,5% BSA, 0,2% of gelatin in PBS
1× and probed with respective primary and secondary antibodies. Labeled
cells were viewed by epifluorescence microscopy. For immunohistochemistry
deparaffinized 4 μm tissue sections were incubated in sodium citrate
buffer (10 mM Na-citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH=6) at 95°C
for 45 min to retrieve antigens. Tissue sections were subsequently rinsed with
water and incubated with block buffer (4% BSA in PBS +
0.1% Tween 20) for 30 min. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight
at 4°C in block buffer (macroH2A 1: 5000; Ago2 1:200). Following 2
× 5 min washes with PBST, tissue sections were incubated with secondary
antibodies as indicated (1:1000 in block buffer) for 1h at room temperature.
Slides were washed 3 × 5min with PBST, rinsed with water and mounted
using DAPI containing mounting medium. Archival and paraffin embedded tumour
tissue were obtained from the tumour tissue bank at NJMS-University Hospital
with the approval of the local IRB committee.Transfection, Reporter assays, siRNA, miR and antagomirCells were cotransfected with 0.1 μg wt or mt cyclin
E-luciferase 26 or CDC2
promoter-reporter constructs and mammalian expression vectors for
pCMV-β-Gal (10 ng), pCMV-Rb (300 ng), pCMV-E2F1/DP1 (10 ng), let-7
(100nM) and pCMV-AGO1 and -2 at the indicated amounts in ng using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen). β-galactosidase and luciferase activities were
measured using Galacto-Star (Tropix) and Luciferase (Promega) luminescent assay
kits according to the suppliers' instructions. Luciferase activities
were normalized with β-galactosidase activities. Expression of proteins
were confirmed by Western blot (data not shown). For siRNA, miR and antagomir
transfection experiments, cells were transfected at 100nM. All siRNA duplexes
were Smart Pools (Dharmacon). Pre-miR-let-7f, miR-let-7f and -let-7f-antagomir
were purchased from Exiqon. Respective scrambled sequences were used as negative
control.RNA isolation, qRT-PCR analysis, qChIP-primersTotal RNA and cDNA preparation were performed by standard procedures.
Real-time PCR (qPCR) was condcuted using Qiagen QuantiTec primer pairs and
designed primer pairs for indicated genes or promoter specific primers for qChIP
analysis and nuclear-run-on assay (see Table S6) with Roche LightCycler
and Roche Absolute™ QPCR SYBR® Green Capillary Mixes. In all
assays cyclophylin (CYP) served as nomalisation control.RNA Immunoprecipitation (RIP)Senescent cells induced by oncogenic RAS or replicative exhaustion were
crosslinked by UV at 100-400mJ/cm2 and immediately collected
afterwards on ice. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer on ice, adjusted
to a protein concentration of 10mg/ml and digested extensively with DNAse I for
15 minutes at 37°C followed by digestion with RNAse T1 (1000U/ml) for 15
minutes at 23°C. Lysates were cleared and incubated with pan-anti-AGO,
anti-H3K9me2 antibodies or IgG-antibodies (Upstate).
Immunoprecipitates were collected with protein A/G beads, washed extensively and
incubated again with 5,000U/ml RNAse T1 at 23°C to rid the precipitates
of any unspecifically attached RNA molecules. Immuncomplexes were proteinase-K
digested and purified RNA molecules ethanol-precipitated and used as probes in
down-stream applications.Next-Generation-Sequencing of small RNAs and analysis of sequencing
dataSmall RNA samples were prepared from RIPs or unfractionated, cellular
RNA of senescent cells using small RNA-Seq sample Prep kit (Illumina) followed
by the standard Illumina RNA sequencing protocol using the Genome Analyzer.
Bioinformatic analysis of RNA Seq results was performed by GenomeQuest Inc.
France (www.genomequest.com). Beginning with raw reads obtained from
ILLUMINA G1 sequencing adaptor sequence was removed. All reads smaller than 18
nucleotides after removing the adaptor sequence were discarded allowing one
mismatch within the adaptor sequence. Small RNA sequences were mapped to the
complete, unmasked, version of the NCBI version of the human genome (Build 36).
The alignment algorithm used aligns the entire read allowing one mismatch,
insertion or deletion. Each sequence read was classified as (a) hit or (b) no
hit and was annotated with the number of hits found. All reads mapping to a
single contiguous position in the genome were then clustered. For each genomic
cluster the genomic sequence was extracted and put into a separate sequence
database (the genomic cluster database). The cluster database was mapped to
mirBase (mirBase v12, http://www.mirbase.org/)
resulting in a microRNA (miR) annotated cluster database. miR reads were
normalized to one million small RNAs (cpm). All mappings used the Genomequest
Kerr proprietary implementation. The KERR algorithm belongs to a class of
approximate string matching algorithms. Given two sequences S1 and S2, KERR
computes the minimal number of differences between S1 and S2, by trying to
optimally fit the shorter sequence into the longer one. Differences in sequence
alignments arise from mismatches or gaps. This strategy assures to find all the
local alignments allowing a given number of mismatch, insertion or deletion. For
all comparisons one error was allowed. For more information about the
Genomequest Kerr implementation, please refer to: http://wiki.genomequest.com/index.php/LSPMUL_HELP#KERR_.28aka_GenePAST.29.Small RNA cDNA cloning (srcDNA)srcDNA cloning was condcucted according to Ro et al.
(2007) 27. Primers that were
used for PCR: (CGAATTCTAGAGCTCGAGGCAGG) and let-7f-specific primers
(GAGGTAGTAGATTGTATAGT).ChiP-on-chip assay and bioinformatic analysisWe used Nimblegen promoter-two-array set 385K (UCSC hg18), which
consists of 59,357 human promoters (see also www.nimblegen.com for
details concerning array platform). Preparation of ChIP samples was per
supplier's instructions. The labeling and hybridisation of DNA from
input and IP fractions for ChIP-chip analysis were performed by NimbleGen
Systems, Inc. Fluorescence intensity raw data were obtained from scanned images
of the oligonucleotide tiling arrays using NimbleScan 2.2 extraction software
(NimbleGen Systems). Only peak data with a false discovery rate (FDR) score of
≤ 0,05 were used for analysis. Scaled log2-ratio data was viewed using
SignalMap. Assembly of top E2F target genes was from Rabinovich et
al. (2008)8, Xu
et al. (2007)9, Bieda et al. (2006)11 and Ross et al. (2001)10. Functional annotations were
performed using the program database for annotation, visualisation and
integrated discovery (DAVID) 2009 37.MicroRNA expression profilingMicroarray analysis was performed as described in Liu et
al. (2008) 38Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses were performed in Excel. Results are shown as
means ± s.d. as indicated. P values were calculated by Student's
two-tailed t-test or Chi square test. All qPCR experiments were
performed in quadruplicates, reporter and senescence assays in triplicates and
growth curves in duplicates.Accession numbersThe ChIP-on-chip data used in this study may be viewed under GSE33998
at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33998.
The data from the genomewide expression analysis used in this study may be
viewed under GSE33710 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33710.
The RIP-Seq data used in this study may be viewed under GSE34494 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE34494.

Material and Methods

Vectors, viruses, cell culture and antibodiesRetroviral vector pBABE-RASV12 and LXSN-HPV16E7 were as
reported 30. MigR and
MigR-AGO2 were from A. Tarakhovsky. Lentiviral shAGO2 constructs TRCN0000007864,
TRCN00000011203 and shControl SHC002 were from SIGMA. Lentiviral infection was
performed by standard procedures. The CDC2 wildtype and mutant promoter
constructs were cloned by PCR into pGL3 (Promega). Low passage, primary human
diploid fibroblast strain WI38 and breast cancer cell line MCF-7 were purchased
from ATCC. Tetracyclin (TET)-Off inducible-Rb SAOS-2 cell line was from L. Zhu
31. Culturing of cells
and infection of primary human diploid fibroblasts strain WI38 by
retroviral-mediated gene transfer were performed at physiological oxygen
concentration of 3% as previously described 30. The following antibodies were used in
this study: mouse or rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti-H3K9-dimethyl- (Millipore
#07-441 and Abcam #1220), anti-H3K27-trimethyl (Upstate and
Millipore #07-449), anti-histone 3 (Millipore #09-838),
anti-pan-AGO (Millipore #07-590), anti-AGO2 9E8.2 (Millipore
#04-642), normal rabbit and mouse IgGs (Millipore #12-370 and
#12-371), anti-lamin-B (Ab-1, Calbiochem), GAPDH and HDAC1 antibodies
(Abcam), mouse monoclonal anti-Rb (Clone G3-245 and XZ-55, Pharmingen), rabbit
polyclonal Ki67 (Vectorlabs) and anti-macroH2A antibody (P. Adams). All
fluorochrome-tagged secondary antibodies were from Molecular probes.

Vectors, viruses, cell culture and antibodies

Retroviral vector pBABE-RASV12 and LXSN-HPV16E7 were as
reported 30. MigR and
MigR-AGO2 were from A. Tarakhovsky. Lentiviral shAGO2 constructs TRCN0000007864,
TRCN00000011203 and shControl SHC002 were from SIGMA. Lentiviral infection was
performed by standard procedures. The CDC2 wildtype and mutant promoter
constructs were cloned by PCR into pGL3 (Promega). Low passage, primary human
diploid fibroblast strain WI38 and breast cancer cell line MCF-7 were purchased
from ATCC. Tetracyclin (TET)-Off inducible-Rb SAOS-2 cell line was from L. Zhu
31. Culturing of cells
and infection of primary human diploid fibroblasts strain WI38 by
retroviral-mediated gene transfer were performed at physiological oxygen
concentration of 3% as previously described 30. The following antibodies were used in
this study: mouse or rabbit polyclonal antibodies anti-H3K9-dimethyl- (Millipore
#07-441 and Abcam #1220), anti-H3K27-trimethyl (Upstate and
Millipore #07-449), anti-histone 3 (Millipore #09-838),
anti-pan-AGO (Millipore #07-590), anti-AGO2 9E8.2 (Millipore
#04-642), normal rabbit and mouse IgGs (Millipore #12-370 and
#12-371), anti-lamin-B (Ab-1, Calbiochem), GAPDH and HDAC1 antibodies
(Abcam), mouse monoclonal anti-Rb (Clone G3-245 and XZ-55, Pharmingen), rabbit
polyclonal Ki67 (Vectorlabs) and anti-macroH2A antibody (P. Adams). All
fluorochrome-tagged secondary antibodies were from Molecular probes.

Senescence analysisSenescence in MCF-7 cells was induced by 1μM doxorubicin
treatment for 24 hrs 32.
Subsequently, drug was washed out and cells were left in fresh medium for 4-5
days after which they became senescent. TET-off inducible Rb was used to induce
senescence in SAOS-2 cells. TET was washed-out from medium and TET-free fresh
medium was added. Senescence of cells was obtained within 4-5 days. Senescence
was assessed using several assays as previously published 30, 33. Briefly, proliferative capacity was determined by growth
curves, indirect immunofluorescence using anti-Ki67 antibody staining
(Boehringer) or Edu incorporation using Click-iT™ (Invitrogen) as per
the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were also co-stained for
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity.

Senescence analysis

Senescence in MCF-7 cells was induced by 1μM doxorubicin
treatment for 24 hrs 32.
Subsequently, drug was washed out and cells were left in fresh medium for 4-5
days after which they became senescent. TET-off inducible Rb was used to induce
senescence in SAOS-2 cells. TET was washed-out from medium and TET-free fresh
medium was added. Senescence of cells was obtained within 4-5 days. Senescence
was assessed using several assays as previously published 30, 33. Briefly, proliferative capacity was determined by growth
curves, indirect immunofluorescence using anti-Ki67 antibody staining
(Boehringer) or Edu incorporation using Click-iT™ (Invitrogen) as per
the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were also co-stained for
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity.

Subcellular FractionationCells were harvested and lysed in CSK-buffer on ice (0.5M sucrose; 15mM
tris pH 7.5; 60mM KCl; 0.25mM EDTA; 0.125mM EGTA; 0.5mM spermidin; 0.15mM
spermin; 1mM DTT). Subsequently, NP-40 was added to a final concentration of
0.5% and lysates were centrifuged to obtain cytosolic supernatant and
nuclear pellet. Nuclei were further purified by centrifugation at 300×g
through a 0,88M sucrose cushion.

Subcellular Fractionation

Cells were harvested and lysed in CSK-buffer on ice (0.5M sucrose; 15mM
tris pH 7.5; 60mM KCl; 0.25mM EDTA; 0.125mM EGTA; 0.5mM spermidin; 0.15mM
spermin; 1mM DTT). Subsequently, NP-40 was added to a final concentration of
0.5% and lysates were centrifuged to obtain cytosolic supernatant and
nuclear pellet. Nuclei were further purified by centrifugation at 300×g
through a 0,88M sucrose cushion.

Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blottingCells were extracted in 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-pH 8.0, 0.5 %
NP-40, 1 mM EDTA and protease inhibitors. For immunoprecipitations, equal
amounts of lysate were incubated with respective antibodies over night at
4°C. Precipitates were prepared and analyzed by Western blotting
according to standard procedures using indicated antibodies. When
immunoprecipitation was not performed, Western blotting of total protein lysates
was peformed according to standard procedures.

Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blotting

Cells were extracted in 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-pH 8.0, 0.5 %
NP-40, 1 mM EDTA and protease inhibitors. For immunoprecipitations, equal
amounts of lysate were incubated with respective antibodies over night at
4°C. Precipitates were prepared and analyzed by Western blotting
according to standard procedures using indicated antibodies. When
immunoprecipitation was not performed, Western blotting of total protein lysates
was peformed according to standard procedures.

Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and histone association assay
(HAA)ChIP assay on chromatin from senescent and pre-senescent, control cells
was performed as described 34.
Calculation of the amount of immunoprecipitated E2F target promoter DNA relative
to that present in total input chromatin was calculated according to Frank et
al. (2001) 35. When HAA was
performed crosslinked cellular lysates were immunoprecipitated with the
respective histone antibodies according to Ricke et al.
(2005)21.
Co-immunoprecipitates were analyzed by Western blot using indicated
antibodies.

Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and histone association assay
(HAA)

ChIP assay on chromatin from senescent and pre-senescent, control cells
was performed as described 34.
Calculation of the amount of immunoprecipitated E2F target promoter DNA relative
to that present in total input chromatin was calculated according to Frank et
al. (2001) 35. When HAA was
performed crosslinked cellular lysates were immunoprecipitated with the
respective histone antibodies according to Ricke et al.
(2005)21.
Co-immunoprecipitates were analyzed by Western blot using indicated
antibodies.

Dual affinity purification (ChIP-ChOP,
Chromatin-Oligo-affinity-Precipitation)Pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts were transfected in multiple replicates
with 100nM antisense 5′-biotin-tagged miR-let-7f (MWG). Cultures were
collected 72 hrs after transfections and ChIP-ChOP assay was performed according
to Han et al. (2007) 29 with minor modifications.

Dual affinity purification (ChIP-ChOP,
Chromatin-Oligo-affinity-Precipitation)

Pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts were transfected in multiple replicates
with 100nM antisense 5′-biotin-tagged miR-let-7f (MWG). Cultures were
collected 72 hrs after transfections and ChIP-ChOP assay was performed according
to Han et al. (2007) 29 with minor modifications.

Nuclear-run-on50,000 pre-senescent fibroblasts were transfected with indicated miRs.
Nuclear run-on was performed as described in Meng and Lemaux (2007) 36. A dot blot assay of pulled
down RNA was performed using radiolabeled CYP (cyclophylin) for normalisation
and CDC2 and CDCA8 reverse primers as probes and autoradiography for
visualisation.

Nuclear-run-on

50,000 pre-senescent fibroblasts were transfected with indicated miRs.
Nuclear run-on was performed as described in Meng and Lemaux (2007) 36. A dot blot assay of pulled
down RNA was performed using radiolabeled CYP (cyclophylin) for normalisation
and CDC2 and CDCA8 reverse primers as probes and autoradiography for
visualisation.

ImmunofluorescenceCells were prepared and immunolabeled with primary and secondary
antibodies as previously described 33. Where noted cells were pre-extracted first with
CSK-buffer (10 mM Pipes pH 6.8, 100 mM NaCl, 300 mM sucrose, 3mM MgCl2, 1mM
EGTA, 0.5% Triton-X100) and Cytoskeleton stripping buffer (10 mM TrisHCl
pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% Tween 40(v/v), 0.5 % sodium
deoxycholate (v/v)) followed by fixation with para-formaldehyde at 4%.
Cells were blocked with 0,5% BSA, 0,2% of gelatin in PBS
1× and probed with respective primary and secondary antibodies. Labeled
cells were viewed by epifluorescence microscopy. For immunohistochemistry
deparaffinized 4 μm tissue sections were incubated in sodium citrate
buffer (10 mM Na-citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH=6) at 95°C
for 45 min to retrieve antigens. Tissue sections were subsequently rinsed with
water and incubated with block buffer (4% BSA in PBS +
0.1% Tween 20) for 30 min. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight
at 4°C in block buffer (macroH2A 1: 5000; Ago2 1:200). Following 2
× 5 min washes with PBST, tissue sections were incubated with secondary
antibodies as indicated (1:1000 in block buffer) for 1h at room temperature.
Slides were washed 3 × 5min with PBST, rinsed with water and mounted
using DAPI containing mounting medium. Archival and paraffin embedded tumour
tissue were obtained from the tumour tissue bank at NJMS-University Hospital
with the approval of the local IRB committee.

Immunofluorescence

Cells were prepared and immunolabeled with primary and secondary
antibodies as previously described 33. Where noted cells were pre-extracted first with
CSK-buffer (10 mM Pipes pH 6.8, 100 mM NaCl, 300 mM sucrose, 3mM MgCl2, 1mM
EGTA, 0.5% Triton-X100) and Cytoskeleton stripping buffer (10 mM TrisHCl
pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% Tween 40(v/v), 0.5 % sodium
deoxycholate (v/v)) followed by fixation with para-formaldehyde at 4%.
Cells were blocked with 0,5% BSA, 0,2% of gelatin in PBS
1× and probed with respective primary and secondary antibodies. Labeled
cells were viewed by epifluorescence microscopy. For immunohistochemistry
deparaffinized 4 μm tissue sections were incubated in sodium citrate
buffer (10 mM Na-citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH=6) at 95°C
for 45 min to retrieve antigens. Tissue sections were subsequently rinsed with
water and incubated with block buffer (4% BSA in PBS +
0.1% Tween 20) for 30 min. Primary antibodies were incubated overnight
at 4°C in block buffer (macroH2A 1: 5000; Ago2 1:200). Following 2
× 5 min washes with PBST, tissue sections were incubated with secondary
antibodies as indicated (1:1000 in block buffer) for 1h at room temperature.
Slides were washed 3 × 5min with PBST, rinsed with water and mounted
using DAPI containing mounting medium. Archival and paraffin embedded tumour
tissue were obtained from the tumour tissue bank at NJMS-University Hospital
with the approval of the local IRB committee.

Transfection, Reporter assays, siRNA, miR and antagomirCells were cotransfected with 0.1 μg wt or mt cyclin
E-luciferase 26 or CDC2
promoter-reporter constructs and mammalian expression vectors for
pCMV-β-Gal (10 ng), pCMV-Rb (300 ng), pCMV-E2F1/DP1 (10 ng), let-7
(100nM) and pCMV-AGO1 and -2 at the indicated amounts in ng using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen). β-galactosidase and luciferase activities were
measured using Galacto-Star (Tropix) and Luciferase (Promega) luminescent assay
kits according to the suppliers' instructions. Luciferase activities
were normalized with β-galactosidase activities. Expression of proteins
were confirmed by Western blot (data not shown). For siRNA, miR and antagomir
transfection experiments, cells were transfected at 100nM. All siRNA duplexes
were Smart Pools (Dharmacon). Pre-miR-let-7f, miR-let-7f and -let-7f-antagomir
were purchased from Exiqon. Respective scrambled sequences were used as negative
control.

Transfection, Reporter assays, siRNA, miR and antagomir

Cells were cotransfected with 0.1 μg wt or mt cyclin
E-luciferase 26 or CDC2
promoter-reporter constructs and mammalian expression vectors for
pCMV-β-Gal (10 ng), pCMV-Rb (300 ng), pCMV-E2F1/DP1 (10 ng), let-7
(100nM) and pCMV-AGO1 and -2 at the indicated amounts in ng using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen). β-galactosidase and luciferase activities were
measured using Galacto-Star (Tropix) and Luciferase (Promega) luminescent assay
kits according to the suppliers' instructions. Luciferase activities
were normalized with β-galactosidase activities. Expression of proteins
were confirmed by Western blot (data not shown). For siRNA, miR and antagomir
transfection experiments, cells were transfected at 100nM. All siRNA duplexes
were Smart Pools (Dharmacon). Pre-miR-let-7f, miR-let-7f and -let-7f-antagomir
were purchased from Exiqon. Respective scrambled sequences were used as negative
control.

RNA isolation, qRT-PCR analysis, qChIP-primersTotal RNA and cDNA preparation were performed by standard procedures.
Real-time PCR (qPCR) was condcuted using Qiagen QuantiTec primer pairs and
designed primer pairs for indicated genes or promoter specific primers for qChIP
analysis and nuclear-run-on assay (see Table S6) with Roche LightCycler
and Roche Absolute™ QPCR SYBR® Green Capillary Mixes. In all
assays cyclophylin (CYP) served as nomalisation control.

RNA isolation, qRT-PCR analysis, qChIP-primers

Total RNA and cDNA preparation were performed by standard procedures.
Real-time PCR (qPCR) was condcuted using Qiagen QuantiTec primer pairs and
designed primer pairs for indicated genes or promoter specific primers for qChIP
analysis and nuclear-run-on assay (see Table S6) with Roche LightCycler
and Roche Absolute™ QPCR SYBR® Green Capillary Mixes. In all
assays cyclophylin (CYP) served as nomalisation control.

RNA Immunoprecipitation (RIP)Senescent cells induced by oncogenic RAS or replicative exhaustion were
crosslinked by UV at 100-400mJ/cm2 and immediately collected
afterwards on ice. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer on ice, adjusted
to a protein concentration of 10mg/ml and digested extensively with DNAse I for
15 minutes at 37°C followed by digestion with RNAse T1 (1000U/ml) for 15
minutes at 23°C. Lysates were cleared and incubated with pan-anti-AGO,
anti-H3K9me2 antibodies or IgG-antibodies (Upstate).
Immunoprecipitates were collected with protein A/G beads, washed extensively and
incubated again with 5,000U/ml RNAse T1 at 23°C to rid the precipitates
of any unspecifically attached RNA molecules. Immuncomplexes were proteinase-K
digested and purified RNA molecules ethanol-precipitated and used as probes in
down-stream applications.

RNA Immunoprecipitation (RIP)

Senescent cells induced by oncogenic RAS or replicative exhaustion were
crosslinked by UV at 100-400mJ/cm2 and immediately collected
afterwards on ice. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer on ice, adjusted
to a protein concentration of 10mg/ml and digested extensively with DNAse I for
15 minutes at 37°C followed by digestion with RNAse T1 (1000U/ml) for 15
minutes at 23°C. Lysates were cleared and incubated with pan-anti-AGO,
anti-H3K9me2 antibodies or IgG-antibodies (Upstate).
Immunoprecipitates were collected with protein A/G beads, washed extensively and
incubated again with 5,000U/ml RNAse T1 at 23°C to rid the precipitates
of any unspecifically attached RNA molecules. Immuncomplexes were proteinase-K
digested and purified RNA molecules ethanol-precipitated and used as probes in
down-stream applications.

Next-Generation-Sequencing of small RNAs and analysis of sequencing
dataSmall RNA samples were prepared from RIPs or unfractionated, cellular
RNA of senescent cells using small RNA-Seq sample Prep kit (Illumina) followed
by the standard Illumina RNA sequencing protocol using the Genome Analyzer.
Bioinformatic analysis of RNA Seq results was performed by GenomeQuest Inc.
France (www.genomequest.com). Beginning with raw reads obtained from
ILLUMINA G1 sequencing adaptor sequence was removed. All reads smaller than 18
nucleotides after removing the adaptor sequence were discarded allowing one
mismatch within the adaptor sequence. Small RNA sequences were mapped to the
complete, unmasked, version of the NCBI version of the human genome (Build 36).
The alignment algorithm used aligns the entire read allowing one mismatch,
insertion or deletion. Each sequence read was classified as (a) hit or (b) no
hit and was annotated with the number of hits found. All reads mapping to a
single contiguous position in the genome were then clustered. For each genomic
cluster the genomic sequence was extracted and put into a separate sequence
database (the genomic cluster database). The cluster database was mapped to
mirBase (mirBase v12, http://www.mirbase.org/)
resulting in a microRNA (miR) annotated cluster database. miR reads were
normalized to one million small RNAs (cpm). All mappings used the Genomequest
Kerr proprietary implementation. The KERR algorithm belongs to a class of
approximate string matching algorithms. Given two sequences S1 and S2, KERR
computes the minimal number of differences between S1 and S2, by trying to
optimally fit the shorter sequence into the longer one. Differences in sequence
alignments arise from mismatches or gaps. This strategy assures to find all the
local alignments allowing a given number of mismatch, insertion or deletion. For
all comparisons one error was allowed. For more information about the
Genomequest Kerr implementation, please refer to: http://wiki.genomequest.com/index.php/LSPMUL_HELP#KERR_.28aka_GenePAST.29.

Next-Generation-Sequencing of small RNAs and analysis of sequencing
data

Small RNA samples were prepared from RIPs or unfractionated, cellular
RNA of senescent cells using small RNA-Seq sample Prep kit (Illumina) followed
by the standard Illumina RNA sequencing protocol using the Genome Analyzer.
Bioinformatic analysis of RNA Seq results was performed by GenomeQuest Inc.
France (www.genomequest.com). Beginning with raw reads obtained from
ILLUMINA G1 sequencing adaptor sequence was removed. All reads smaller than 18
nucleotides after removing the adaptor sequence were discarded allowing one
mismatch within the adaptor sequence. Small RNA sequences were mapped to the
complete, unmasked, version of the NCBI version of the human genome (Build 36).
The alignment algorithm used aligns the entire read allowing one mismatch,
insertion or deletion. Each sequence read was classified as (a) hit or (b) no
hit and was annotated with the number of hits found. All reads mapping to a
single contiguous position in the genome were then clustered. For each genomic
cluster the genomic sequence was extracted and put into a separate sequence
database (the genomic cluster database). The cluster database was mapped to
mirBase (mirBase v12, http://www.mirbase.org/)
resulting in a microRNA (miR) annotated cluster database. miR reads were
normalized to one million small RNAs (cpm). All mappings used the Genomequest
Kerr proprietary implementation. The KERR algorithm belongs to a class of
approximate string matching algorithms. Given two sequences S1 and S2, KERR
computes the minimal number of differences between S1 and S2, by trying to
optimally fit the shorter sequence into the longer one. Differences in sequence
alignments arise from mismatches or gaps. This strategy assures to find all the
local alignments allowing a given number of mismatch, insertion or deletion. For
all comparisons one error was allowed. For more information about the
Genomequest Kerr implementation, please refer to: http://wiki.genomequest.com/index.php/LSPMUL_HELP#KERR_.28aka_GenePAST.29.

Small RNA cDNA cloning (srcDNA)srcDNA cloning was condcucted according to Ro et al.
(2007) 27. Primers that were
used for PCR: (CGAATTCTAGAGCTCGAGGCAGG) and let-7f-specific primers
(GAGGTAGTAGATTGTATAGT).

Small RNA cDNA cloning (srcDNA)

srcDNA cloning was condcucted according to Ro et al.
(2007) 27. Primers that were
used for PCR: (CGAATTCTAGAGCTCGAGGCAGG) and let-7f-specific primers
(GAGGTAGTAGATTGTATAGT).

ChiP-on-chip assay and bioinformatic analysisWe used Nimblegen promoter-two-array set 385K (UCSC hg18), which
consists of 59,357 human promoters (see also www.nimblegen.com for
details concerning array platform). Preparation of ChIP samples was per
supplier's instructions. The labeling and hybridisation of DNA from
input and IP fractions for ChIP-chip analysis were performed by NimbleGen
Systems, Inc. Fluorescence intensity raw data were obtained from scanned images
of the oligonucleotide tiling arrays using NimbleScan 2.2 extraction software
(NimbleGen Systems). Only peak data with a false discovery rate (FDR) score of
≤ 0,05 were used for analysis. Scaled log2-ratio data was viewed using
SignalMap. Assembly of top E2F target genes was from Rabinovich et
al. (2008)8, Xu
et al. (2007)9, Bieda et al. (2006)11 and Ross et al. (2001)10. Functional annotations were
performed using the program database for annotation, visualisation and
integrated discovery (DAVID) 2009 37.

ChiP-on-chip assay and bioinformatic analysis

We used Nimblegen promoter-two-array set 385K (UCSC hg18), which
consists of 59,357 human promoters (see also www.nimblegen.com for
details concerning array platform). Preparation of ChIP samples was per
supplier's instructions. The labeling and hybridisation of DNA from
input and IP fractions for ChIP-chip analysis were performed by NimbleGen
Systems, Inc. Fluorescence intensity raw data were obtained from scanned images
of the oligonucleotide tiling arrays using NimbleScan 2.2 extraction software
(NimbleGen Systems). Only peak data with a false discovery rate (FDR) score of
≤ 0,05 were used for analysis. Scaled log2-ratio data was viewed using
SignalMap. Assembly of top E2F target genes was from Rabinovich et
al. (2008)8, Xu
et al. (2007)9, Bieda et al. (2006)11 and Ross et al. (2001)10. Functional annotations were
performed using the program database for annotation, visualisation and
integrated discovery (DAVID) 2009 37.

MicroRNA expression profilingMicroarray analysis was performed as described in Liu et
al. (2008) 38

MicroRNA expression profiling

Microarray analysis was performed as described in Liu et
al. (2008) 38

Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses were performed in Excel. Results are shown as
means ± s.d. as indicated. P values were calculated by Student's
two-tailed t-test or Chi square test. All qPCR experiments were
performed in quadruplicates, reporter and senescence assays in triplicates and
growth curves in duplicates.

Statistical analysis

All statistical analyses were performed in Excel. Results are shown as
means ± s.d. as indicated. P values were calculated by Student's
two-tailed t-test or Chi square test. All qPCR experiments were
performed in quadruplicates, reporter and senescence assays in triplicates and
growth curves in duplicates.

Accession numbersThe ChIP-on-chip data used in this study may be viewed under GSE33998
at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33998.
The data from the genomewide expression analysis used in this study may be
viewed under GSE33710 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33710.
The RIP-Seq data used in this study may be viewed under GSE34494 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE34494.

Accession numbers

The ChIP-on-chip data used in this study may be viewed under GSE33998
at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33998.
The data from the genomewide expression analysis used in this study may be
viewed under GSE33710 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE33710.
The RIP-Seq data used in this study may be viewed under GSE34494 at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE34494.

Supplementary MaterialFigure S1S1. a-g, Visualisation of AGO2 ChIP-on-chip data obtained from
Nimblegen arrays. a, AGO2 promoter association as detected on
chromosome (chr) 16. Note the enrichment of AGO2 on promoters in senescence
compared to control. b, AGO2 binding region on PCNA promoter.
c, AGO2 binding region on CCNE2 (cyclin E2) promoter.
d, AGO2 binding region on CDCA8 promoter. e,
AGO2 binding region on CDC2 promoter. f, AGO2 binding region on
CCNA2 (cyclin A2) promoter, g, AGO2 binding region on CDC6
promoter. Red peaks represent false discovery rate (FDR) score ≤
0.05. Orange peaks FDR score ≤ 0,1; Yellow peaks 0,1 < FDR
score ≤ 0,2; Grey peaks represent the lowest probability of a peak
with FDR score > 0.2.Figure S2S2. a, Functional annotation clustering of AGO-bound E2F
target genes downregulated in senescence. AGO-binding to
downregulated E2F targets shows predilection for cell cycle control genes
(colored in blue). Enrichment score is 21,04 and p-value < 0,01
using DAVID gene ontology tool (see also Supplementary Information, Table
S2). b, Experimental design for small RNA sequence
aquisition using Next-Generation Sequencing (Next-Generation-Seq) and
bioinformatic analysis; RIP, RNA immunoprecipitation. c, Anti-Ago2
antibody (9E8.2) is AGO2-specific. Flag/HA(FH)-tagged Ago genes
(FH-Ago1 through FH-Ago4) were expressed in Hela cells and cell lysates
analysed by immunoblot using mouse monoclonal anti-AGO2 9E8.2 or anti-HA
antibodies. d-f, AGO2 accumulates in nucleus of senescent cancer
cells. MCF-7 breast cancer cells were left untreated or treated
with 1μM doxorubicin for 24 hrs (MCF-7). Subsequently, doxorubicin
was washed out and cells were left unperturbed for 5 days after which cells
aquired a senescence phenotype. Tetracyclin was washed out from TET-off
Rb-inducible SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cancer cells (-TET) and cell cultures were
replenished with fresh medium and left unperturbed for 5 days at which point
cells underwent senescence. d, Localisation of AGO2 as
determined by preparation of cytosolic and nuclear fractions from cell
lysates of MCF-7 cells as described in Material and Methods. Indirect
immunofluorescence of AGO2 in pre-extracted e,
doxorubicin-induced MCF-7 (scale bar 20μm) and f,
Rb-induced SAOS-2 senescent cells 5 days post-treatment; scale bar
15μm.Figure S3S3. Histopathological and indirect immunofluorescence
characterisation of benign melanocytic nevi and malignant melanomas
a, Hematoxylin and eosin stained tissue section from a
melanocytic nevus and malignant melanoma that were used for the AGO2
localisation studies in Figures 2c and
d. b-d, Nuclear colocalisation of AGO2 and macroH2A
in melanocytic nevi (n=3) and e-f, cytosolic
colocalisation in melanomas (n=3) as determined by indirect
immunofluorescence; scale bar, 20μm.Figure S4S4. AGO2 targets promoters of repressed E2F-response genes in
senescence. a, AGO2 qChIP analysis of indicated E2F target genes
in pre-senescent, empty vector control (C) and RasV12-induced
senescent (S) WI38 fibroblasts. b, mRNA transcript levels were
measured by qRT-PCR in pre-senescent, empty vector control (C) and
RasV12-induced senescent (S) WI38 fibroblasts for the
indicated genes. c, Experimental design and reference time
frame for siRNA, miR and antagomir treatments of cells. d,
Silencing of AGO2 diminishes its binding to E2F-target genes.AGO2 qChIP was
performed in RasV12-induced senescent cells treated with scramble
siRNA (siC) or siAGO2. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P
< 0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates.Figure S5S5: a, Partial Colocalisation of AGO2, H3K9me2 and
H3K27me3 at periphery of SAHF. Indirect
immunostaining for a, AGO2 and H3K9me2 and
b, H3K27me3 in cells undergoing
RASV12-induced senescence using DAPI as DNA counterstain;
scale bars, 20μm c, Depletion of AGO2 derepresses E2F target
genes. Cells were retrovirally infected with
pBABE-RasV12 and 2 days post-drug selection cells were
transiently transfected with siScramble control (siC) or siAGO2 for 3 days
followed by qRT-PCR for indicated genes. Data are means ± s.d.;
n=3; P < 0,02. Experiments were performed in
quadruplicates.Figure S6S6: Depletion of AGO2 delays the onset of
RasV12-induced and replicative senescence. a,
Immunoblot analysis of lysates from empty vector control cells (C),
RasV12-infected cells expressing shControl (shC) or the
indicated shAGO2s (as used in Figs.
3e-g) probed for Ras and β-tubulin (Tub) at day 14 of
life span study. (b-c), Stable down-regulation of AGO2 by
shRNAs expression in cells undergoing RasV12-induced senescence
(used in Figs. 3e-g) as determined by
b, qRT-PCR and c, Western blot at day 14 of
life span study. Tubulin (Tub) is used as loading control. d,
Relative gene expression of AGO2 in control (shC) and AGO2-depleted
(shAGO2-1/2) cell populations undergoing replicative senescence as
determined by qRT-PCR. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P
< 0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates.Figure S7S7: a, Expression profile of let-7 family members.
Total RNA was prepared from RasV12-induced senescent and
pre-senescent, control WI38 fibroblasts and hybridised to microarray as
described in experimental procedures. b, MiR-let-7 corepresses the
E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter-reporter gene together with AGO2 and Rb.
b, CDC2 promoter-luciferase reporter assays were performed in
C33A cells using either a wild-type version of the CDC2 promoter or a
derivative there-of in which the putative let-7 site is deleted.
Promoter-reporter was stimulated by 10ng of E2F1/DP1 expression. Rb was used
at 300ng, AGO2 at 100ng and let-7 at 100nM. Data are means ± s.d.;
n=3; P < 0,05. Experiments were performed in triplicates.
Expression of proteins was confirmed by Western blot (data not shown).
c, Genomic locus of the human CDC2 gene and its upstream
promoter fragment used in this study. (d-e), Schematic
representation of the pGL3 luciferase CDC2 promoter reporters
d, containing the let-7 site or e, deleted for
the let-7 site. TSS, transcriptional start-site.Figure S8S8. AGO2 and pre-miR-let-7f induce TGS of E2F target
promoters. Exogenous pre-miR-let-7f or control pre-miR (C) was
transiently transfected at 100nM into pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts.
a, Abundance of CDCA8 and CDC2 mRNAs was measured by
qRT-PCR of total RNA prepared from the respective samples. Data are means
± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05. Experiments were performed in
quadruplicates. b, qChIP was performed in
pre-miR-let-7f-treated cells using anti-AGO2 and anti-H3K27me3
antibodies followed by qPCR using primers amplifying CDCA8 and CDC2 promoter
regions. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05.
Experiments were performed in quadruplicates. c, Simultaneous
presence of miR-185 and AGO2 on ORC6L promoter was determined by combined
qChIP-ChOP assay. Biotin-labeled miR-185 (100nM) was transfected into
pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts followed by successive rounds of AGO2-ChIP or
control-ChIP and streptavidin-affinity (SA) precipitation.
SA-chromatin-precipitates were analyzed by qPCR with primers detecting
E2F-responsive promoter ORC6L. Experiment was performed in quadruplicates
and the s.d. is indicated. Also shown is the alignment of miR-185 to ORC6L
target promoter. Identical nucleotides are shown in red. Asterisk,
transcription start site (TSS); E2F-binding site is depicted as grey box
with respect to TSS; Arrows to the right and left of miR-target are primers
used for qChIP or qRT-PCR; numbers on top of indicate miR target site
position with respect to TSS. d, Biotin-labeled let-7f (100nM)
was transfected into pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts followed by
streptavidin-affinity (SA) precipitation. SA-chromatin-precipitates were
analyzed by qPCR with primers detecting E2F-responsive promoters CDCA8 and
CDC6. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05.
Experiments were performed in duplicates. (e-f), Exogenous
pre-miR-let-7f induces cellular senescence. Pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts
were transiently transfected with 100nM pre-miR-let-7f, control pre-miR (C)
or siCDCA8 and cell proliferation was determined at the indicated time
points. Experiments were performed in duplicates. e, Growth
curve and f, Number of cells staining positive for Ki67 and
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) at day 7
post-treatment. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P <
0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates. g, Cell number
of pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts 96 hrs after cotransfection with indicated
siC, siAGO2 and let-7 combinations. Shown is the mean of quadruplicates.Figure S9Table S1Supplementary Table S1: List of genome-wide AGO2-bound- and
AGO2-bound E2F target promoters in pre-senescent, control and
oncogenic RASV12-induced senescent cells and their respective
expression statuses (up-down; only E2F-targets are shown).Table S2Supplementary Table S2. Annotated gene ontology analysis using
DAVID. Depicted is the functional annotation cluster including
cell cycle, mitosis and cell division for AGO-bound E2F target genes
repressed in senescence showing the highest enrichment score.Table S3Supplementary Table S3. Summary of ILLUMINA Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS). Usable sequence reads are reads after trimming
of adapter and selection of reads greater than 17 nucleotides.Table S4Supplementary Table S4. Summary of miRs identified by NGS for
all samples analysed.Table S5Supplementary Table S5. Top 10 AGO and
H3K9me2-bound miRs in senescent cells. Next-generation
sequencing was performed on small RNAs purified by AGO2-and
H3K9me2 immunoprecipitation (RIP) from
RASV12-induced senescent cells. Shown are cpm obtained for the
respective top 10 miRs.Table S6Supplementary Table S6. List of oligonucleotides used in this
study.

Supplementary Material

S1. a-g, Visualisation of AGO2 ChIP-on-chip data obtained from
Nimblegen arrays. a, AGO2 promoter association as detected on
chromosome (chr) 16. Note the enrichment of AGO2 on promoters in senescence
compared to control. b, AGO2 binding region on PCNA promoter.
c, AGO2 binding region on CCNE2 (cyclin E2) promoter.
d, AGO2 binding region on CDCA8 promoter. e,
AGO2 binding region on CDC2 promoter. f, AGO2 binding region on
CCNA2 (cyclin A2) promoter, g, AGO2 binding region on CDC6
promoter. Red peaks represent false discovery rate (FDR) score ≤
0.05. Orange peaks FDR score ≤ 0,1; Yellow peaks 0,1 < FDR
score ≤ 0,2; Grey peaks represent the lowest probability of a peak
with FDR score > 0.2.

S2. a, Functional annotation clustering of AGO-bound E2F
target genes downregulated in senescence. AGO-binding to
downregulated E2F targets shows predilection for cell cycle control genes
(colored in blue). Enrichment score is 21,04 and p-value < 0,01
using DAVID gene ontology tool (see also Supplementary Information, Table
S2). b, Experimental design for small RNA sequence
aquisition using Next-Generation Sequencing (Next-Generation-Seq) and
bioinformatic analysis; RIP, RNA immunoprecipitation. c, Anti-Ago2
antibody (9E8.2) is AGO2-specific. Flag/HA(FH)-tagged Ago genes
(FH-Ago1 through FH-Ago4) were expressed in Hela cells and cell lysates
analysed by immunoblot using mouse monoclonal anti-AGO2 9E8.2 or anti-HA
antibodies. d-f, AGO2 accumulates in nucleus of senescent cancer
cells. MCF-7 breast cancer cells were left untreated or treated
with 1μM doxorubicin for 24 hrs (MCF-7). Subsequently, doxorubicin
was washed out and cells were left unperturbed for 5 days after which cells
aquired a senescence phenotype. Tetracyclin was washed out from TET-off
Rb-inducible SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cancer cells (-TET) and cell cultures were
replenished with fresh medium and left unperturbed for 5 days at which point
cells underwent senescence. d, Localisation of AGO2 as
determined by preparation of cytosolic and nuclear fractions from cell
lysates of MCF-7 cells as described in Material and Methods. Indirect
immunofluorescence of AGO2 in pre-extracted e,
doxorubicin-induced MCF-7 (scale bar 20μm) and f,
Rb-induced SAOS-2 senescent cells 5 days post-treatment; scale bar
15μm.

S3. Histopathological and indirect immunofluorescence
characterisation of benign melanocytic nevi and malignant melanomas
a, Hematoxylin and eosin stained tissue section from a
melanocytic nevus and malignant melanoma that were used for the AGO2
localisation studies in Figures 2c and
d. b-d, Nuclear colocalisation of AGO2 and macroH2A
in melanocytic nevi (n=3) and e-f, cytosolic
colocalisation in melanomas (n=3) as determined by indirect
immunofluorescence; scale bar, 20μm.

S4. AGO2 targets promoters of repressed E2F-response genes in
senescence. a, AGO2 qChIP analysis of indicated E2F target genes
in pre-senescent, empty vector control (C) and RasV12-induced
senescent (S) WI38 fibroblasts. b, mRNA transcript levels were
measured by qRT-PCR in pre-senescent, empty vector control (C) and
RasV12-induced senescent (S) WI38 fibroblasts for the
indicated genes. c, Experimental design and reference time
frame for siRNA, miR and antagomir treatments of cells. d,
Silencing of AGO2 diminishes its binding to E2F-target genes.AGO2 qChIP was
performed in RasV12-induced senescent cells treated with scramble
siRNA (siC) or siAGO2. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P
< 0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates.

S5: a, Partial Colocalisation of AGO2, H3K9me2 and
H3K27me3 at periphery of SAHF. Indirect
immunostaining for a, AGO2 and H3K9me2 and
b, H3K27me3 in cells undergoing
RASV12-induced senescence using DAPI as DNA counterstain;
scale bars, 20μm c, Depletion of AGO2 derepresses E2F target
genes. Cells were retrovirally infected with
pBABE-RasV12 and 2 days post-drug selection cells were
transiently transfected with siScramble control (siC) or siAGO2 for 3 days
followed by qRT-PCR for indicated genes. Data are means ± s.d.;
n=3; P < 0,02. Experiments were performed in
quadruplicates.

S6: Depletion of AGO2 delays the onset of
RasV12-induced and replicative senescence. a,
Immunoblot analysis of lysates from empty vector control cells (C),
RasV12-infected cells expressing shControl (shC) or the
indicated shAGO2s (as used in Figs.
3e-g) probed for Ras and β-tubulin (Tub) at day 14 of
life span study. (b-c), Stable down-regulation of AGO2 by
shRNAs expression in cells undergoing RasV12-induced senescence
(used in Figs. 3e-g) as determined by
b, qRT-PCR and c, Western blot at day 14 of
life span study. Tubulin (Tub) is used as loading control. d,
Relative gene expression of AGO2 in control (shC) and AGO2-depleted
(shAGO2-1/2) cell populations undergoing replicative senescence as
determined by qRT-PCR. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P
< 0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates.

S7: a, Expression profile of let-7 family members.
Total RNA was prepared from RasV12-induced senescent and
pre-senescent, control WI38 fibroblasts and hybridised to microarray as
described in experimental procedures. b, MiR-let-7 corepresses the
E2F-responsive CDC2 promoter-reporter gene together with AGO2 and Rb.
b, CDC2 promoter-luciferase reporter assays were performed in
C33A cells using either a wild-type version of the CDC2 promoter or a
derivative there-of in which the putative let-7 site is deleted.
Promoter-reporter was stimulated by 10ng of E2F1/DP1 expression. Rb was used
at 300ng, AGO2 at 100ng and let-7 at 100nM. Data are means ± s.d.;
n=3; P < 0,05. Experiments were performed in triplicates.
Expression of proteins was confirmed by Western blot (data not shown).
c, Genomic locus of the human CDC2 gene and its upstream
promoter fragment used in this study. (d-e), Schematic
representation of the pGL3 luciferase CDC2 promoter reporters
d, containing the let-7 site or e, deleted for
the let-7 site. TSS, transcriptional start-site.

S8. AGO2 and pre-miR-let-7f induce TGS of E2F target
promoters. Exogenous pre-miR-let-7f or control pre-miR (C) was
transiently transfected at 100nM into pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts.
a, Abundance of CDCA8 and CDC2 mRNAs was measured by
qRT-PCR of total RNA prepared from the respective samples. Data are means
± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05. Experiments were performed in
quadruplicates. b, qChIP was performed in
pre-miR-let-7f-treated cells using anti-AGO2 and anti-H3K27me3
antibodies followed by qPCR using primers amplifying CDCA8 and CDC2 promoter
regions. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05.
Experiments were performed in quadruplicates. c, Simultaneous
presence of miR-185 and AGO2 on ORC6L promoter was determined by combined
qChIP-ChOP assay. Biotin-labeled miR-185 (100nM) was transfected into
pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts followed by successive rounds of AGO2-ChIP or
control-ChIP and streptavidin-affinity (SA) precipitation.
SA-chromatin-precipitates were analyzed by qPCR with primers detecting
E2F-responsive promoter ORC6L. Experiment was performed in quadruplicates
and the s.d. is indicated. Also shown is the alignment of miR-185 to ORC6L
target promoter. Identical nucleotides are shown in red. Asterisk,
transcription start site (TSS); E2F-binding site is depicted as grey box
with respect to TSS; Arrows to the right and left of miR-target are primers
used for qChIP or qRT-PCR; numbers on top of indicate miR target site
position with respect to TSS. d, Biotin-labeled let-7f (100nM)
was transfected into pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts followed by
streptavidin-affinity (SA) precipitation. SA-chromatin-precipitates were
analyzed by qPCR with primers detecting E2F-responsive promoters CDCA8 and
CDC6. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P < 0,05.
Experiments were performed in duplicates. (e-f), Exogenous
pre-miR-let-7f induces cellular senescence. Pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts
were transiently transfected with 100nM pre-miR-let-7f, control pre-miR (C)
or siCDCA8 and cell proliferation was determined at the indicated time
points. Experiments were performed in duplicates. e, Growth
curve and f, Number of cells staining positive for Ki67 and
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) at day 7
post-treatment. Data are means ± s.d.; n=3; P <
0,05. Experiments were performed in duplicates. g, Cell number
of pre-senescent WI38 fibroblasts 96 hrs after cotransfection with indicated
siC, siAGO2 and let-7 combinations. Shown is the mean of quadruplicates.

Supplementary Table S1: List of genome-wide AGO2-bound- and
AGO2-bound E2F target promoters in pre-senescent, control and
oncogenic RASV12-induced senescent cells and their respective
expression statuses (up-down; only E2F-targets are shown).

Supplementary Table S2. Annotated gene ontology analysis using
DAVID. Depicted is the functional annotation cluster including
cell cycle, mitosis and cell division for AGO-bound E2F target genes
repressed in senescence showing the highest enrichment score.

Supplementary Table S3. Summary of ILLUMINA Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS). Usable sequence reads are reads after trimming
of adapter and selection of reads greater than 17 nucleotides.

Supplementary Table S4. Summary of miRs identified by NGS for
all samples analysed.

Supplementary Table S5. Top 10 AGO and
H3K9me2-bound miRs in senescent cells. Next-generation
sequencing was performed on small RNAs purified by AGO2-and
H3K9me2 immunoprecipitation (RIP) from
RASV12-induced senescent cells. Shown are cpm obtained for the
respective top 10 miRs.

Supplementary Table S6. List of oligonucleotides used in this
study.
