---
pmid: '12408825'
title: ICAT inhibits beta-catenin binding to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors
  and the general coactivator p300 using independent structural modules.
authors:
- Daniels DL
- Weis WI
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00631-7
---

# ICAT inhibits beta-catenin binding to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and the general coactivator p300 using independent structural modules.
**Authors:** Daniels DL, Weis WI
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00631-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00631-7)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2002 Sep;10(3):573-84. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00631-7.

ICAT inhibits beta-catenin binding to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and 
the general coactivator p300 using independent structural modules.

Daniels DL(1), Weis WI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

In the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, beta-catenin activates target genes 
through its interactions with Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and 
additional transcriptional coactivators. The crystal structure of ICAT, an 
inhibitor of beta-catenin-mediated transcription, bound to the armadillo repeat 
domain of beta-catenin, has been determined. ICAT contains an N-terminal 
helilical domain that binds to repeats 11 and 12 of beta-catenin, and an 
extended C-terminal region that binds to repeats 5-10 in a manner similar to 
that of Tcfs and other beta-catenin ligands. Full-length ICAT dissociates 
complexes of beta-catenin, Lef-1, and the transcriptional coactivator p300, 
whereas the helical domain alone selectively blocks binding to p300. The 
C-terminal armadillo repeats of beta-catenin may be an attractive target for 
compounds designed to disrupt aberrant beta-catenin-mediated transcription 
associated with various cancers.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00631-7
PMID: 12408825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
