---
pmid: '27641337'
title: INO80 is required for oncogenic transcription and tumor growth in non-small
  cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Zhang S
- Zhou B
- Wang L
- Li P
- Bennett BD
- Snyder R
- Garantziotis S
- Fargo DC
- Cox AD
- Chen L
- Hu G
journal: Oncogene
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6534818
doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.311
---

# INO80 is required for oncogenic transcription and tumor growth in non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Zhang S, Zhou B, Wang L, Li P, Bennett BD, Snyder R, Garantziotis S, Fargo DC, Cox AD, Chen L, Hu G
**Journal:** Oncogene (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2016.311](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2016.311)
**PMC:** [PMC6534818](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6534818/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2017 Mar;36(10):1430-1439. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.311. Epub 2016 Sep 
19.

INO80 is required for oncogenic transcription and tumor growth in non-small cell 
lung cancer.

Zhang S(1), Zhou B(2)(3), Wang L(3)(4), Li P(4), Bennett BD(5), Snyder R(6), 
Garantziotis S(6), Fargo DC(5), Cox AD(2), Chen L(1), Hu G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National 
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(4)Epigenetics and Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(5)Integrative Bioinformatics, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(6)Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

Epigenetic regulators are attractive targets for the development of new cancer 
therapies. Among them, the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes control 
the chromatin architecture and have important roles in gene regulation. They are 
often found to be mutated and de-regulated in cancers, but how they influence 
the cancer gene expression program during cancer initiation and progression is 
not fully understood. Here we show that the INO80 chromatin remodeling complex 
is required for oncogenic transcription and tumor growth in non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). Ino80, the SWI/SNF ATPase in the complex, is highly expressed in 
NSCLC cells compared with normal lung epithelia cells. Further, its expression, 
as well as that of another subunit Ino80B, negatively correlates with disease 
prognosis in lung cancer patients. Functionally, INO80 silencing inhibits NSCLC 
cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumor formation 
in mouse xenografts. It occupies enhancer regions near lung cancer-associated 
genes, and its occupancy correlates with increased genome accessibility and 
enhanced expression of downstream genes. Together, our study defines a critical 
role of INO80 in promoting oncogenic transcription and NSCLC tumorigenesis, and 
reveals a potential treatment strategy for inhibiting the cancer transcription 
network by targeting the INO80 chromatin remodeling complex.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2016.311
PMCID: PMC6534818
PMID: 27641337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
there is no conflict of interest.
