---
pmid: '24561554'
title: The binary protein-protein interaction landscape of Escherichia coli.
authors:
- Rajagopala SV
- Sikorski P
- Kumar A
- Mosca R
- Vlasblom J
- Arnold R
- Franca-Koh J
- Pakala SB
- Phanse S
- Ceol A
- Häuser R
- Siszler G
- Wuchty S
- Emili A
- Babu M
- Aloy P
- Pieper R
- Uetz P
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC4123855
doi: 10.1038/nbt.2831
---

# The binary protein-protein interaction landscape of Escherichia coli.
**Authors:** Rajagopala SV, Sikorski P, Kumar A, Mosca R, Vlasblom J, Arnold R, Franca-Koh J, Pakala SB, Phanse S, Ceol A, Häuser R, Siszler G, Wuchty S, Emili A, Babu M, Aloy P, Pieper R, Uetz P
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nbt.2831](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2831)
**PMC:** [PMC4123855](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4123855/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2014 Mar;32(3):285-290. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2831. Epub 2014 Feb
23.

The binary protein-protein interaction landscape of Escherichia coli.

Rajagopala SV(1), Sikorski P(#)(1), Kumar A(#)(2), Mosca R(#)(3), Vlasblom J(2), 
Arnold R(4), Franca-Koh J(1), Pakala SB(1), Phanse S(2), Ceol A(3), Häuser R(5), 
Siszler G(5), Wuchty S(6), Emili A(4), Babu M(2), Aloy P(3)(7), Pieper R(1), 
Uetz P(8).

Author information:
(1)J Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Research and Innovation Centre, University of 
Regina, Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada.
(3)Joint IRB-BSC Program in Computational Biology, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)The Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, Donnelly Centre, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)National Center of Biotechnology Information, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, Virginia, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2014 Mar;32(3):241-3. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2848.

Efforts to map the Escherichia coli interactome have identified several hundred 
macromolecular complexes, but direct binary protein-protein interactions (PPIs) 
have not been surveyed on a large scale. Here we performed yeast two-hybrid 
screens of 3,305 baits against 3,606 preys (∼70% of the E. coli proteome) in 
duplicate to generate a map of 2,234 interactions, which approximately doubles 
the number of known binary PPIs in E. coli. Integration of binary PPI and 
genetic-interaction data revealed functional dependencies among components 
involved in cellular processes, including envelope integrity, flagellum assembly 
and protein quality control. Many of the binary interactions that we could map 
in multiprotein complexes were informative regarding internal topology of 
complexes and indicated that interactions in complexes are substantially more 
conserved than those interactions connecting different complexes. This resource 
will be useful for inferring bacterial gene function and provides a draft 
reference of the basic physical wiring network of this evolutionarily important 
model microbe.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt.2831
PMCID: PMC4123855
PMID: 24561554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Mapping protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is essential to understand biological function. High-throughput tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) has been used to identify PPIs on a large scale in Escherichia coli
1–3, but this method is unable to distinguish direct interactions when several proteins are purified together. Various high-throughput biochemical approaches have been proposed to examine binary PPIs, including the yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) method which has been successively applied in several eukaryotes 4, 5, prokaryotes 6 and viruses 7. Here we explored the global architecture of the binary interactome in the gram-negative bacterium E. coli by carrying out proteome-scale, high-throughput Y2H screening. We detected network associations for 1,269 E. coli proteins and more than half of the interactions are new. Furthermore, we derived a comprehensive interactome of E. coli by integrating literature curated binary PPIs with Y2H interactions obtained from this study, and analyzed the network structure and function of this E. coli interactome.

RESULTSTesting the Y2H system for E. coli proteinsWe constructed Y2H libraries by transferring 3,971 Gateway-compatible E. coli entry clones8 into three different Y2H vectors (pGADT7g, pGBGT7g and pGBKCatg) (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. 1a). After the removal of auto-activating baits9, our libraries contained 3,305 baits (in pGBGT7g as DNA binding domain fusions) and 3,606 preys (in pGADT7g as activation domain fusions) (Fig. 1a). To evaluate the efficacy of the Y2H for E. coli proteins, we first benchmarked our system with a reference set of likely (that is, positive) and unlikely (that is, random) PPIs. The positive reference set (PRS) was compiled from manually curated databases10, 11. Approximately 1,941 binary PPIs have been documented for E. coli, most of which have been reported as purified dimers or binary complexes in AP-MS studies. Previous studies have shown that interactions supported by multiple publications are more reliable than those supported by a single publication12, so we selected 303 PPIs that had been described in multiple publications or were characterized by two independent methods.Among these, our pGBGT7g-pGADT7g library contains both bait and prey clones for 212 PPIs (Supplementary Table 1a). From these we randomly selected 94 PPIs as a PRS (Supplementary Table 1b) and tested them using the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g Y2H vector systems (Fig. 1b, Online Methods). We also tested 100 PRS interactions using the pGBKCatg-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1c, Online Methods). Approximately 29% (27 of 94) of the PRS interactions were detected by the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g system, a sensitivity that is comparable to yeast and human Y2H array screening12, 13. We assayed 500 randomly chosen protein pairs comprising the random reference set and detected an interaction for only four, giving a specificity of ~99% (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1d). However, this number cannot be directly extrapolated to the whole data set, given that most false positives arise through a small set of promiscuous baits and preys. We have removed such non-specific interactions from our Y2H dataset (Online Methods).High-throughput Y2H screeningThe Y2H screening was conducted with pools of 3 baits, and positive yeast colonies were selected on synthetic media plates (Supplementary Fig. 1c and Online Methods). The interacting preys were identified by yeast colony PCR, followed by DNA sequencing. The resulting interactions were retested in quadruplicate for each bait-prey combination using fresh yeast bait and prey cultures from archival stocks, and interactions that were either non-reproducible or auto-activated were eliminated (Supplementary Fig. 1d)9, 14. By this approach, we systematically screened 3,305 baits against 3,606 preys, thus covering ~70% of E. coli interactome space (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2).When screening millions of protein pairs, the search space needs to be sampled multiple times to detect all the interactions that are detectable by the assay used 5, 15. Therefore, to estimate the sampling sensitivity of our Y2H system, we performed eight independent sampling screens using 92 baits against the entire prey library (3,606 proteins), resulting in saturation in the number of detectable interactions (Fig. 1e). Based on this analysis, we estimated a mean sampling sensitivity of 69% (+/− 2.5%) for a combination of two screens; at least five-fold sampling would be required to obtain 90% saturation (Fig. 1e). We sampled the entire search space twice independently, resulting in 2,234 high-quality PPIs among 1,269 proteins (Supplementary Table 2). Nearly two-thirds (1,830 of 2,234) of these interactions have not been reported previously. Evaluation against a PRS of 212 interacting pairs indicated a sensitivity of ~21% (44 of 212) in the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1a), which is comparable to the sensitivity attained in Y2H screening in yeast 5.To assess independently the quality of these PPIs, we evaluated 114 randomly selected PPIs by two different methods: co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and LUMIER 16 assays (Online Methods). About 86% (99/114) of the Y2H interactions were confirmed by at least one of these biochemical methods (Fig. 2a, b, c and Supplementary Table 3), consistent with previously published Y2H validation rates 4, 5.Of the 2,234 PPIs reported in this study, 239 are supported by manually curated PPIs from the literature10, 11, and another 165 are supported by AP-MS studies 1–3 (Fig. 2d). The limited overlap with the literature data is mainly due to low Y2H assay sensitivity (that is, many false-negatives) rather than low specificity (that is, false-positives) (Fig. 1c), consistent with the low overlap observed in the yeast interactome5.We have shown previously that the Y2H system can be used effectively to analyze direct interactions among proteins within a complex 17. Assessing our Y2H interactions against structures of E. coli protein complexes from the Protein Data Bank 18 (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b, c, d and Supplementary Table 4) revealed that >90% (101/110) of interactions among complex subunits corresponded to direct PPIs (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 4) 1–3. We then tested 227 putative E. coli protein complexes containing three or more protein subunits 3 by pair-wise Y2H assays of the subunits. To enhance assay sensitivity, the Y2H screening was conducted using both N-terminal and C-terminal fusion bait proteins 13. By this method, we identified a total of 458 PPIs between the subunits of the complexes (Fig. 2e, Supplementary Fig. 4 and Online Methods).High-quality binary interaction networkTo obtain a more comprehensive binary E. coli interactome, we combined the high-quality Y2H data set from this study with binary interactions that we manually curated from the literature 10, 11, hereinafter referred to as “combined-binary” dataset. This dataset contains 3,946 binary interactions among 2,048 proteins (Supplementary Table 5, Fig. 3). Based on our precision, completeness, assay- and sampling-sensitivity measures, we estimated that the total size of the E. coli interactome is on the order of ~10,000 PPIs (Supplementary Results). The combined-binary dataset described in this study comprising ~39% of the whole E. coli binary interactome. We estimate that approximately half of the interactions in the combined-binary interaction dataset likely to be between the components of multimeric complexes (that is, complexes inferred from AP-MS data3 and complexes from EcoCyc http://ecocyc.org/, and half are transient binary interactions (Supplementary Results).Like other biological networks 19, both the combined-binary interactions and the combined AP-MS data sets2, 3 are scale-free; that is, many interacting proteins have low connectivity and few have high connectivity (Supplementary Fig. 5a). As with the yeast binary interactome 5, we found that AP-MS interactions were enriched (p = 1.8 × 10−31) in essential protein pairs (Supplementary Fig. 5b), and essential proteins were better connected (Fig. 4a) in the AP-MS network than in the combined-binary interaction network. Moreover, the path length between proteins in the combined-binary interaction network was longer (> 5) compared to the combined AP-MS network (Fig. 4b), reflecting the tendency of Y2H to detect more interactions outside of protein complexes than AP-MS5.As in yeast 20, we found that physically interacting proteins from the combined-binary dataset and from the combined AP-MS dataset were more likely to have highly correlated genetic interactions (GI) profiles (p ≤ 0.05) than randomly selected protein pairs (Fig. 4c). Physically interacting protein pairs in both datasets also showed positively correlated co-expression (p ≤ 0.05) and phenotypic (p ≤ 0.05) profiles (Fig. 4d, e) 5. Moreover, the average semantic similarity 21 of Gene Ontology (GO) annotations in the combined-binary PPI network was comparable to that of the combined AP-MS network, suggesting that the binary PPIs are as functionally coherent as the AP-MS-derived PPIs (Fig. 4f).Protein complex topology of the E. coli interactomeAP-MS-derived complexes do not provide information about the internal topology of multi-protein assemblies 22, 23. We therefore assessed whether Y2H experiments could be used to detect direct physical interactions within complexes identified by large-scale AP-MS experiments. We compiled a list of 227 E. coli protein complexes that have three components or more as identified in a large-scale AP-MS screen 3. Next, we identified interactions between subunits of these complexes in our Y2H data set and among literature-curated binary interactions (Supplementary Table 6 and Online Methods). We mapped 745 binary interactions within 203 complexes (Supplementary Fig. 6), of which 319 (43%) interactions were found in this study and 426 (57%) were obtained from the literature (108 of which were recapitulated in our Y2H study). We could deduce a putative complete internal topology for 15 multi-protein complexes; for these 15 complexes the binary interactions connected all components of the complex, therefore providing a hypothesis on its internal connectivity. For another 45 complexes we determined the putative internal topology of a sub-complex with at least three subunits, and for 46 complexes we determined the internal connections between pairs of subunits (Supplementary Fig. 6). For an additional 97 complexes we could only map homomeric interactions (that is interactions between multiple copies of the same protein). We found in the literature a structure (or a homology model) for 1,097 proteins and 202 interactions (Supplementary Fig. 7) within the complexes. For several complexes, we found a sub-complex of at least three components for which complete topology was revealed by experimental binary interaction data and structural data was available for all its subunits (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 8).Integration of PPI and GI networksIdentification of physical interactions among proteins does not necessarily imply that all interacting partners belong to the same functional pathway24, 25. By contrast, genetic screens can elucidate functional relationships between genes26, 27. Analogous to the yeast synthetic genetic array approach 28, we have previously developed a high-throughput synthetic genetic array screening technology, termed eSGA 29 to map GI networks in E. coli to elucidate pathway-level relationships. Integration of this GI data with the PPI networks should provide information that is not attainable from either study alone29. Using a Markov clustering algorithm 30, we identified physically related groupings in the binary interaction network and overlaid with the currently available large-scale E. coli GIs datasets 24, 29, 31 (publically accessible at http://ecoli.med.utoronto.ca/esga; Supplementary Table 7) for the corresponding protein interactions to determine the functional relationships of individual proteins and multi-protein complexes in various pathways and processes (Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables 7, 8).This integrative analysis captured interactions that were missed by either one of the methods. For example, in the secretory pathway the inner membrane protein SecA is peripherally associated with the multi-subunit translocation apparatus SecYEG 32; Y2H alone captured the physical interaction between SecA and SecY and not by eSGA (Fig. 5a); however interactions between other Sec components missed by Y2H were detected as GIs by eSGA. Also, for components of the flagellum (e.g., fliN-cheR and fliA-fliI) (Fig. 5b), physical interactions among the proteins are overlaid by a negative phenotype in the GI network, consistent with their joint participation in flagellum assembly and motility33. Another example involves a sub-network of physically connected subunits of the ATP-dependent protease complex (ClpAX) known for their cooperative function in protein quality control 34. These had a positive GI phenotype (Fig. 5c), suggesting that they operate in the same pathway 28, 29, 35. Similarly, the Y2H interaction between the recently characterized outer membrane lipoprotein YcfM/LpoB and penicillin binding protein PbpG showed a strong positive interaction (Fig. 5d), consistent with a recently proposed regulatory role of YcfM in peptidoglycan synthesis 36Conservation of binary PPITo investigate the evolutionary significance of PPIs detected in E. coli with respect to other microbes, we examined the presence of PPI orthologs in other bacteria (Fig. 6a) by using the combined-binary interactions of E. coli and binary interactions reported for other bacteria in literature curated database10 and from the large scale bacterial interactome studies (Online Methods). Previous investigations have shown that interactions in yeast are conserved in worms37 and metazoan interactions are able to predict homologous connections in yeast 38. We found that interacting protein pairs from our study are highly conserved in bacteria that are closely related to E. coli but less so with increasing distance from E. coli in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 6a). However, the opposite trend was observed when interactions between proteins encoded by essential E. coli genes were considered (Fig. 6b). We also found that interactions between the subunits of protein complexes are more conserved than interactions between proteins belonging to different complexes (Fig. 6b).

Testing the Y2H system for E. coli proteinsWe constructed Y2H libraries by transferring 3,971 Gateway-compatible E. coli entry clones8 into three different Y2H vectors (pGADT7g, pGBGT7g and pGBKCatg) (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. 1a). After the removal of auto-activating baits9, our libraries contained 3,305 baits (in pGBGT7g as DNA binding domain fusions) and 3,606 preys (in pGADT7g as activation domain fusions) (Fig. 1a). To evaluate the efficacy of the Y2H for E. coli proteins, we first benchmarked our system with a reference set of likely (that is, positive) and unlikely (that is, random) PPIs. The positive reference set (PRS) was compiled from manually curated databases10, 11. Approximately 1,941 binary PPIs have been documented for E. coli, most of which have been reported as purified dimers or binary complexes in AP-MS studies. Previous studies have shown that interactions supported by multiple publications are more reliable than those supported by a single publication12, so we selected 303 PPIs that had been described in multiple publications or were characterized by two independent methods.Among these, our pGBGT7g-pGADT7g library contains both bait and prey clones for 212 PPIs (Supplementary Table 1a). From these we randomly selected 94 PPIs as a PRS (Supplementary Table 1b) and tested them using the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g Y2H vector systems (Fig. 1b, Online Methods). We also tested 100 PRS interactions using the pGBKCatg-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1c, Online Methods). Approximately 29% (27 of 94) of the PRS interactions were detected by the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g system, a sensitivity that is comparable to yeast and human Y2H array screening12, 13. We assayed 500 randomly chosen protein pairs comprising the random reference set and detected an interaction for only four, giving a specificity of ~99% (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1d). However, this number cannot be directly extrapolated to the whole data set, given that most false positives arise through a small set of promiscuous baits and preys. We have removed such non-specific interactions from our Y2H dataset (Online Methods).

Testing the Y2H system for E. coli proteins

We constructed Y2H libraries by transferring 3,971 Gateway-compatible E. coli entry clones8 into three different Y2H vectors (pGADT7g, pGBGT7g and pGBKCatg) (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Fig. 1a). After the removal of auto-activating baits9, our libraries contained 3,305 baits (in pGBGT7g as DNA binding domain fusions) and 3,606 preys (in pGADT7g as activation domain fusions) (Fig. 1a). To evaluate the efficacy of the Y2H for E. coli proteins, we first benchmarked our system with a reference set of likely (that is, positive) and unlikely (that is, random) PPIs. The positive reference set (PRS) was compiled from manually curated databases10, 11. Approximately 1,941 binary PPIs have been documented for E. coli, most of which have been reported as purified dimers or binary complexes in AP-MS studies. Previous studies have shown that interactions supported by multiple publications are more reliable than those supported by a single publication12, so we selected 303 PPIs that had been described in multiple publications or were characterized by two independent methods.

Among these, our pGBGT7g-pGADT7g library contains both bait and prey clones for 212 PPIs (Supplementary Table 1a). From these we randomly selected 94 PPIs as a PRS (Supplementary Table 1b) and tested them using the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g Y2H vector systems (Fig. 1b, Online Methods). We also tested 100 PRS interactions using the pGBKCatg-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1c, Online Methods). Approximately 29% (27 of 94) of the PRS interactions were detected by the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g system, a sensitivity that is comparable to yeast and human Y2H array screening12, 13. We assayed 500 randomly chosen protein pairs comprising the random reference set and detected an interaction for only four, giving a specificity of ~99% (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 1d). However, this number cannot be directly extrapolated to the whole data set, given that most false positives arise through a small set of promiscuous baits and preys. We have removed such non-specific interactions from our Y2H dataset (Online Methods).

High-throughput Y2H screeningThe Y2H screening was conducted with pools of 3 baits, and positive yeast colonies were selected on synthetic media plates (Supplementary Fig. 1c and Online Methods). The interacting preys were identified by yeast colony PCR, followed by DNA sequencing. The resulting interactions were retested in quadruplicate for each bait-prey combination using fresh yeast bait and prey cultures from archival stocks, and interactions that were either non-reproducible or auto-activated were eliminated (Supplementary Fig. 1d)9, 14. By this approach, we systematically screened 3,305 baits against 3,606 preys, thus covering ~70% of E. coli interactome space (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2).When screening millions of protein pairs, the search space needs to be sampled multiple times to detect all the interactions that are detectable by the assay used 5, 15. Therefore, to estimate the sampling sensitivity of our Y2H system, we performed eight independent sampling screens using 92 baits against the entire prey library (3,606 proteins), resulting in saturation in the number of detectable interactions (Fig. 1e). Based on this analysis, we estimated a mean sampling sensitivity of 69% (+/− 2.5%) for a combination of two screens; at least five-fold sampling would be required to obtain 90% saturation (Fig. 1e). We sampled the entire search space twice independently, resulting in 2,234 high-quality PPIs among 1,269 proteins (Supplementary Table 2). Nearly two-thirds (1,830 of 2,234) of these interactions have not been reported previously. Evaluation against a PRS of 212 interacting pairs indicated a sensitivity of ~21% (44 of 212) in the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1a), which is comparable to the sensitivity attained in Y2H screening in yeast 5.To assess independently the quality of these PPIs, we evaluated 114 randomly selected PPIs by two different methods: co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and LUMIER 16 assays (Online Methods). About 86% (99/114) of the Y2H interactions were confirmed by at least one of these biochemical methods (Fig. 2a, b, c and Supplementary Table 3), consistent with previously published Y2H validation rates 4, 5.Of the 2,234 PPIs reported in this study, 239 are supported by manually curated PPIs from the literature10, 11, and another 165 are supported by AP-MS studies 1–3 (Fig. 2d). The limited overlap with the literature data is mainly due to low Y2H assay sensitivity (that is, many false-negatives) rather than low specificity (that is, false-positives) (Fig. 1c), consistent with the low overlap observed in the yeast interactome5.We have shown previously that the Y2H system can be used effectively to analyze direct interactions among proteins within a complex 17. Assessing our Y2H interactions against structures of E. coli protein complexes from the Protein Data Bank 18 (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b, c, d and Supplementary Table 4) revealed that >90% (101/110) of interactions among complex subunits corresponded to direct PPIs (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 4) 1–3. We then tested 227 putative E. coli protein complexes containing three or more protein subunits 3 by pair-wise Y2H assays of the subunits. To enhance assay sensitivity, the Y2H screening was conducted using both N-terminal and C-terminal fusion bait proteins 13. By this method, we identified a total of 458 PPIs between the subunits of the complexes (Fig. 2e, Supplementary Fig. 4 and Online Methods).

High-throughput Y2H screening

The Y2H screening was conducted with pools of 3 baits, and positive yeast colonies were selected on synthetic media plates (Supplementary Fig. 1c and Online Methods). The interacting preys were identified by yeast colony PCR, followed by DNA sequencing. The resulting interactions were retested in quadruplicate for each bait-prey combination using fresh yeast bait and prey cultures from archival stocks, and interactions that were either non-reproducible or auto-activated were eliminated (Supplementary Fig. 1d)9, 14. By this approach, we systematically screened 3,305 baits against 3,606 preys, thus covering ~70% of E. coli interactome space (Fig. 1d and Supplementary Fig. 2).

When screening millions of protein pairs, the search space needs to be sampled multiple times to detect all the interactions that are detectable by the assay used 5, 15. Therefore, to estimate the sampling sensitivity of our Y2H system, we performed eight independent sampling screens using 92 baits against the entire prey library (3,606 proteins), resulting in saturation in the number of detectable interactions (Fig. 1e). Based on this analysis, we estimated a mean sampling sensitivity of 69% (+/− 2.5%) for a combination of two screens; at least five-fold sampling would be required to obtain 90% saturation (Fig. 1e). We sampled the entire search space twice independently, resulting in 2,234 high-quality PPIs among 1,269 proteins (Supplementary Table 2). Nearly two-thirds (1,830 of 2,234) of these interactions have not been reported previously. Evaluation against a PRS of 212 interacting pairs indicated a sensitivity of ~21% (44 of 212) in the pGBGT7g-pGADT7g vector system (Supplementary Table 1a), which is comparable to the sensitivity attained in Y2H screening in yeast 5.

To assess independently the quality of these PPIs, we evaluated 114 randomly selected PPIs by two different methods: co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and LUMIER 16 assays (Online Methods). About 86% (99/114) of the Y2H interactions were confirmed by at least one of these biochemical methods (Fig. 2a, b, c and Supplementary Table 3), consistent with previously published Y2H validation rates 4, 5.

Of the 2,234 PPIs reported in this study, 239 are supported by manually curated PPIs from the literature10, 11, and another 165 are supported by AP-MS studies 1–3 (Fig. 2d). The limited overlap with the literature data is mainly due to low Y2H assay sensitivity (that is, many false-negatives) rather than low specificity (that is, false-positives) (Fig. 1c), consistent with the low overlap observed in the yeast interactome5.

We have shown previously that the Y2H system can be used effectively to analyze direct interactions among proteins within a complex 17. Assessing our Y2H interactions against structures of E. coli protein complexes from the Protein Data Bank 18 (Supplementary Fig. 3a, b, c, d and Supplementary Table 4) revealed that >90% (101/110) of interactions among complex subunits corresponded to direct PPIs (Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 4) 1–3. We then tested 227 putative E. coli protein complexes containing three or more protein subunits 3 by pair-wise Y2H assays of the subunits. To enhance assay sensitivity, the Y2H screening was conducted using both N-terminal and C-terminal fusion bait proteins 13. By this method, we identified a total of 458 PPIs between the subunits of the complexes (Fig. 2e, Supplementary Fig. 4 and Online Methods).

High-quality binary interaction networkTo obtain a more comprehensive binary E. coli interactome, we combined the high-quality Y2H data set from this study with binary interactions that we manually curated from the literature 10, 11, hereinafter referred to as “combined-binary” dataset. This dataset contains 3,946 binary interactions among 2,048 proteins (Supplementary Table 5, Fig. 3). Based on our precision, completeness, assay- and sampling-sensitivity measures, we estimated that the total size of the E. coli interactome is on the order of ~10,000 PPIs (Supplementary Results). The combined-binary dataset described in this study comprising ~39% of the whole E. coli binary interactome. We estimate that approximately half of the interactions in the combined-binary interaction dataset likely to be between the components of multimeric complexes (that is, complexes inferred from AP-MS data3 and complexes from EcoCyc http://ecocyc.org/, and half are transient binary interactions (Supplementary Results).Like other biological networks 19, both the combined-binary interactions and the combined AP-MS data sets2, 3 are scale-free; that is, many interacting proteins have low connectivity and few have high connectivity (Supplementary Fig. 5a). As with the yeast binary interactome 5, we found that AP-MS interactions were enriched (p = 1.8 × 10−31) in essential protein pairs (Supplementary Fig. 5b), and essential proteins were better connected (Fig. 4a) in the AP-MS network than in the combined-binary interaction network. Moreover, the path length between proteins in the combined-binary interaction network was longer (> 5) compared to the combined AP-MS network (Fig. 4b), reflecting the tendency of Y2H to detect more interactions outside of protein complexes than AP-MS5.As in yeast 20, we found that physically interacting proteins from the combined-binary dataset and from the combined AP-MS dataset were more likely to have highly correlated genetic interactions (GI) profiles (p ≤ 0.05) than randomly selected protein pairs (Fig. 4c). Physically interacting protein pairs in both datasets also showed positively correlated co-expression (p ≤ 0.05) and phenotypic (p ≤ 0.05) profiles (Fig. 4d, e) 5. Moreover, the average semantic similarity 21 of Gene Ontology (GO) annotations in the combined-binary PPI network was comparable to that of the combined AP-MS network, suggesting that the binary PPIs are as functionally coherent as the AP-MS-derived PPIs (Fig. 4f).

High-quality binary interaction network

To obtain a more comprehensive binary E. coli interactome, we combined the high-quality Y2H data set from this study with binary interactions that we manually curated from the literature 10, 11, hereinafter referred to as “combined-binary” dataset. This dataset contains 3,946 binary interactions among 2,048 proteins (Supplementary Table 5, Fig. 3). Based on our precision, completeness, assay- and sampling-sensitivity measures, we estimated that the total size of the E. coli interactome is on the order of ~10,000 PPIs (Supplementary Results). The combined-binary dataset described in this study comprising ~39% of the whole E. coli binary interactome. We estimate that approximately half of the interactions in the combined-binary interaction dataset likely to be between the components of multimeric complexes (that is, complexes inferred from AP-MS data3 and complexes from EcoCyc http://ecocyc.org/, and half are transient binary interactions (Supplementary Results).

Like other biological networks 19, both the combined-binary interactions and the combined AP-MS data sets2, 3 are scale-free; that is, many interacting proteins have low connectivity and few have high connectivity (Supplementary Fig. 5a). As with the yeast binary interactome 5, we found that AP-MS interactions were enriched (p = 1.8 × 10−31) in essential protein pairs (Supplementary Fig. 5b), and essential proteins were better connected (Fig. 4a) in the AP-MS network than in the combined-binary interaction network. Moreover, the path length between proteins in the combined-binary interaction network was longer (> 5) compared to the combined AP-MS network (Fig. 4b), reflecting the tendency of Y2H to detect more interactions outside of protein complexes than AP-MS5.

As in yeast 20, we found that physically interacting proteins from the combined-binary dataset and from the combined AP-MS dataset were more likely to have highly correlated genetic interactions (GI) profiles (p ≤ 0.05) than randomly selected protein pairs (Fig. 4c). Physically interacting protein pairs in both datasets also showed positively correlated co-expression (p ≤ 0.05) and phenotypic (p ≤ 0.05) profiles (Fig. 4d, e) 5. Moreover, the average semantic similarity 21 of Gene Ontology (GO) annotations in the combined-binary PPI network was comparable to that of the combined AP-MS network, suggesting that the binary PPIs are as functionally coherent as the AP-MS-derived PPIs (Fig. 4f).

Protein complex topology of the E. coli interactomeAP-MS-derived complexes do not provide information about the internal topology of multi-protein assemblies 22, 23. We therefore assessed whether Y2H experiments could be used to detect direct physical interactions within complexes identified by large-scale AP-MS experiments. We compiled a list of 227 E. coli protein complexes that have three components or more as identified in a large-scale AP-MS screen 3. Next, we identified interactions between subunits of these complexes in our Y2H data set and among literature-curated binary interactions (Supplementary Table 6 and Online Methods). We mapped 745 binary interactions within 203 complexes (Supplementary Fig. 6), of which 319 (43%) interactions were found in this study and 426 (57%) were obtained from the literature (108 of which were recapitulated in our Y2H study). We could deduce a putative complete internal topology for 15 multi-protein complexes; for these 15 complexes the binary interactions connected all components of the complex, therefore providing a hypothesis on its internal connectivity. For another 45 complexes we determined the putative internal topology of a sub-complex with at least three subunits, and for 46 complexes we determined the internal connections between pairs of subunits (Supplementary Fig. 6). For an additional 97 complexes we could only map homomeric interactions (that is interactions between multiple copies of the same protein). We found in the literature a structure (or a homology model) for 1,097 proteins and 202 interactions (Supplementary Fig. 7) within the complexes. For several complexes, we found a sub-complex of at least three components for which complete topology was revealed by experimental binary interaction data and structural data was available for all its subunits (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 8).

Protein complex topology of the E. coli interactome

AP-MS-derived complexes do not provide information about the internal topology of multi-protein assemblies 22, 23. We therefore assessed whether Y2H experiments could be used to detect direct physical interactions within complexes identified by large-scale AP-MS experiments. We compiled a list of 227 E. coli protein complexes that have three components or more as identified in a large-scale AP-MS screen 3. Next, we identified interactions between subunits of these complexes in our Y2H data set and among literature-curated binary interactions (Supplementary Table 6 and Online Methods). We mapped 745 binary interactions within 203 complexes (Supplementary Fig. 6), of which 319 (43%) interactions were found in this study and 426 (57%) were obtained from the literature (108 of which were recapitulated in our Y2H study). We could deduce a putative complete internal topology for 15 multi-protein complexes; for these 15 complexes the binary interactions connected all components of the complex, therefore providing a hypothesis on its internal connectivity. For another 45 complexes we determined the putative internal topology of a sub-complex with at least three subunits, and for 46 complexes we determined the internal connections between pairs of subunits (Supplementary Fig. 6). For an additional 97 complexes we could only map homomeric interactions (that is interactions between multiple copies of the same protein). We found in the literature a structure (or a homology model) for 1,097 proteins and 202 interactions (Supplementary Fig. 7) within the complexes. For several complexes, we found a sub-complex of at least three components for which complete topology was revealed by experimental binary interaction data and structural data was available for all its subunits (Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 8).

Integration of PPI and GI networksIdentification of physical interactions among proteins does not necessarily imply that all interacting partners belong to the same functional pathway24, 25. By contrast, genetic screens can elucidate functional relationships between genes26, 27. Analogous to the yeast synthetic genetic array approach 28, we have previously developed a high-throughput synthetic genetic array screening technology, termed eSGA 29 to map GI networks in E. coli to elucidate pathway-level relationships. Integration of this GI data with the PPI networks should provide information that is not attainable from either study alone29. Using a Markov clustering algorithm 30, we identified physically related groupings in the binary interaction network and overlaid with the currently available large-scale E. coli GIs datasets 24, 29, 31 (publically accessible at http://ecoli.med.utoronto.ca/esga; Supplementary Table 7) for the corresponding protein interactions to determine the functional relationships of individual proteins and multi-protein complexes in various pathways and processes (Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables 7, 8).This integrative analysis captured interactions that were missed by either one of the methods. For example, in the secretory pathway the inner membrane protein SecA is peripherally associated with the multi-subunit translocation apparatus SecYEG 32; Y2H alone captured the physical interaction between SecA and SecY and not by eSGA (Fig. 5a); however interactions between other Sec components missed by Y2H were detected as GIs by eSGA. Also, for components of the flagellum (e.g., fliN-cheR and fliA-fliI) (Fig. 5b), physical interactions among the proteins are overlaid by a negative phenotype in the GI network, consistent with their joint participation in flagellum assembly and motility33. Another example involves a sub-network of physically connected subunits of the ATP-dependent protease complex (ClpAX) known for their cooperative function in protein quality control 34. These had a positive GI phenotype (Fig. 5c), suggesting that they operate in the same pathway 28, 29, 35. Similarly, the Y2H interaction between the recently characterized outer membrane lipoprotein YcfM/LpoB and penicillin binding protein PbpG showed a strong positive interaction (Fig. 5d), consistent with a recently proposed regulatory role of YcfM in peptidoglycan synthesis 36

Integration of PPI and GI networks

Identification of physical interactions among proteins does not necessarily imply that all interacting partners belong to the same functional pathway24, 25. By contrast, genetic screens can elucidate functional relationships between genes26, 27. Analogous to the yeast synthetic genetic array approach 28, we have previously developed a high-throughput synthetic genetic array screening technology, termed eSGA 29 to map GI networks in E. coli to elucidate pathway-level relationships. Integration of this GI data with the PPI networks should provide information that is not attainable from either study alone29. Using a Markov clustering algorithm 30, we identified physically related groupings in the binary interaction network and overlaid with the currently available large-scale E. coli GIs datasets 24, 29, 31 (publically accessible at http://ecoli.med.utoronto.ca/esga; Supplementary Table 7) for the corresponding protein interactions to determine the functional relationships of individual proteins and multi-protein complexes in various pathways and processes (Fig. 5, Supplementary Tables 7, 8).

This integrative analysis captured interactions that were missed by either one of the methods. For example, in the secretory pathway the inner membrane protein SecA is peripherally associated with the multi-subunit translocation apparatus SecYEG 32; Y2H alone captured the physical interaction between SecA and SecY and not by eSGA (Fig. 5a); however interactions between other Sec components missed by Y2H were detected as GIs by eSGA. Also, for components of the flagellum (e.g., fliN-cheR and fliA-fliI) (Fig. 5b), physical interactions among the proteins are overlaid by a negative phenotype in the GI network, consistent with their joint participation in flagellum assembly and motility33. Another example involves a sub-network of physically connected subunits of the ATP-dependent protease complex (ClpAX) known for their cooperative function in protein quality control 34. These had a positive GI phenotype (Fig. 5c), suggesting that they operate in the same pathway 28, 29, 35. Similarly, the Y2H interaction between the recently characterized outer membrane lipoprotein YcfM/LpoB and penicillin binding protein PbpG showed a strong positive interaction (Fig. 5d), consistent with a recently proposed regulatory role of YcfM in peptidoglycan synthesis 36

Conservation of binary PPITo investigate the evolutionary significance of PPIs detected in E. coli with respect to other microbes, we examined the presence of PPI orthologs in other bacteria (Fig. 6a) by using the combined-binary interactions of E. coli and binary interactions reported for other bacteria in literature curated database10 and from the large scale bacterial interactome studies (Online Methods). Previous investigations have shown that interactions in yeast are conserved in worms37 and metazoan interactions are able to predict homologous connections in yeast 38. We found that interacting protein pairs from our study are highly conserved in bacteria that are closely related to E. coli but less so with increasing distance from E. coli in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 6a). However, the opposite trend was observed when interactions between proteins encoded by essential E. coli genes were considered (Fig. 6b). We also found that interactions between the subunits of protein complexes are more conserved than interactions between proteins belonging to different complexes (Fig. 6b).

Conservation of binary PPI

To investigate the evolutionary significance of PPIs detected in E. coli with respect to other microbes, we examined the presence of PPI orthologs in other bacteria (Fig. 6a) by using the combined-binary interactions of E. coli and binary interactions reported for other bacteria in literature curated database10 and from the large scale bacterial interactome studies (Online Methods). Previous investigations have shown that interactions in yeast are conserved in worms37 and metazoan interactions are able to predict homologous connections in yeast 38. We found that interacting protein pairs from our study are highly conserved in bacteria that are closely related to E. coli but less so with increasing distance from E. coli in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 6a). However, the opposite trend was observed when interactions between proteins encoded by essential E. coli genes were considered (Fig. 6b). We also found that interactions between the subunits of protein complexes are more conserved than interactions between proteins belonging to different complexes (Fig. 6b).

DISCUSSIONOur study substantially expands the available resources for protein complexes and their connections to pathways in the model gram-negative bacterium, E. coli. Y2H and AP-MS studies provide largely complementary information about the interactome and both are essential to obtaining complete protein networks in prokaryotic biology. The current dataset confirms some known binary interactions and contains many novel PPIs within and between complexes.Binary PPI interaction maps also provide information about the internal topology of multimeric protein complexes, which should allow for their structural modeling, once the stoichiometry of each component is known22. This is illustrated by the structures of two well-characterized E. coli complexes: RecBCD 39 and the F1 portion of the ATP synthase complex 40 containing three copies of each of its subunits (alpha, AtpA and beta, AtpD) (Fig. 3).Comparison of the binary interactome to complexes found through AP-MS and in the EcoCyc database (Supplementary Tables 9 and 10) suggests that the majority of PPIs (2128) are not in complexes. We suspect that many protein complexes remain undetected and may form only under certain growth conditions; the Y2H assay may detect PPIs irrespective of the growth condition in E. coli as it is carried out in yeast. Furthermore, the conditions used for affinity purification may preclude the detection of less stable interactions that are detectable by Y2H. Our data suggest that there are distinct subsets of interactions found in complexes or as more transient binary interactions. Based on the assessment of the the total number of interactions in each group, we estimate that the combined total is on the order of 9,200 to 11,400 interactions (Supplementary Results). To our knowledge, this study represents the largest experimentally derived catalog to date of the E. coli binary interaction network and thus is a draft reference of the basic physical wiring network of an evolutionarily well conserved model microbe.

Our study substantially expands the available resources for protein complexes and their connections to pathways in the model gram-negative bacterium, E. coli. Y2H and AP-MS studies provide largely complementary information about the interactome and both are essential to obtaining complete protein networks in prokaryotic biology. The current dataset confirms some known binary interactions and contains many novel PPIs within and between complexes.

Binary PPI interaction maps also provide information about the internal topology of multimeric protein complexes, which should allow for their structural modeling, once the stoichiometry of each component is known22. This is illustrated by the structures of two well-characterized E. coli complexes: RecBCD 39 and the F1 portion of the ATP synthase complex 40 containing three copies of each of its subunits (alpha, AtpA and beta, AtpD) (Fig. 3).

Comparison of the binary interactome to complexes found through AP-MS and in the EcoCyc database (Supplementary Tables 9 and 10) suggests that the majority of PPIs (2128) are not in complexes. We suspect that many protein complexes remain undetected and may form only under certain growth conditions; the Y2H assay may detect PPIs irrespective of the growth condition in E. coli as it is carried out in yeast. Furthermore, the conditions used for affinity purification may preclude the detection of less stable interactions that are detectable by Y2H. Our data suggest that there are distinct subsets of interactions found in complexes or as more transient binary interactions. Based on the assessment of the the total number of interactions in each group, we estimate that the combined total is on the order of 9,200 to 11,400 interactions (Supplementary Results). To our knowledge, this study represents the largest experimentally derived catalog to date of the E. coli binary interaction network and thus is a draft reference of the basic physical wiring network of an evolutionarily well conserved model microbe.

Supplementary Material12

Supplementary Material
