---
pmid: '24462683'
title: Interaction between nucleophosmin and HBV core protein increases HBV capsid
  assembly.
authors:
- Jeong H
- Cho MH
- Park SG
- Jung G
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.020
---

# Interaction between nucleophosmin and HBV core protein increases HBV capsid assembly.
**Authors:** Jeong H, Cho MH, Park SG, Jung G
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.020)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 18;588(6):851-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.020. Epub 
2014 Jan 23.

Interaction between nucleophosmin and HBV core protein increases HBV capsid 
assembly.

Jeong H(1), Cho MH(1), Park SG(2), Jung G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: drjung@snu.ac.kr.

Host factors are involved in Hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome replication and 
capsid formation during the viral life cycle. A host factor, nucleophosmin 
(B23), was found to bind to HBV core protein dimers, but its functional role has 
not been studied. This interaction promoted HBV capsid assembly and decreased 
the degree of capsid dissociation when subjected to denaturant treatments in 
vitro. In addition, inhibition of B23 reduced intracellular capsid formation 
resulting in a decrease of HBV production in HepG2.2.15 cells. These results 
provide important evidence that B23 acts on core capsid assembly via its 
interaction with HBV core dimers.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.020
PMID: 24462683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
