---
pmid: '19043417'
title: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding
  mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2.
authors:
- Pannicke U
- Hönig M
- Hess I
- Friesen C
- Holzmann K
- Rump EM
- Barth TF
- Rojewski MT
- Schulz A
- Boehm T
- Friedrich W
- Schwarz K
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.265
---

# Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2.
**Authors:** Pannicke U, Hönig M, Hess I, Friesen C, Holzmann K, Rump EM, Barth TF, Rojewski MT, Schulz A, Boehm T, Friedrich W, Schwarz K
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.265](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.265)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):101-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.265. Epub 2008 Nov 30.

Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding 
mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2.

Pannicke U(1), Hönig M, Hess I, Friesen C, Holzmann K, Rump EM, Barth TF, 
Rojewski MT, Schulz A, Boehm T, Friedrich W, Schwarz K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Human severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCID) are phenotypically and 
genotypically heterogeneous diseases. Reticular dysgenesis is the most severe 
form of inborn SCID. It is characterized by absence of granulocytes and almost 
complete deficiency of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, hypoplasia of the thymus 
and secondary lymphoid organs, and lack of innate and adaptive humoral and 
cellular immune functions, leading to fatal septicemia within days after birth. 
In bone marrow of individuals with reticular dysgenesis, myeloid differentiation 
is blocked at the promyelocytic stage, whereas erythro- and megakaryocytic 
maturation is generally normal. These features exclude a defect in hematopoietic 
stem cells but point to a unique aberration of the myelo-lymphoid lineages. The 
dramatic clinical course of reticular dysgenesis and its unique hematological 
phenotype have spurred interest in the unknown genetic basis of this syndrome. 
Here we show that the gene encoding the mitochondrial energy metabolism enzyme 
adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) is mutated in individuals with reticular dysgenesis. 
Knockdown of zebrafish ak2 also leads to aberrant leukocyte development, 
stressing the evolutionarily conserved role of AK2. Our results provide in vivo 
evidence for AK2 selectivity in leukocyte differentiation. These observations 
suggest that reticular dysgenesis is the first example of a human 
immunodeficiency syndrome that is causally linked to energy metabolism and that 
can therefore be classified as a mitochondriopathy.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.265
PMID: 19043417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
