---
pmid: '24413057'
title: Temporal orchestration of repressive chromatin modifiers by circadian clock
  Period complexes.
authors:
- Duong HA
- Weitz CJ
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4227600
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2746
---

# Temporal orchestration of repressive chromatin modifiers by circadian clock Period complexes.
**Authors:** Duong HA, Weitz CJ
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2746](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2746)
**PMC:** [PMC4227600](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4227600/)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014 Feb;21(2):126-32. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2746. Epub 2014 
Jan 12.

Temporal orchestration of repressive chromatin modifiers by circadian clock 
Period complexes.

Duong HA(1), Weitz CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

The mammalian circadian clock is built on a molecular feedback loop in which the 
Period (PER) proteins, acting in a large, poorly understood complex, repress 
Clock-Bmal1, the transcription factor driving their expression. We found that 
mouse PER complexes include the histone methyltransferase HP1γ-Suv39h. PER 
proteins recruited HP1γ-Suv39h to the Per1 and Per2 promoters, and HP1γ-Suv39h 
proved important for circadian di- and trimethylation of histone H3 Lys9 (H3K9) 
at the Per1 promoter, feedback repression and clock function. HP1γ-Suv39h was 
recruited to the Per1 and Per2 promoters ~4 h after recruitment of HDAC1, a 
PER-associated protein previously implicated in clock function and H3K9 
deacetylation at the Per1 promoter. PER complexes containing HDAC1 or 
HP1γ-Suv39h appeared to be physically separable. Circadian clock negative 
feedback by the PER complex thus involves dynamic, ordered recruitment of 
repressive chromatin modifiers to DNA-bound Clock-Bmal1.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2746
PMCID: PMC4227600
PMID: 24413057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
