---
pmid: '19318129'
title: Importin alpha is an essential nuclear import carrier adaptor required for
  proper sexual and asexual development and secondary metabolism in Aspergillus nidulans.
authors:
- Araújo-Bazán L
- Dhingra S
- Chu J
- Fernández-Martínez J
- Calvo AM
- Espeso EA
journal: Fungal Genet Biol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.006
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Importin alpha is an essential nuclear import carrier adaptor required for proper sexual and asexual development and secondary metabolism in Aspergillus nidulans.
**Authors:** Araújo-Bazán L, Dhingra S, Chu J, Fernández-Martínez J, Calvo AM, Espeso EA
**Journal:** Fungal Genet Biol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.006)

## Abstract

1. Fungal Genet Biol. 2009 Jun-Jul;46(6-7):506-15. doi:
10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.006.  Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Importin alpha is an essential nuclear import carrier adaptor required for 
proper sexual and asexual development and secondary metabolism in Aspergillus 
nidulans.

Araújo-Bazán L(1), Dhingra S, Chu J, Fernández-Martínez J, Calvo AM, Espeso EA.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (C.S.I.C.), Microbiología Molecular, 
Madrid, Spain.

In eukaryotes, the principal nuclear import pathway is driven by the importin 
alpha/beta1 heterodimer. KapA, the Aspergillus nidulans importin alpha, is an 
essential protein. We generated a conditional allele, kapA31, mimicking the 
srp1-31 allele in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. KapA31 carries a Ser111Phe amino 
acid substitution which, at the restrictive temperature of 42 degrees C, reduces 
nuclear import of cargos containing classical nuclear-localization-sequences, 
cNLS. Using kapA31, we have demonstrated the role of the importin alpha in the 
nuclear accumulation of the light-dependent developmental regulator VeA. KapA 
have additional tasks in the cell, as reported for other members of the importin 
alpha family. KapA participates at different regulatory stages of asexual and 
sexual development, being required for the completion of both reproductive 
cycles with the formation of conidiospores and ascospores, respectively. 
Finally, KapA also mediates in different pathways of secondary metabolism having 
a dual role: positively for penicillin production and negatively for mycotoxin 
biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.006
PMID: 19318129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
