---
pmid: '24845384'
title: Deubiquitination and stabilization of T-bet by USP10.
authors:
- Pan L
- Chen Z
- Wang L
- Chen C
- Li D
- Wan H
- Li B
- Shi G
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037
---

# Deubiquitination and stabilization of T-bet by USP10.
**Authors:** Pan L, Chen Z, Wang L, Chen C, Li D, Wan H, Li B, Shi G
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 4;449(3):289-94. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037. Epub 2014 May 17.

Deubiquitination and stabilization of T-bet by USP10.

Pan L(1), Chen Z(2), Wang L(1), Chen C(2), Li D(2), Wan H(1), Li B(3), Shi G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular 
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200031, PR China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular 
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200031, PR China. 
Electronic address: binli@sibs.ac.cn.
(4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Rui Jin Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, PR China. Electronic address: 
shiguochao@hotmail.com.

The T-box transcriptional factor T-bet is crucial in the development, 
differentiation and function of Th1 cells. It drives Th1 immune response 
primarily through promoting expression of Th1 hallmark cytokine IFN-γ. Although 
T-bet was found associated with many immune-mediated diseases such as asthma and 
systemic sclerosis, little is known about the regulation of T-bet stability and 
function. Here we identified USP10, a carboxyl-terminal ubiquitin-processing 
protease, could interact with T-bet in the nucleus. Overexpression of USP10 
directly inhibited T-bet ubiquitination and increased the expression of T-bet. 
We further confirmed Quercetin, a reported inhibitor of T-bet, could target 
USP10. Quercetin treatment downregulated USP10 and promoted T-bet degradation in 
a proteasome dependent way. Moreover, we found USP10 expression was upregulated 
in asthmatic patient PBMC, suggesting USP10 may maintain high level of T-bet and 
IFN-γ to fight against Th2-dominated inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.037
PMID: 24845384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
