---
pmid: '20037141'
title: Inhibition of ERK1/2 and activation of liver X receptor synergistically induce
  macrophage ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux.
authors:
- Zhou X
- Yin Z
- Guo X
- Hajjar DP
- Han J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2825427
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.073601
---

# Inhibition of ERK1/2 and activation of liver X receptor synergistically induce macrophage ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux.
**Authors:** Zhou X, Yin Z, Guo X, Hajjar DP, Han J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M109.073601](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.073601)
**PMC:** [PMC2825427](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2825427/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6316-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.073601. Epub
2009  Dec 25.

Inhibition of ERK1/2 and activation of liver X receptor synergistically induce 
macrophage ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux.

Zhou X(1), Yin Z, Guo X, Hajjar DP, Han J.

Author information:
(1)Colleges of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1), a molecule mediating free 
cholesterol efflux from peripheral tissues to apoAI and high density lipoprotein 
(HDL), inhibits the formation of lipid-laden macrophage/foam cells and the 
development of atherosclerosis. ERK1/2 are important signaling molecules 
regulating cellular growth and differentiation. The ERK1/2 signaling pathway is 
implicated in cardiac development and hypertrophy. However, the role of ERK1/2 
in the development of atherosclerosis, particularly in macrophage cholesterol 
homeostasis, is unknown. In this study, we investigated the effects of ERK1/2 
activity on macrophage ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux. Compared with a 
minor effect by inhibition of other kinases, inhibition of ERK1/2 significantly 
increased macrophage cholesterol efflux to apoAI and HDL. In contrast, 
activation of ERK1/2 reduced macrophage cholesterol efflux and ABCA1 expression. 
The increased cholesterol efflux by ERK1/2 inhibitors was associated with the 
increased ABCA1 levels and the binding of apoAI to cells. The increased ABCA1 by 
ERK1/2 inhibitors was due to increased ABCA1 mRNA and protein stability. The 
induction of ABCA1 expression and cholesterol efflux by ERK1/2 inhibitors was 
concentration-dependent. The mechanism study indicated that activation of liver 
X receptor (LXR) had little effect on ERK1/2 expression and activation. ERK1/2 
inhibitors had no effect on macrophage LXRalpha/beta expression, whereas they 
did not influence the activation or the inhibition of the ABCA1 promoter by LXR 
or sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP). However, inhibition of 
ERK1/2 and activation of LXR synergistically induced macrophage cholesterol 
efflux and ABCA1 expression. Our data suggest that ERK1/2 activity can play an 
important role in macrophage cholesterol trafficking.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.073601
PMCID: PMC2825427
PMID: 20037141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
