---
pmid: '11551923'
title: CD22 regulates B cell receptor-mediated signals via two domains that independently
  recruit Grb2 and SHP-1.
authors:
- Otipoby KL
- Draves KE
- Clark EA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105446200
---

# CD22 regulates B cell receptor-mediated signals via two domains that independently recruit Grb2 and SHP-1.
**Authors:** Otipoby KL, Draves KE, Clark EA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M105446200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M105446200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):44315-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M105446200. Epub 
2001 Sep 10.

CD22 regulates B cell receptor-mediated signals via two domains that 
independently recruit Grb2 and SHP-1.

Otipoby KL(1), Draves KE, Clark EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
98195, USA. kotipoby@u.washington.edu

Recognition of antigen by the B cell antigen receptor (BCR) determines the 
subsequent fate of a B cell and is regulated in part by the involvement of other 
surface molecules, termed coreceptors. CD22 is a B cell-restricted coreceptor 
that gets rapidly tyrosyl-phosphorylated and recruits various signaling 
molecules to the membrane following BCR ligation. Although CD22 contains three 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs), only the two 
carboxyl-terminal ITIM tyrosines are required for efficient recruitment of the 
SHP-1 phosphatase after BCR ligation. Furthermore, Grb2 is inducibly recruited 
to CD22 in human and murine B cells. Unlike SHP-1, Grb2 recruitment to CD22 is 
not inhibited by specific doses of the Src family kinase-specific inhibitor PP1. 
The tyrosine residue in CD22 required for Grb2 recruitment (Tyr-828) is distinct 
and independent from the two ITIM tyrosines required for efficient SHP-1 
recruitment (Tyr-843 and Tyr-863). Individually both Lyn and Syk are required 
for maximal phosphorylation of CD22 following ligation of the BCR, and together 
Lyn and Syk are required for all of the constitutive and induced tyrosine 
phosphorylation of CD22. We propose that the cytoplasmic tail of CD22 contains 
two domains that regulate signal transduction pathways initiated by the BCR and 
B cell fate.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M105446200
PMID: 11551923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
