---
pmid: '8246913'
title: Cloning and expression of a human Ah receptor cDNA.
authors:
- Dolwick KM
- Schmidt JV
- Carver LA
- Swanson HI
- Bradfield CA
journal: Mol Pharmacol
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# Cloning and expression of a human Ah receptor cDNA.
**Authors:** Dolwick KM, Schmidt JV, Carver LA, Swanson HI, Bradfield CA
**Journal:** Mol Pharmacol (1993)

## Abstract

1. Mol Pharmacol. 1993 Nov;44(5):911-7.

Cloning and expression of a human Ah receptor cDNA.

Dolwick KM(1), Schmidt JV, Carver LA, Swanson HI, Bradfield CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611.

In this report, we describe the cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding a 
human Ah receptor, a basic/helix-loop-helix protein that mediates the toxic 
effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. A comparison of this human cDNA 
with a murine homologue (Ahb1 allele) indicates that the molecular mass 
variation observed between the receptors found in these two species results from 
hypervariability of amino acid sequences in the carboxyl termini (< 60% 
conserved over 450 amino acids). Differential usage of stop codons generates 
proteins with molecular masses that differ by 6 kDa. In contrast, the 
amino-terminal halves of these proteins are highly conserved and show 90% amino 
acid sequence identity. Northern blot analysis indicates that the human Ah 
receptor mRNA is expressed at its highest levels in placenta and is also highly 
expressed in lung, heart, pancreas, and liver, with lower levels of expression 
found in brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle. Expression of the human cDNA in a 
rabbit reticulocyte lysate system allowed functional analysis of ligand binding, 
agonist-induced and Ah receptor nuclear translocator-dependent DNA binding, and 
receptor stabilization by sodium molybdate.

PMID: 8246913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
