---
pmid: '26487724'
title: Protein Arginine Methyltransferase 6 (Prmt6) Is Essential for Early Zebrafish
  Development through the Direct Suppression of gadd45αa Stress Sensor Gene.
authors:
- Zhao XX
- Zhang YB
- Ni PL
- Wu ZL
- Yan YC
- Li YP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4697175
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.666347
---

# Protein Arginine Methyltransferase 6 (Prmt6) Is Essential for Early Zebrafish Development through the Direct Suppression of gadd45αa Stress Sensor Gene.
**Authors:** Zhao XX, Zhang YB, Ni PL, Wu ZL, Yan YC, Li YP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.666347](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.666347)
**PMC:** [PMC4697175](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4697175/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 1;291(1):402-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.666347. Epub 2015
 Oct 20.

Protein Arginine Methyltransferase 6 (Prmt6) Is Essential for Early Zebrafish 
Development through the Direct Suppression of gadd45αa Stress Sensor Gene.

Zhao XX(1), Zhang YB(1), Ni PL(1), Wu ZL(1), Yan YC(1), Li YP(2).

Author information:
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200031, China.
(2)From the State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory for 
Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 
200031, China Yipingli@sibcb.ac.cn.

Histone lysine methylation is important in early zebrafish development; however, 
the role of histone arginine methylation in this process remains unclear. 
H3R2me2a, generated by protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (Prmt6), is a 
repressive mark. To explore the role of Prmt6 and H3R2me2a during zebrafish 
embryogenesis, we identified the maternal characteristic of prmt6 and designed 
two prmt6-specific morpholino-oligos (MOs) to study its importance in early 
development, application of which led to early epiboly defects and significantly 
reduced the level of H3R2me2a marks. prmt6 mRNA could rescue the epiboly defects 
and the H3R2me2a reduction in the prmt6 morphants. Functionally, microarray data 
demonstrated that growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible, α, a (gadd45αa) was a 
significantly up-regulated gene in MO-treated embryos, the activity of which was 
linked to the activation of the p38/JNK pathway and apoptosis. Importantly, 
gadd45αa MO and p38/JNK inhibitors could partially rescue the defect of prmt6 
morphants, the downstream targets of Prmt6, and the apoptosis ratios of the 
prmt6 morphants. Moreover, the results of ChIP quantitative real time PCR and 
luciferase reporter assay indicated that gadd45αa is a repressive target of 
Prmt6. Taken together, these results suggest that maternal Prmt6 is essential to 
early zebrafish development by directly repressing gadd45αa.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.666347
PMCID: PMC4697175
PMID: 26487724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Histone lysine methylation is important in early zebrafish development; however, the role of histone arginine methylation in this process remains unclear. H3R2me2a, generated by protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (Prmt6), is a repressive mark. To explore the role of Prmt6 and H3R2me2a during zebrafish embryogenesis, we identified the maternal characteristic of prmt6 and designed two prmt6 -specific morpholino-oligos (MOs) to study its importance in early development, application of which led to early epiboly defects and significantly reduced the level of H3R2me2a marks. prmt6 mRNA could rescue the epiboly defects and the H3R2me2a reduction in the prmt6 morphants. Functionally, microarray data demonstrated that growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible, α, a ( gadd45 α a ) was a significantly up-regulated gene in MO-treated embryos, the activity of which was linked to the activation of the p38/JNK pathway and apoptosis. Importantly, gadd45 α a MO and p38/JNK inhibitors could partially rescue the defect of prmt6 morphants, the downstream targets of Prmt6, and the apoptosis ratios of the prmt6 morphants. Moreover, the results of ChIP quantitative real time PCR and luciferase reporter assay indicated that gadd45 α a is a repressive target of Prmt6. Taken together, these results suggest that maternal Prmt6 is essential to early zebrafish development by directly repressing gadd45 α a .

Introduction

During embryogenesis, the embryo undergoes dramatic developmental changes. After fertilization, the embryo is engaged in a rapid and synchronous series of cleavages, which are absent of gene transcription and instead regulated by maternal mRNA and proteins. At a certain critical period thereafter, the cell cycle becomes longer and asynchronous, zygotic genome activation starts, and maternal materials begin to degrade ( 1 , 2 ). This process is known as the maternal-zygotic transition in all animals, paralleling the midblastula transition (MBT) 2 of zebrafish. At the end of this transition, epiboly, which is the spreading and thinning of blastomere cells to enclose the yolk cell and which has been reported to be controlled by many maternal factors ( 3 , 4 ), is initiated and plays an essential role in the progress of gastrulation. Therefore, maternal factors drive early embryogenesis, and a long standing issue in developmental biology is the identity of the maternal transcripts that are vital for early embryogenesis ( 5 – 7 ).

Early embryo development comes down to transcriptional activation and repression, which are precisely controlled by the state of the local chromatin ( 9 ). In this respect, histone methylation, including lysine and arginine methylation, might be an important post-translational modification involved in transcriptional regulation during early embryogenesis. In animal sperm, developmental genes are marked by histone lysine methylation, such as H3K4me2/3 and H3K27me3 in human and mouse spermatozoa ( 10 ) and H3K4me2/3, H3K27me3, H3K36me3, and H3K9me3 in zebrafish sperm ( 11 ). The modified chromatin in sperm could be transmitted to embryo through fertilization ( 8 , 11 , 12 ). Before the MBT, H3K4me3, H3K9me3, and H3K27me3 mark the zebrafish embryonic genome; they are transcriptionally silent and predict a propensity for transcriptional activation after the MBT ( 8 ). After the MBT, H3K4me3 levels increase and mark more than 80% of genes, including many inactive developmental regulatory genes that are also marked by H3K27me3, poising genes for their transcription ( 13 ).

Histone arginine methylations are generated by proteinarginine methyltransferases (Prmts) ( 14 ). It is known that H3R2me2a is methylated primarily by Prmt6, preventing the binding of the SET1 methyltransferase complex or WDR5 ( 15 , 16 ). Therefore, H3R2me2a mutually antagonizes H3K4me3 ( 17 ) and is known as a transcription-repressive mark. Prmt6 has been reported to regulate numerous biological process, including transcription ( 18 – 21 ), DNA repair ( 22 ), DNA replication ( 23 ), and signal transduction ( 24 ). These functions agree with the nuclear localization of Prmt6 ( 25 ). To date, many target genes of Prmt6 have been reported, including HoxA2 ( 17 ), thrombospondin-1 ( 26 ), p21 ( 20 ), p27 ( 27 ), p53 ( 21 ), Oct4 and Nanog ( 28 ), CD41 ( 29 ), and IL-6 ( 24 ).

The literature discussed above highlights the importance of histone lysine methylation for embryonic development; however, the roles of histone arginine methylation in early embryogenesis remain unknown. The goal of this study was to explore the role of Prmt6 and H3R2me2a during zebrafish embryogenesis. Our results indicate that Prmt6 is essential for early zebrafish development and acts by repressing growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible, α, a ( gadd45 α a ).

Discussion

In this study, knockdown of Prmt6 using MO decreased the global level of H3R2me2a and led to early epiboly arrest, highlighting an important role for maternal Prmt6 in early zebrafish development. Our mechanistic studies revealed that the prmt6 MO directly up-regulated gadd45 α a and subsequently activated p38/JNK pathway signaling and induced apoptosis, thereby explaining the phenotype of prmt6 morphants.

Previous studies have demonstrated that Prmt6 plays important roles in numerous biological process ( 19 – 21 , 26 , 29 ). However, the importance of the H3R2me2a and Prmt6 in embryogenesis remains unknown. In this study, we initially detected the existence of the H3R2me2a mark during early zebrafish development ( Fig. 1 A ). This result is consistent with a previous report that four-cell-stage mouse embryos are characterized by high levels of H3R2me2a ( 41 ). In addition, we generated a zebrafish catalytically inactive Prmt6 form (VLD to KLA) by means of the reported human methylase-inactive PRMT6 mutant ( 23 ). This mutant could not increase the level of H3R2me2a in the prmt6 morphants as expected ( Fig. 2 F ). This is evidence of the conservation of Prmt6 between zebrafish and human ( 14 ).

Many direct targets of Prmt6 have been reported ( 19 – 21 , 26 ). In this study, we determined the misregulated genes in the prmt6 morphants through microarray analysis and proved that the up-regulation of gadd45 α a ( Fig. 3 E ), not the up-regulation of hsp70 and tpbl2 ( Fig. 3 F ), is responsible for the prmt6 morphants. Although the Gadd45αa protein level could not be detected because of a lack of an effective antibody, the results from qPCR ( Fig. 3 B ), quantitative ChIP ( Fig. 5 , B , D , and E ), and the luciferase reporter assay ( Fig. 5 F ) confirmed that gadd45 α a is directly regulated by Prmt6. The up-regulation of hsp70 might be a response to the activation of the p38/JNK pathway induced by the up-regulation of gadd45 α a , and the up-regulation of tpbl2 might be the result of the failure of degradation of maternal mRNA. This needs to be confirmed by further studies.

Of note, gadd45 α a MO could only partially rescue the prmt6 morphants, suggesting that additional targets of Prmt6 exist. Interestingly, there were 858 down-regulated genes in the prmt6 severe morphant that included zygotic genes and demonstrated the failure of zygotic genome activation. Therefore, whether Prmt6 directly contributes to zygotic genome activation through generating active modifications, such as H4R3me2a and H3R42me2a ( 14 , 18 ), deserves to be investigated. Additional ChIP-sequencing studies are required to determine whether the misregulated genes (see supplemental Table 1A ) are directly regulated by Prmt6.

The timing and the mediators involved at the start of apoptosis in different animals have been identified ( 42 – 44 ). In zebrafish, the apoptotic response is activated during development at 8 hpf ( 45 ) as zBik , a key factor in regulating apoptosis, is not expressed until 8 hpf ( 46 ). In this study, apoptosis was observed at 6 hpf in the prmt6 morphants ( Fig. 4 , B and F ) that was the result of the up-regulation of gadd45 α a by knockdown of Prmt6. These results reveal that the high maternal level of Prmt6 might be one of the reasons for the absence of apoptosis in early zebrafish embryos.

Given the specificities of SP600125 ( 47 ), JNK-IN-8, another JNK inhibitor, was also used and found to partially rescue the prmt6 morphants with results similar to SP600125 (data not shown). A high mortality rate of embryos incubated in 0.8 μ m SP600125 has been reported ( 48 ). However, this was not seen in our experiment ( Fig. 4 C ), which suggests that the amount of SP600125 injected (320 μ m ; 3 nl/embryo) was low. These results indicated that the rescue by SP600125 is specific.

In conclusion, this study identified that maternal Prmt6 is required for early embryogenesis by preventing apoptosis through direct suppression of gadd45 α a . Other reports demonstrate that PRMT6 is up-regulated in diverse cancer types, promoting growth and suppressing apoptosis, which is of potential significance for cancer therapeutics ( 19 , 20 , 26 ). These studies suggest that the balance of Prmt6 plays an important role in proliferation and apoptosis and that further study of this protein may prove of importance to developmental biology and anticancer research.
