---
pmid: '19164755'
title: Identification of small-molecule inducers of pancreatic beta-cell expansion.
authors:
- Wang W
- Walker JR
- Wang X
- Tremblay MS
- Lee JW
- Wu X
- Schultz PG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2635822
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811848106
---

# Identification of small-molecule inducers of pancreatic beta-cell expansion.
**Authors:** Wang W, Walker JR, Wang X, Tremblay MS, Lee JW, Wu X, Schultz PG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0811848106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0811848106)
**PMC:** [PMC2635822](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2635822/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 3;106(5):1427-32. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0811848106. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

Identification of small-molecule inducers of pancreatic beta-cell expansion.

Wang W(1), Walker JR, Wang X, Tremblay MS, Lee JW, Wu X, Schultz PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 28;106(17):7264.

To identify small molecules that can induce beta-cell replication, a large
chemical library was screened for proliferation of growth-arrested, reversibly
immortalized mouse beta cells by using an automated high-throughput screening
platform. A number of structurally diverse, active compounds were identified,
including phorbol esters, which likely act through protein kinase C, and a group
of thiophene-pyrimidines that stimulate beta-cell proliferation by activating
the Wnt signaling pathway. A group of dihydropyridine (DHP) derivatives was also
shown to reversibly induce beta-cell replication in vitro by activating L-type
calcium channels (LTCCs). Our data suggest that the LTCC agonist 2a affects the
expression of genes involved in cell cycle progression and cellular
proliferation. Furthermore, treatment of beta cells with both LTCC agonist 2a
and the Glp-1 receptor agonist Exendin-4 showed an additive effect on beta-cell
replication. The identification of small molecules that induce beta-cell
proliferation suggests that it may be possible to reversibly expand other
quiescent cells to overcome deficits associated with degenerative and/or
autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0811848106
PMCID: PMC2635822
PMID: 19164755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
