---
pmid: '18164639'
title: Mutations of the E1beta subunit gene (PDHB) in four families with pyruvate
  dehydrogenase deficiency.
authors:
- Okajima K
- Korotchkina LG
- Prasad C
- Rupar T
- Phillips JA 3rd
- Ficicioglu C
- Hertecant J
- Patel MS
- Kerr DS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.135
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Mutations of the E1beta subunit gene (PDHB) in four families with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Okajima K, Korotchkina LG, Prasad C, Rupar T, Phillips JA 3rd, Ficicioglu C, Hertecant J, Patel MS, Kerr DS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.135](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.135)

## Abstract

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Apr;93(4):371-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.135. Epub
 2008 Mar 4.

Mutations of the E1beta subunit gene (PDHB) in four families with pyruvate 
dehydrogenase deficiency.

Okajima K(1), Korotchkina LG, Prasad C, Rupar T, Phillips JA 3rd, Ficicioglu C, 
Hertecant J, Patel MS, Kerr DS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Inherited Disorders of Energy Metabolism, Rainbow Babies and 
Childrens Hospital, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Department of 
Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 
44106 6004, USA.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) deficiencies are a major cause of primary 
lactic acidosis. Most cases result from mutations of the gene for the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase E1alpha subunit (PDHA1), with fewer cases resulting from mutations 
in genes for E3, E3-binding protein, E2, and the E1beta subunit (PDHB). We have 
found four cases of PDHB mutations among 83 analyzed cases of PDC deficiency. In 
this series, PDHB mutations were found to be about 10% as frequent as PDHA1 
mutations. All cases were diagnosed by low PDC activity, with normal E2 and E3 
activities. These included a 6.5-year-old male (consanguineous, homozygous 
R36C); a neonatal female who died soon after birth, (compound heterozygous 
C306R/D319V), a 26-year-old female (heterozygous I142M/W165S), and a 13month old 
female (consanguineous, homozygous Y132C) who is a sibling of a previously 
published case. Their ethnic background is diverse (Caucasian, Arab, and African 
American descent). All cases had lactic acidosis and developmental delay. Three 
cases had agenesis of the corpus callosum, seizures, and hypotonia; one died 
within the first year of life. These clinical findings are similar to those of 
PDHA1 deficiency, except that ataxia was more frequent in PDHA1 cases and 
consanguinity was found only in PDHB families. PDC activity in lymphocytes from 
six parents is normal, who all are heterozygous carriers for the respective 
mutations. Immunoreactivity of E1beta was markedly reduced in one case and 
showed a slightly larger form of E1beta in one case. Computer analysis predicts 
that: R36C affects the interaction of several amino acids resulting in 
conformational change, C306R affects interaction of the two beta subunits, D319 
is in the interface of E1 and E2, I142M affects conformation around a K ion 
affecting stability of the beta subunit, W165S affects hydrophobic interaction 
between the beta subunits, and Y132C affects interaction between the beta 
subunits. All of these residues are conserved in E1beta across species, and Y132 
is also conserved in other TPP-requiring enzymes. These observations support the 
conclusion that these are pathogenic mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2007.10.135
PMID: 18164639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
