---
pmid: '19816106'
title: A novel plant cysteine-rich peptide family conferring cadmium tolerance to
  yeast and plants.
authors:
- Matsuda T
- Kuramata M
- Takahashi Y
- Kitagawa E
- Youssefian S
- Kusano T
journal: Plant Signal Behav
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2676753
doi: 10.4161/psb.4.5.8272
---

# A novel plant cysteine-rich peptide family conferring cadmium tolerance to yeast and plants.
**Authors:** Matsuda T, Kuramata M, Takahashi Y, Kitagawa E, Youssefian S, Kusano T
**Journal:** Plant Signal Behav (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4161/psb.4.5.8272](https://doi.org/10.4161/psb.4.5.8272)
**PMC:** [PMC2676753](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2676753/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Signal Behav. 2009 May;4(5):419-21. doi: 10.4161/psb.4.5.8272. Epub 2009
 May 25.

A novel plant cysteine-rich peptide family conferring cadmium tolerance to yeast 
and plants.

Matsuda T(1), Kuramata M, Takahashi Y, Kitagawa E, Youssefian S, Kusano T.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Comment on
    Plant Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;50(1):106-17. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcn175.

We have identified a novel cDNA clone, termed DcCDT1, from Digitaria ciliaris, 
that confers cadmium (Cd)-tolerance to yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). The 
gene encodes a predicted peptide of 55 amino acid residues of which 15 (27.3%) 
are cysteine residues. We found that monocotyledonous plants possess multiple 
DcCDT1 homologues, for example rice contains five DcCDT1 homologues (designated 
OsCDT1~5), whereas dicotyledonous plants, including Arabidopsis thaliana, 
Brassica rapa, poplar (Populus tremula x Populus alba) and Picea sitchensis, 
appear to possess only a single homologue. GFP fusion experiments demonstrate 
that DcCDT1 and OsCDT1 are targeted to both the plant cytoplasmic membranes and 
cell walls. Constitutive expression of DcCDT1 or OsCDT1 confers Cd-tolerance to 
transgenic A. thaliana plants by lowering the accumulation of Cd in the cells. 
The functions of the DcCDT1 family members are discussed in the light of these 
findings.

DOI: 10.4161/psb.4.5.8272
PMCID: PMC2676753
PMID: 19816106
