---
pmid: '38575788'
title: SCAF1 drives the compositional diversity of mammalian respirasomes.
authors:
- Vercellino I
- Sazanov LA
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2024'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41594-024-01255-0
---

# SCAF1 drives the compositional diversity of mammalian respirasomes.
**Authors:** Vercellino I, Sazanov LA
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41594-024-01255-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-024-01255-0)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2024 Jul;31(7):1061-1071. doi:
10.1038/s41594-024-01255-0.  Epub 2024 Apr 4.

SCAF1 drives the compositional diversity of mammalian respirasomes.

Vercellino I(1)(2), Sazanov LA(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
(2)Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(3)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria. 
sazanov@ist.ac.at.

Erratum in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2025 Nov;32(11):2371. doi: 10.1038/s41594-025-01721-3.

Supercomplexes of the respiratory chain are established constituents of the 
oxidative phosphorylation system, but their role in mammalian metabolism has 
been hotly debated. Although recent studies have shown that different 
tissues/organs are equipped with specific sets of supercomplexes, depending on 
their metabolic needs, the notion that supercomplexes have a role in the 
regulation of metabolism has been challenged. However, irrespective of the 
mechanistic conclusions, the composition of various high molecular weight 
supercomplexes remains uncertain. Here, using cryogenic electron microscopy, we 
demonstrate that mammalian (mouse) tissues contain three defined types of 
'respirasome', supercomplexes made of CI, CIII2 and CIV. The stoichiometry and 
position of CIV differs in the three respirasomes, of which only one contains 
the supercomplex-associated factor SCAF1, whose involvement in respirasome 
formation has long been contended. Our structures confirm that the 'canonical' 
respirasome (the C-respirasome, CICIII2CIV) does not contain SCAF1, which is 
instead associated to a different respirasome (the CS-respirasome), containing a 
second copy of CIV. We also identify an alternative respirasome (A-respirasome), 
with CIV bound to the 'back' of CI, instead of the 'toe'. This structural 
characterization of mouse mitochondrial supercomplexes allows us to hypothesize 
a mechanistic basis for their specific role in different metabolic conditions.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41594-024-01255-0
PMID: 38575788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
