---
pmid: '21817107'
title: MicroRNA-21 regulates vascular smooth muscle cell function via targeting tropomyosin
  1 in arteriosclerosis obliterans of lower extremities.
authors:
- Wang M
- Li W
- Chang GQ
- Ye CS
- Ou JS
- Li XX
- Liu Y
- Cheang TY
- Huang XL
- Wang SM
journal: Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229559
---

# MicroRNA-21 regulates vascular smooth muscle cell function via targeting tropomyosin 1 in arteriosclerosis obliterans of lower extremities.
**Authors:** Wang M, Li W, Chang GQ, Ye CS, Ou JS, Li XX, Liu Y, Cheang TY, Huang XL, Wang SM
**Journal:** Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229559](https://doi.org/10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229559)

## Abstract

1. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Sep;31(9):2044-53. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229559. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

MicroRNA-21 regulates vascular smooth muscle cell function via targeting 
tropomyosin 1 in arteriosclerosis obliterans of lower extremities.

Wang M(1), Li W, Chang GQ, Ye CS, Ou JS, Li XX, Liu Y, Cheang TY, Huang XL, Wang 
SM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Sep;31(9):1941-2. doi: 
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.231985.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to determine the expression signature and 
the potential role of microRNAs in human arteries with arteriosclerosis 
obliterans (ASO).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression profiles of microRNAs in human arteries with 
ASO and in normal control arteries were determined by quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction array. Among the 617 detected microRNAs, 
multiple microRNAs were aberrantly expressed in arteries with ASO. Some of these 
dysregulated microRNAs were further verified by quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Among them, microRNA-21 (miR-21) was 
mainly located in arterial smooth muscle cells (ASMCs) and was increased by more 
than 7-fold in ASO that was related to hypoxia inducible factor 1-α. In cultured 
human ASMCs, cell proliferation and migration were significantly decreased by 
inhibition of miR-21. 3'-Untranslated region luciferase assay confirmed that 
tropomyosin 1 was a target of miR-21 that was involved in miR-21-mediated 
cellular effects, such as cell shape modulation.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that miR-21 is able to regulate ASMC function by 
targeting tropomyosin 1. The hypoxia inducible factor-1 α/miR-21/tropomyosin 1 
pathway may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of ASO. These findings 
might provide a new therapeutic target for human ASO.

DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.229559
PMID: 21817107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
