---
pmid: '17568776'
title: Phosphorylation of Pirh2 by calmodulin-dependent kinase II impairs its ability
  to ubiquitinate p53.
authors:
- Duan S
- Yao Z
- Hou D
- Wu Z
- Zhu WG
- Wu M
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC1914097
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601749
---

# Phosphorylation of Pirh2 by calmodulin-dependent kinase II impairs its ability to ubiquitinate p53.
**Authors:** Duan S, Yao Z, Hou D, Wu Z, Zhu WG, Wu M
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601749](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601749)
**PMC:** [PMC1914097](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1914097/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3062-74. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601749. Epub 2007
Jun  14.

Phosphorylation of Pirh2 by calmodulin-dependent kinase II impairs its ability 
to ubiquitinate p53.

Duan S(1), Yao Z, Hou D, Wu Z, Zhu WG, Wu M.

Author information:
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of 
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 
People's Republic of China.

Although the recently identified Pirh2 protein is known as a p53-induced 
ubiquitin-protein E3 ligase, which negatively regulates p53, the detailed 
mechanism underlying the regulation of Pirh2 remains largely unknown. Here, we 
demonstrate that while Pirh2 is mostly detected in the phosphorylated form in 
normal tissues, it is predominantly present in the unphosphorylated form in 
majority of tumor cell lines and tissues examined. Phosphorylated Pirh2 is far 
more unstable than its unphosphorylated form. We further identified that 
Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK II) phosphorylates Pirh2 on residues 
Thr-154 and Ser-155. Phosphorylation of Pirh2 appears to be regulated through 
cell cycle-dependent mechanism. CaMK II-mediated Pirh2 phosphorylation abrogates 
its E3 ligase activity toward p53. Together, our data suggest that 
phosphorylation of Pirh2 may act as a fine-tuning to maintain the balance of 
p53-Pirh2 autoregulatory feedback loop, which facilitates the tight regulation 
of p53 stability and tumor suppression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601749
PMCID: PMC1914097
PMID: 17568776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Although the recently identified Pirh2 protein is known as a p53-induced ubiquitin-protein E3 ligase, which negatively regulates p53, the detailed mechanism underlying the regulation of Pirh2 remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that while Pirh2 is mostly detected in the phosphorylated form in normal tissues, it is predominantly present in the unphosphorylated form in majority of tumor cell lines and tissues examined. Phosphorylated Pirh2 is far more unstable than its unphosphorylated form. We further identified that Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK II) phosphorylates Pirh2 on residues Thr-154 and Ser-155. Phosphorylation of Pirh2 appears to be regulated through cell cycle-dependent mechanism. CaMK II-mediated Pirh2 phosphorylation abrogates its E3 ligase activity toward p53. Together, our data suggest that phosphorylation of Pirh2 may act as a fine-tuning to maintain the balance of p53-Pirh2 autoregulatory feedback loop, which facilitates the tight regulation of p53 stability and tumor suppression.

Introduction

The tumor suppressor p53 is known to exert its antiproliferative effects through induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis ( Vogelstein et al , 2000 ; Vousden, 2000 ). p53 can mediate apoptosis by transcriptionally activating pro-apoptotic genes like bax, puma, noxa or reversibly, repressing antiapoptotic genes such as bcl-2 and survivin ( Hoffman et al , 2002 ; Nakano and Vousden, 2001 ; Ryan et al , 2001 ; Wu et al , 2001 ). Besides its transcription-dependent functions, p53 can also promote apoptosis through transcription-independent mechanisms ( Chipuk et al , 2003 , 2004 ; Mihara et al , 2003 ). Tight regulation of p53 activity is crucial for maintaining normal cell growth and preventing tumorigenesis and occurs at multiple levels, including protein post-translational modification, stability and subcellular localization ( Giaccia and Kastan, 1998 ). Maintaining stability of p53 is mainly through the ubiquitin–proteasome system. Several E3 ubiquitin ligases for p53 have been identified, including Mdm2, Pirh2 and COP1 ( Corcoran et al , 2004 ; Dornan et al , 2004 ). Despite the well-established role of Mdm2, recent studies showed that Pirh2 is another critical negative regulator of p53 function. Pirh2 was initially cloned by Beitel et al (2002) as a novel androgen receptor N-terminal-interacting protein (ARNIP), and later, it was identified as an E3 ligase to promote p53 degradation ( Leng et al , 2003 ). Pirh2 is itself a p53-inducible gene product, and this dependence creates an autoregulatory feedback loop in which both the activity of p53 and the expression of Pirh2 are tightly regulated. As a short-lived protein, Pirh2 is a target for RING domain-dependent proteasomal degradation. Binding of Pirh2 to either histone acetylase TIP60 or measles virus phosphoprotein (MV P protein) was reported to efficiently increase its stability by inhibiting polyubiquitination of Pirh2 ( Logan et al , 2004 ; Chen et al , 2005 ). Collectively, the activities of Pirh2 are controlled at multiple levels, enabling its quick and accurate adjustment in protein level depending on specific needs.

Previous studies suggest that increased Pirh2 expression might affect lung tumorigenesis by reducing p53 activity ( Duan et al , 2004 ), indicating that the disruption of interaction between these two proteins may be a potential target for anticancer strategies. In the case of Mdm2 and p53, post-translational modifications on either protein can profoundly affect their interactions, and subsequently, their functions ( Alarcon-Vargas and Ronai, 2002 ; Meek and Knippschild, 2003 ; Moll and Petrenko, 2003 ). Compared with Mdm2, considerably less has been known for the post-translational modifications occurring on Pirh2. Here, we report that Calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMK II) is involved in catalyzing phosphorylation of Pirh2 at amino-acid residues Thr154 and Ser155. We also showed that the phosphorylation status of Pirh2 determines its E3 ligase activity toward p53. Majority of Pirh2 is phosphorylated in normal tissues, whereas in tumor tissues examined, Pirh2 is present predominantly in the unphosphorylated form. In addition, we determined that unphosphorylated, but not phosphorylated, Pirh2 was able to associate with p53 and mediate its degradation. Thus, our results define a coordinately controlled network involving CaMK II, Pirh2 and p53. CaMK II-involved phosphorylation of Pirh2 impairs its E3 ligase activity toward p53, leading to increase of p53 stability. This may explain why in most of tumor cells majority of Pirh2 has been found in their unphosphorylated form, resulting in a relatively low level of p53.

Discussion

The data presented here demonstrate a link between CaMK II-dependent phosphorylation of Pirh2 and the regulation of p53 activity, and suggest that the phosphorylation status of Pirh2 may be used as a molecular indicator of tumorigenesis.

Mass spectrometry analysis of Pirh2 revealed that it is a phosphoprotein. Using a yeast two-hybrid system, we have identified CaM as a novel Pirh2 binding partner. CaM is a ubiquitous intracellular second messenger, known to activate calcium/CaM-dependent protein kinases. Our experiments showed that Pirh2 is a direct substrate of CaMK II, a serine/threonine kinase that has been shown to be involved in a number of cellular activities ( Yang et al , 2003 ; Yadav et al , 2004 ; Nutt et al , 2005 ). Consistently, the level of phosphorylated Pirh2 detected in different cell lines and tissues matches remarkably well with the CaMK II activity, further indicating CaMK II regulates Pirh2. These findings, together with the previous report that CaMK II was downregulated in human tumor cells ( Tombes et al , 1999 ), might explain why in most malignant tissues examined, majority of Pirh2 is in its less phosphorylated form.

We further identified two functionally relevant CaMK II phosphorylation sites Thr154 and Ser155 located in the RING domain of Pirh2. It is noteworthy that these sites are well conserved among mammals. Phosphorylation of these sites leads to accelerated degradation of Pirh2 through yet-unknown mechanisms. One possible explanation is that phosphorylation at these sites may cause conformational change that makes Pirh2 more susceptible to degradation. Inhibition of Pirh2 phosphorylation alters its localization from cytosol to nucleus, where majority of p53 is located. This coincidence raises the possibility that unphosphorylated Pirh2 may be associated with p53 in the nucleus, and provides new insight into the mechanism of how Pirh2-mediated ubiquitination of p53 is regulated spatially and temporally in response to cellular signals such as UV irradiation and serum starvation.

It is interesting to note that Pirh2 is predominantly phosphorylated in G2/M phase of cell cycle, and during that time, the activity of CaMK II is also peaked, suggesting the phosphorylation of Pirh2 by CaMK II occurs mainly in G2/M phase. CaMK II has been observed in the mitotic apparatus of dividing cells and was suggested as a regulator of the G2/M transition ( Ohta et al , 1990 ; Matsumoto and Maller, 2002 ). Whether the phosphorylation of Pirh2 actively participates in the cell cycle regulation at G2/M phase, or is just a consequence of cell cycle arrest, is currently being under investigation. Importantly, expression of Pirh2 led to an increase in ubiquitination of p53 in G1 phase, but not G2/M phase ( Figure 6C ), suggesting that Pirh2-mediated p53 degradation preferentially occurs during G1 phase.

Previous studies established an autoregulatory feedback loop between p53 and Pirh2 ( Leng et al , 2003 ). We have demonstrated that the phosphorylation status of Pirh2 affects its E3 ligase activity toward p53. Phosphorylated Pirh2 fails to bind p53, and as a result, Pirh2 lost its ability to ubiquitinate p53. Hence, data presented in this study further support the following scenario: Pirh2 is under dual regulation by p53 and CaMK II. On one hand, Pirh2 is transcriptionally upregulated by p53, and on the other hand, it can be post-translationally modified by CaMK II via phosphorylation. Once Pirh2 is phosphorylated, Pirh2 becomes less stable and the association between Pirh2 and p53 is weakened. As a result, Pirh2 no longer functions as an E3 ligase toward p53, thereby enhancing the stability of p53. Reversibly, if Pirh2 remains less phosphorylated, as shown in the cancerous tissues, more p53 will be degraded and cells could become more susceptible to tumor formation. We further utilized mouse models to examine the ability of wt-Pirh2 or mutant Pirh2 to promote tumorigenicity in vivo . As expected, Pirh2/T154AS155A double mutant induced tumors with large volume, whereas phosphor-mimic mutant Pirh2/T154ES155D could only form tumors of small size, demonstrating that lack of Pirh2 phosphorylation could be one of the causes of tumorigenesis. Thus CaMK II-mediated phosphorylation acts as a fine-tuning in adjusting the level of Pirh2, which in turn, modulates polyubiquitination and degradation of p53 ( Figure 7C ).

Overall, these observations added knowledge to a delicate and tightly coordinated mechanism, which regulates the Pirh2–p53 interplay. Studies on regulation of Pirh2 may help identify valuable therapeutic targets for maximizing the p53 response to stress and sensitizing cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs.
