---
pmid: '11060313'
title: MAP-1, a novel proapoptotic protein containing a BH3-like motif that associates
  with Bax through its Bcl-2 homology domains.
authors:
- Tan KO
- Tan KM
- Chan SL
- Yee KS
- Bevort M
- Ang KC
- Yu VC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008955200
---

# MAP-1, a novel proapoptotic protein containing a BH3-like motif that associates with Bax through its Bcl-2 homology domains.
**Authors:** Tan KO, Tan KM, Chan SL, Yee KS, Bevort M, Ang KC, Yu VC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M008955200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M008955200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 26;276(4):2802-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M008955200. Epub 2000
 Nov 1.

MAP-1, a novel proapoptotic protein containing a BH3-like motif that associates 
with Bax through its Bcl-2 homology domains.

Tan KO(1), Tan KM, Chan SL, Yee KS, Bevort M, Ang KC, Yu VC.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 30 Medical Dr., Singapore 117609, 
Republic of Singapore.

A novel Bax-associating protein, named MAP-1 (Modulator of Apoptosis), has been 
identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen. MAP-1 contains a BH3-like (BH: Bcl-2 
homology) motif and mediates caspase-dependent apoptosis in mammalian cells when 
overexpressed. MAP-1 homodimerizes and associates with the proapoptotic Bax and 
the prosurvival Bcl-2 and Bcl-X(L) of the Bcl-2 family in vitro and in vivo in 
mammalian cells. Mutagenesis analyses revealed that the BH3-like domain in MAP-1 
is not required for its association with Bcl-X(L) but is required for 
association with Bax and for mediating apoptosis. Interestingly, in contrast to 
other Bax-associating proteins such as Bcl-X(L) and Bid, which require the BH3 
and BH1 domains of Bax, respectively, for binding, the binding of MAP-1 to Bax 
appears to require all three BH domains (BH1, BH2, and BH3) of Bax, because 
point mutation of the critical amino acid in any one of these domains is 
sufficient to abolish its binding to MAP-1. These data suggest that MAP-1 
mediates apoptosis through a mechanism that involves binding to Bax.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M008955200
PMID: 11060313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
