---
pmid: '16387653'
title: ING tumor suppressor proteins are critical regulators of chromatin acetylation
  required for genome expression and perpetuation.
authors:
- Doyon Y
- Cayrou C
- Ullah M
- Landry AJ
- Côté V
- Selleck W
- Lane WS
- Tan S
- Yang XJ
- Côté J
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.007
---

# ING tumor suppressor proteins are critical regulators of chromatin acetylation required for genome expression and perpetuation.
**Authors:** Doyon Y, Cayrou C, Ullah M, Landry AJ, Côté V, Selleck W, Lane WS, Tan S, Yang XJ, Côté J
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.007)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2006 Jan 6;21(1):51-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.007.

ING tumor suppressor proteins are critical regulators of chromatin acetylation 
required for genome expression and perpetuation.

Doyon Y(1), Cayrou C, Ullah M, Landry AJ, Côté V, Selleck W, Lane WS, Tan S, 
Yang XJ, Côté J.

Author information:
(1)Laval University Cancer Research Center, Hôtel-Dieu de Québec (CHUQ), Québec 
City, Québec G1R 2J6, Canada.

Members of the ING family of tumor suppressors regulate cell cycle progression, 
apoptosis, and DNA repair as important cofactors of p53. ING1 and ING3 are 
stable components of the mSin3A HDAC and Tip60/NuA4 HAT complexes, respectively. 
We now report the purification of the three remaining human ING proteins. While 
ING2 is in an HDAC complex similar to ING1, ING4 associates with the HBO1 HAT 
required for normal progression through S phase and the majority of histone H4 
acetylation in vivo. ING5 fractionates with two distinct complexes containing 
HBO1 or nucleosomal H3-specific MOZ/MORF HATs. These ING5 HAT complexes interact 
with the MCM helicase and are essential for DNA replication to occur during S 
phase. Our data also indicate that ING subunits are crucial for acetylation of 
chromatin substrates. Since INGs, HBO1, and MOZ/MORF contribute to oncogenic 
transformation, the multisubunit assemblies characterized here underscore the 
critical role of epigenetic regulation in cancer development.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.12.007
PMID: 16387653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
