---
pmid: '16531006'
title: Interaction of the amyloid precursor like protein 1 with the alpha2A-adrenergic
  receptor increases agonist-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase.
authors:
- Weber B
- Schaper C
- Scholz J
- Bein B
- Rodde C
- H Tonner P
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.017
---

# Interaction of the amyloid precursor like protein 1 with the alpha2A-adrenergic receptor increases agonist-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase.
**Authors:** Weber B, Schaper C, Scholz J, Bein B, Rodde C, H Tonner P
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.017)

## Abstract

1. Cell Signal. 2006 Oct;18(10):1748-57. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.017.

Interaction of the amyloid precursor like protein 1 with the alpha2A-adrenergic 
receptor increases agonist-mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase.

Weber B(1), Schaper C, Scholz J, Bein B, Rodde C, H Tonner P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Schwanenweg 21, 24105 Kiel, Germany. 
weber@anaesthesie.uni-kiel.de

Alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonists exert potent analgesic and sedative/hypnotic 
effects. In addition, they have been shown to be neuroprotective, but the 
mechanisms of these actions are still poorly defined. To isolate proteins that 
may control alpha2-adrenergic receptor function or trafficking, we performed a 
two-hybrid screen using the carboxy-terminal fourth intracellular tail of the 
alpha2A-adrenergic receptor as bait. This screen identified the amyloid 
precursor like protein 1 (APLP1), a homologue of the beta-amyloid precursor 
protein involved in Alzheimer's disease, as alpha2A-adrenergic receptor-binding 
protein. GST affinity chromatography revealed that APLP1 specifically interacts 
with all three human alpha2-adrenergic receptor subtypes and deletion mutant 
analysis confined the APLP1 domain involved in binding to alpha2-adrenergic 
receptors to the 13 amino acid residues Ser599-Ala611. Coimmunoprecipitations of 
transiently transfected cells with epitope-tagged APLP1 and alpha2-adrenergic 
receptors confirmed the interaction. Agonist treatment tended to increase the 
amount of alpha2A-adrenergic receptor associated with APLP1 while 
coimmunoprecipitations were not affected by the state of receptor 
phosphorylation or cotransfection of arrestin-3. Confocal laser microscopy 
showed that APLP1 causes a considerable shift of the alpha2A-adrenergic receptor 
localization from plasma membrane to intracellular compartments. Furthermore, 
cotransfection of alpha2A-adrenergic receptor and APLP1 into HEK293 cells 
significantly increased norepinephrine mediated inhibition of adenylate cyclase 
activity. These results suggest a possible role of APLP1 in regulation of 
alpha2A-adrenergic receptor trafficking. Moreover, we speculate that this 
interaction may present one mechanism by which alpha2-adrenergic receptor 
agonists exert their neuroprotective effects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.01.017
PMID: 16531006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
