---
pmid: '19136951'
title: Identification of a putative lysosomal cobalamin exporter altered in the cblF
  defect of vitamin B12 metabolism.
authors:
- Rutsch F
- Gailus S
- Miousse IR
- Suormala T
- Sagné C
- Toliat MR
- Nürnberg G
- Wittkampf T
- Buers I
- Sharifi A
- Stucki M
- Becker C
- Baumgartner M
- Robenek H
- Marquardt T
- Höhne W
- Gasnier B
- Rosenblatt DS
- Fowler B
- Nürnberg P
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ng.294
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of a putative lysosomal cobalamin exporter altered in the cblF defect of vitamin B12 metabolism.
**Authors:** Rutsch F, Gailus S, Miousse IR, Suormala T, Sagné C, Toliat MR, Nürnberg G, Wittkampf T, Buers I, Sharifi A, Stucki M, Becker C, Baumgartner M, Robenek H, Marquardt T, Höhne W, Gasnier B, Rosenblatt DS, Fowler B, Nürnberg P
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.294](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.294)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 2009 Feb;41(2):234-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.294. Epub 2009 Jan 11.

Identification of a putative lysosomal cobalamin exporter altered in the cblF 
defect of vitamin B12 metabolism.

Rutsch F(1), Gailus S, Miousse IR, Suormala T, Sagné C, Toliat MR, Nürnberg G, 
Wittkampf T, Buers I, Sharifi A, Stucki M, Becker C, Baumgartner M, Robenek H, 
Marquardt T, Höhne W, Gasnier B, Rosenblatt DS, Fowler B, Nürnberg P.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Münster University Children's Hospital, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Strasse 33, D-48149 Münster, Germany. 
rutschf@mednet.uni-muenster.de

Vitamin B(12) (cobalamin) is essential in animals for metabolism of branched 
chain amino acids and odd chain fatty acids, and for remethylation of 
homocysteine to methionine. In the cblF inborn error of vitamin B(12) 
metabolism, free vitamin accumulates in lysosomes, thus hindering its conversion 
to cofactors. Using homozygosity mapping in 12 unrelated cblF individuals and 
microcell-mediated chromosome transfer, we identified a candidate gene on 
chromosome 6q13, LMBRD1, encoding LMBD1, a lysosomal membrane protein with 
homology to lipocalin membrane receptor LIMR. We identified five different 
frameshift mutations in LMBRD1 resulting in loss of LMBD1 function, with 18 of 
the 24 disease chromosomes carrying the same mutation embedded in a common 
1.34-Mb haplotype. Transfection of fibroblasts of individuals with cblF with 
wild-type LMBD1 rescued cobalamin coenzyme synthesis and function. This work 
identifies LMBRD1 as the gene underlying the cblF defect of cobalamin metabolism 
and suggests that LMBD1 is a lysosomal membrane exporter for cobalamin.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.294
PMID: 19136951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
