---
pmid: '30455355'
title: Physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of ataxin-3 isoforms.
authors:
- Weishäupl D
- Schneider J
- Peixoto Pinheiro B
- Ruess C
- Dold SM
- von Zweydorf F
- Gloeckner CJ
- Schmidt J
- Riess O
- Schmidt T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6333899
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.005801
---

# Physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of ataxin-3 isoforms.
**Authors:** Weishäupl D, Schneider J, Peixoto Pinheiro B, Ruess C, Dold SM, von Zweydorf F, Gloeckner CJ, Schmidt J, Riess O, Schmidt T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA118.005801](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA118.005801)
**PMC:** [PMC6333899](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6333899/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Jan 11;294(2):644-661. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.005801. Epub 
2018 Nov 19.

Physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of ataxin-3 isoforms.

Weishäupl D(1)(2)(3)(4), Schneider J(1)(2)(3), Peixoto Pinheiro B(1)(2)(3), 
Ruess C(1)(2)(3), Dold SM(1)(2)(3), von Zweydorf F(5), Gloeckner CJ(5)(6), 
Schmidt J(1)(2)(3), Riess O(1)(2)(3), Schmidt T(7)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of 
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)the Center for Rare Diseases, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(3)the NGS Competence Center, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(4)the Graduate Training Center of Neuroscience, 72074 Tübingen, Germany.
(5)the German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tübingen, 
Germany, and.
(6)the Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Center for Ophthalmology, University 
of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(7)From the Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of 
Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany, thorsten.schmidt@med.uni-tuebingen.de.

Ataxin-3 is a deubiquitinating enzyme and the affected protein in the 
neurodegenerative disorder Machado-Joseph disease (MJD). The ATXN3 gene is 
alternatively spliced, resulting in protein isoforms that differ in the number 
of ubiquitin-interacting motifs. Additionally, nonsynonymous SNPs in ATXN3 cause 
amino acid changes in ataxin-3, and one of these polymorphisms introduces a 
premature stop codon in one isoform. Here, we examined the effects of different 
ataxin-3 isoforms and of the premature stop codon on ataxin-3's physiological 
function and on main disease mechanisms. At the physiological level, we show 
that alternative splicing and the premature stop codon alter ataxin-3 stability 
and that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their enzymatic deubiquitination activity, 
subcellular distribution, and interaction with other proteins. At the 
pathological level, we found that the expansion of the polyglutamine repeat 
leads to a stabilization of ataxin-3 and that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their 
aggregation properties. Interestingly, we observed a functional interaction 
between normal and polyglutamine-expanded ATXN3 allelic variants. We found that 
interactions between different ATXN3 allelic variants modify the physiological 
and pathophysiological properties of ataxin-3. Our findings indicate that 
alternative splicing and interactions between different ataxin-3 isoforms affect 
not only major aspects of ataxin-3 function but also MJD pathogenesis. Our 
results stress the importance of considering isoforms of disease-causing 
proteins and their interplay with the normal allelic variant as disease 
modifiers in MJD and autosomal-dominantly inherited diseases in general.

© 2019 Weishäupl et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.005801
PMCID: PMC6333899
PMID: 30455355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article

## Full Text

Abstract

Ataxin-3 is a deubiquitinating enzyme and the affected protein in the neurodegenerative disorder Machado–Joseph disease (MJD). The ATXN3 gene is alternatively spliced, resulting in protein isoforms that differ in the number of ubiquitin-interacting motifs. Additionally, nonsynonymous SNPs in ATXN3 cause amino acid changes in ataxin-3, and one of these polymorphisms introduces a premature stop codon in one isoform. Here, we examined the effects of different ataxin-3 isoforms and of the premature stop codon on ataxin-3's physiological function and on main disease mechanisms. At the physiological level, we show that alternative splicing and the premature stop codon alter ataxin-3 stability and that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their enzymatic deubiquitination activity, subcellular distribution, and interaction with other proteins. At the pathological level, we found that the expansion of the polyglutamine repeat leads to a stabilization of ataxin-3 and that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their aggregation properties. Interestingly, we observed a functional interaction between normal and polyglutamine-expanded ATXN3 allelic variants. We found that interactions between different ATXN3 allelic variants modify the physiological and pathophysiological properties of ataxin-3. Our findings indicate that alternative splicing and interactions between different ataxin-3 isoforms affect not only major aspects of ataxin-3 function but also MJD pathogenesis. Our results stress the importance of considering isoforms of disease-causing proteins and their interplay with the normal allelic variant as disease modifiers in MJD and autosomal-dominantly inherited diseases in general.

Introduction

Ataxin-3 (UniProt ID P54252 ) is a 40–43-kDa protein ( 1 ) that is ubiquitously expressed in many different cell types of peripheral and neuronal tissues ( 2 – 6 ). It belongs to the family of cysteine proteases exhibiting a deubiquitinase activity ( 7 , 8 ). Ataxin-3 consists of a globular N terminus with the so-called Josephin domain, followed by ubiquitin-interacting motifs (UIMs), 2 a polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat, and a more flexible C terminus. Moreover, ataxin-3 harbors two nuclear export signals and one nuclear localization signal ( 9 ). Ataxin-3 may not be an essential protein, but it is evolutionarily conserved ( 10 , 11 ), and the exact physiological function is still not completely understood. Ataxin-3 takes part in different cellular pathways and seems to play an important role in the ubiquitin proteasome system ( 11 ). However, it is also known to regulate the expression of various genes ( 12 ). Moreover, ataxin-3 was found to interact with other ataxin-3 molecules ( 13 ). The ataxin-3–encoding gene ATXN3 (HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee number 7106) consists of 11 exons ( 14 ) and is subjected to alternative splicing. Different protein isoforms of ataxin-3 were identified, which mainly differ in their C-terminal sequence ( 15 – 17 ). Alternative splicing creates two different isoforms, which are called ataxin-3a and ataxin-3c ( Fig. 1 ). The third isoform is created by a stop SNP located in exon 10 (the C-terminal part of ataxin-3a), leading to a premature stop codon variant and therefore creating two isoforms: ataxin-3aL (long) and ataxin-3aS (short). The C terminus of ataxin-3aL and -3aS is hydrophobic, whereas the C terminus of ataxin-3c is hydrophilic and contains a third UIM ( 16 ). Ataxin-3c seems to be the predominant protein isoform in human and murine brain tissue, but all isoforms were reported to be expressed ( 19 ). Interestingly, the expanded CAG repeat in ATXN3 seems to be associated with an increased generation of the ataxin-3a transcript ( 20 ).

A toxic gain-of-function of ataxin-3 ( 21 ) leads to a severely progressing neurodegenerative disease called Machado–Joseph disease (MJD (MIM catalog no. 109150), also known as SCA3) caused by a pathological expansion of the CAG repeat in the ATXN3 gene, which is translated into a polyQ repeat within ataxin-3. Normal individuals have 12–44 glutamine repeats, whereas MJD patients have expanded repeats between 61 and 87 glutamines ( 22 , 23 ). It is known that the majority of Machado–Joseph disease (MJD) patients have a SNP combination that leads to the premature stop codon in ataxin-3a, whereas this variant is uncommon in controls ( 18 ). One hallmark of MJD is the formation of macromolecular aggregates containing the pathological expanded ataxin-3 ( 4 , 24 ). Further, it is known that ataxin-3 is cleaved by calpains and caspases ( 25 – 27 ). Cleavage is required for aggregate formation in vitro and in vivo and may be part of the pathogenesis according to the toxic fragment hypothesis ( 28 ). Moreover, the nuclear localization of ataxin-3 turned out to be critical for the manifestation of MJD ( 29 , 30 ). The exact pathogenic mechanisms of MJD, however, are still not understood in depth, but it is known that the expanded polyQ repeat induces dysfunctions in the cell via different mechanisms. Well-established is an inverse correlation between the age at onset and the number of CAG repeats in ATXN3 ( 31 – 33 ). The expanded CAG repeat size only explains about 50% of the variability of the age at onset ( 34 , 35 ); the remaining part is thought to be modified by environmental factors ( 36 ) as well as further genetic factors ( 37 ). In recent years, the normal allele has also been discussed to have some neuroprotective function within the cell ( 38 – 42 ).

In this study, we analyzed the effect of alternative splicing of ATXN3 and the effect of this premature stop codon on physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of ataxin-3 as well as the mutual interaction of ATXN3 allelic variants.

Results

The aim of this study was to show the contribution of different ataxin-3 isoforms to physiological function and to disease modification of MJD. Alternative splicing and multiple isoforms have been recently described for ATXN3 ( 17 , 43 ); however, only three full-length isoforms exist, which differ in their C termini ( 16 ) ( Fig. 1 ). The C terminus of ataxin-3c contains a third UIM, whereas the C terminus of ataxin-3a is more unstructured and highly hydrophobic ( 16 ). Exon 10 of the ATXN3 gene contains a SNP that leads to a nonsense mutation creating a premature stop codon and thereby a shorter variant of ataxin-3a. Therefore, we termed these two isoforms ataxin-3aL (long) and ataxin-3aS (short). The SNP leading to a shorter isoform is highly associated with MJD and the expanded allele in MJD ( 44 ). Here we studied the physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of the different ataxin-3 isoforms.

To ensure that our analysis of ataxin-3 isoforms is not influenced by endogenously expressed ataxin-3, we generated ATXN3 KO cells. Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) targeting exon 2 of ATXN3 were employed in HEK 293T cells followed by an antibiotic selection. Sequencing confirmed frameshift mutations at the expected location (data not shown). We further confirmed that ataxin-3 is no longer expressed in the KO cells by Western blot analysis using two different antibodies flanking the genomic frameshift region ( Fig. 2 A ). All experiments described below were performed in this cell line if not stated differently.

Discussion

Alternative splicing plays a crucial role in various neurodegenerative diseases ( 60 ), and dysfunction of alternative splicing is known to be one cause for frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17 ( 61 ), spinal muscular dystrophy ( 62 ), and Alzheimer's disease ( 63 , 64 ). However, alternative splicing can also act as a modifier of diseases, as previously reported for Parkinson's disease ( 65 , 66 ), Huntington's disease ( 67 ), SCA1 ( 68 ), and Alzheimer's disease ( 69 , 70 ). Alternative splicing of the ATXN3 gene was described only 3 years after its identification ( 15 , 16 ). However, little is known about ATXN3 transcript diversity ( 14 , 17 ) and the functional differences between ataxin-3 isoforms on the protein level ( 4 , 19 ). At least three protein isoforms ( 16 ) are generated by alternative splicing (ataxin-3c and -3aL) plus a modification by a nonsense SNP in ATXN3 creating a short variant from ataxin-3aL termed 3aS. Although ataxin-3c seems to be the predominant isoform in murine and human brain ( 19 ), the presence of ataxin-3a has a great impact on MJD pathology as well. It was already proposed earlier that the C terminus may lead to functional differences of ataxin-3 isoforms ( 16 ). However, these differences, especially the influence of the stop codon, remain elusive. To close this knowledge gap, we analyzed the physiological characteristics of ataxin-3 isoforms as well as their potential significance for MJD pathology.

On a physiological level, we found that ataxin-3 protein isoforms differ in their protein level and stability. Ataxin-3c and -3aL showed comparable protein levels and a half-life that correlates well to the previously reported half-life of ataxin-3c ( 71 ). We further expanded and specified the results obtained by Harris and colleagues ( 19 ) by differentiating between ataxin-3aL and -3aS as well as the usage of the Tet-off system, which superseded the need of translational inhibition. We observed that the stop codon reduces the stability of the protein as well as the expression level. An expansion of the polyQ repeat within ataxin-3 increases the half-life significantly independent of the isoform. This polyQ-dependent increased half-life was also described previously for expanded ataxin-3 ( 50 , 72 ), huntingtin ( 73 ), ataxin-1 ( 74 ), and TATA-box–binding protein ( 75 , 76 ), showing that this effect is common to polyQ proteins. The observed stability differences between ataxin-3 isoforms are due to their protein degradation rates, as we could not find differences in mRNA stability or aggregation after termination of expression. Although it is known that functional UIMs of ataxin-3 increase the turnover rate of ataxin-3 ( 77 ), this obviously does not apply for an exchange of the third UIM by alternative splicing of the whole C terminus.

To analyze why the half-life of ataxin-3aS is reduced, we examined the degradation pathway of ataxin-3 isoforms by inhibition of either autophagy or proteasomal degradation. We found that ataxin-3 isoforms are degraded by autophagy but that the stop codon additionally directs ataxin-3aS to proteasomal degradation. Previous studies presented partially conflicting results for the stability and degradation pathway of ataxin-3 ( 19 , 50 , 77 – 79 ). These discrepancies may be explained by the isoform applied, the use of tags, and the localization within the protein as well as specific differences in the experiments like translational inhibition and inhibitor concentrations ( 80 – 88 ).

Ataxin-3 was reported to be located in different compartments of the cell ( 3 , 4 , 46 ). Moreover, the nucleus was previously reported to be an essential site for MJD pathology ( 29 , 30 ). We therefore asked whether ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their subcellular localization. We found a strong localization of ataxin-3aS in the nucleus. Besides the strong nuclear localization of ataxin-3aS, we found a fragment of ataxin-3 to be enriched in the nuclear fractions for all isoforms as well. This is of special interest, as it was previously reported that cleavage of mutant ataxin-3 leads to a nuclear translocation of the polyQ-containing fragment ( 4 , 9 ). At the same time, these fragments are considered to be more toxic and show an increased propensity to form aggregates compared with the full-length protein ( 2 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 47 , 89 , 90 ). Ataxin-3 is known to be a deubiquitinating enzyme ( 7 , 8 ), and that cellular turnover of ataxin-3, as well as its steady-state level, is regulated by its catalytic activity ( 13 ). Therefore, we wanted to investigate whether the stop codon causes changes in ataxin-3's DUB activity and therefore explains its low stability and reduced steady-state level. We found that alternative splicing, but not the stop codon, leads to changes in the DUB activity of ataxin-3 isoforms. The use of a substrate excess in our experiments further specified the previously reported enzymatic activity of ataxin-3 isoforms ( 19 ).

The DUB activity of ataxin-3 is modified by ubiquitination of the protein ( 91 ). Furthermore, it is known that the catalytic activity influences the stability as well as the steady-state level of ataxin-3 ( 13 ). These results fit very well to our observations, as ataxin-3c showed an increased steady-state level.

Ataxin-3 is known to interact with various different proteins, reviewed by Costa and Paulson ( 1 ). However, nothing was known about the interaction of particular ataxin-3 isoforms with different proteins. We found that ataxin-3 isoforms share major parts of their interactomes; however, they also have individual protein partners, indicating that the isoforms have their own specific interaction network within the cell and take over functions in different pathways.

Aggregation of the respective polyQ protein is a hallmark of all polyQ diseases ( 24 , 92 – 97 ). Interestingly, ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their aggregation behavior. Our results demonstrate that the C terminus is involved in the process of aggregate formation as proposed by Harris et al. ( 19 ). It thereby has a great impact not only on aggregation kinetics but also on the properties of aggregates formed.

It was previously reported that ataxin-3 can interact with itself ( 13 ). Due to the presence of different ataxin-3 isoforms in one cell, we were interested in understanding how this mutual influence changes physiological and pathophysiological characteristics of ataxin-3. In our study, we only analyzed those combinations that are likely to occur in MJD patients ( 18 , 58 ). We found that the presence of another ataxin-3 protein isoform is able to change the stability of ataxin-3, depending on the specific isoform combination. However, this change in stability is not a consequence of deubiquitination of one ataxin-3 isoform by another, as it was reported that ataxin-3 is not deubiquitinating other ataxin-3 molecules ( 13 ).

Pathophysiologically, the presence of a normal ataxin-3 allele reduced the amount of aggregates formed by a polyQ-expanded ATXN3 allelic variant. These results fit well to a previous report that ataxin-3 is recruited to inclusions and reduces the accumulation of pathogenic protein aggregates ( 38 ). Indeed, this mutual interaction of ataxin-3 isoforms may play an important role as a modifier of pathology. The presence of a normal allele was reported to rescue the disease phenotype in Drosophila models of MJD ( 38 – 42 ) but had no effect in mice ( 98 ). Nevertheless, our in vitro data clearly show that ataxin-3 isoforms have an influence on each other. In summary, we found that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in physiological as well as pathophysiological characteristics ( Fig. 8 ), creating protein species with specific functions and interactions that, in order to study protein function or MJD, cannot be exchanged by each other. This strongly substantiates the need of a precise annotation in research on neurodegenerative diseases not only of the protein isoform but also of the haplotype that is studied. Further, our results suggest that ataxin-3 isoforms differ in their contribution to MJD pathology. This helps in understanding the pathological differences between genetic subtypes that vary in age at onset and disease severity. Our data provide evidence that the underlying differences are mainly determined by the presence of the stop codon aggravating MJD pathology. Importantly, MJD patients differ in their isoform combination due to different genotypes of the respective polymorphism impacting both the normal and expanded allele of ataxin-3 and, as we demonstrated in this study, ataxin-3's physiological and pathophysiological characteristics. Our results highlight the importance of taking polymorphisms and isoforms of disease-causing proteins as well as mutual interactions with the respective normal protein allele as disease modifiers in MJD and other autosomal-dominantly inherited disorders into consideration.
