---
pmid: '1756736'
title: The wis1 protein kinase is a dosage-dependent regulator of mitosis in Schizosaccharomyces
  pombe.
authors:
- Warbrick E
- Fantes PA
journal: EMBO J
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC453182
doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb05007.x
---

# The wis1 protein kinase is a dosage-dependent regulator of mitosis in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
**Authors:** Warbrick E, Fantes PA
**Journal:** EMBO J (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb05007.x](https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb05007.x)
**PMC:** [PMC453182](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC453182/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1991 Dec;10(13):4291-9. doi: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb05007.x.

The wis1 protein kinase is a dosage-dependent regulator of mitosis in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe.

Warbrick E(1), Fantes PA.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, UK.

The wis1+ gene encodes a newly identified mitotic control element in 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. It was isolated by virtue of its interaction with the 
mitotic control genes cdc25, wee1 and win1. The wis1+ gene potentially encodes a 
66 kDa protein with homology to the serine/threonine family of protein kinases. 
wis1+ plays an important role in the regulation of entry into mitosis, as it 
shares with cdc25+ and nim1+/cdr1+ the property of inducing mitosis in a 
dosage-dependent manner. Increased levels of wis1+ expression cause mitotic 
initiation to occur at a reduced cell size. Loss of wis1+ function does not 
prevent vegetative growth and division, though wis1- cells show an elongated 
morphology, indicating that their entry into mitosis and cell division is 
delayed relative to wild type cells. wis1- cells undergo a rapid reduction of 
viability upon entry into stationary phase, suggesting a role for wis1+ in the 
integration of nutritional sensing with the control over entry into mitosis.

DOI: 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1991.tb05007.x
PMCID: PMC453182
PMID: 1756736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The wis1+ gene encodes a newly identified mitotic control element in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. It was isolated by virtue of its interaction with the mitotic control genes cdc25, wee1 and win1. The wis1+ gene potentially encodes a 66 kDa protein with homology to the serine/threonine family of protein kinases. wis1+ plays an important role in the regulation of entry into mitosis, as it shares with cdc25+ and nim1+/cdr1+ the property of inducing mitosis in a dosage-dependent manner. Increased levels of wis1+ expression cause mitotic initiation to occur at a reduced cell size. Loss of wis1+ function does not prevent vegetative growth and division, though wis1- cells show an elongated morphology, indicating that their entry into mitosis and cell division is delayed relative to wild type cells. wis1- cells undergo a rapid reduction of viability upon entry into stationary phase, suggesting a role for wis1+ in the integration of nutritional sensing with the control over entry into mitosis.
