---
pmid: '18492664'
title: Intra- and intermonomer interactions are required to synergistically facilitate
  ATP hydrolysis in Hsp90.
authors:
- Cunningham CN
- Krukenberg KA
- Agard DA
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: xml
pmcid: PMC2475720
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800046200
---

# Intra- and intermonomer interactions are required to synergistically facilitate ATP hydrolysis in Hsp90.
**Authors:** Cunningham CN, Krukenberg KA, Agard DA
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M800046200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M800046200)
**PMC:** [PMC2475720](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2475720/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 25;283(30):21170-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800046200. Epub
2008  May 20.

Intra- and intermonomer interactions are required to synergistically facilitate 
ATP hydrolysis in Hsp90.

Cunningham CN(1), Krukenberg KA, Agard DA.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California-San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA.

Nucleotide-dependent conformational changes of the constitutively dimeric 
molecular chaperone Hsp90 are integral to its molecular mechanism. Recent 
full-length crystal structures (Protein Data Bank codes 2IOQ, 2CG9, AND 2IOP) of 
Hsp90 homologs reveal large scale quaternary domain rearrangements upon the 
addition of nucleotides. Although previous work has shown the importance of 
C-terminal domain dimerization for efficient ATP hydrolysis, which should imply 
cooperativity, other studies suggest that the two ATPases function 
independently. Using the crystal structures as a guide, we examined the role of 
intra- and intermonomer interactions in stabilizing the ATPase activity of a 
single active site within an intact dimer. This was accomplished by creating 
heterodimers that allow us to differentially mutate each monomer, probing the 
context in which particular residues are important for ATP hydrolysis. Although 
the ATPase activity of each monomer can function independently, we found that 
the activity of one monomer could be inhibited by the mutation of hydrophobic 
residues on the trans N-terminal domain (opposite monomer). Furthermore, these 
trans interactions are synergistically mediated by a loop on the cis middle 
domain. This loop contains hydrophobic residues as well as a critical arginine 
that provides a direct linkage to the gamma-phosphate of bound ATP. Small angle 
x-ray scattering demonstrates that deleterious mutations block domain closure in 
the presence of AMPPNP (5'-adenylyl-beta,gamma-imidodiphosphate), providing a 
direct linkage between structural changes and functional consequences. Together, 
these data indicate that both the cis monomer and the trans monomer and the 
intradomain and interdomain interactions cooperatively stabilize the active 
conformation of each active site and help explain the importance of dimer 
formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800046200
PMCID: PMC2475720
PMID: 18492664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Hsp90 plays a central role in the activation and folding of a wide variety
 of critical proteins including kinases, steroid hormone receptors, nitric
 oxide synthase, and telomerase as well as being involved in important
 processes such as mitochondrial import
 (1-6).
 Hsp90 is a constitutive dimer where each ∼90-kDa monomer consists of three
 domains: the N-terminal domain
 (NTD),4 which confers
 nucleotide binding, the middle domain (MD), which is necessary for ATP
 hydrolysis, and the C-terminal domain (CTD), which is required for
 dimerization (7). Although the
 exact mechanism of how Hsp90 interacts with its substrate proteins (client
 proteins) remains unclear, the structure of the full-length apo protein from
 Escherichia coli reveals that each domain contributes hydrophobic
 elements into a large central cleft, and these elements are likely to be
 involved in client recognition
 (8). Dramatic domain
 rearrangements occur in response to ATP
 (9) and ADP
 (8) binding and are thought to
 drive client protein remodeling and release
 (Fig. 1). Inhibition of the
 ATPase of Hsp90 by either mutation or small molecule inhibitors results in the
 degradation of client proteins in vivo, demonstrating the central
 importance of the ATPase to the function of the chaperone
 (10-12).

Hsp90 is a relatively slow ATPase with activities ranging from 0.1 to 1.2
 min-1 across prokaryotic and eukaryotic homologs
 (13,
 14). The NTD alone provides
 all of the structural requirements for nucleotide binding, including a
 catalytic glutamate, which activates the attacking water in the hydrolysis
 reaction (15). However, when
 isolated, the NTD has very low activity
 (14), suggesting that other
 parts of the molecule are required for hydrolysis, similar to Hsp90
 superfamily members MutL and GyrB
 (16). Some of these
 determinants come from the middle domain
 (17), and others arise only in
 the context of the full-length structure. Removal of the constitutive
 C-terminal dimerization domain reduces the ATPase activity 6-10-fold depending
 on the homolog (14,
 18). Replacing this domain
 with a disulfide bridge between the two monomers rescues activity, clearly
 demonstrating the requirement of dimerization for efficient ATP hydrolysis
 (19). Additionally, structural
 and biochemical data indicate that ATP binding leads to the transient
 association of the NTDs (13).
 Given the multiple domain interactions and dimer requirements, it has been
 quite surprising that kinetic data provide no evidence for cooperativity in
 either nucleotide binding or hydrolysis
 (18).

The structural determinants beyond the NTD that are required for ATPase
 activation are largely unknown. Mutation of several MD residues (Arg-376,
 Gln-380 in yeast Hsc82) has been shown to affect ATPase activity
 (17). The recently solved
 full-length structure of the yeast Hsp90 (Hsp82) in complex with Sba1 and
 AMPPNP (9) most likely
 represents a prehydrolysis state (as Sba1 binding inhibits ATP hydrolysis
 (20)); however, it has proven
 a useful guide for understanding these mutations. For example, it shows that
 the Arg-380 (Arg-376 in Hsc82) side chain is within 3 Å of the
 γ-phosphate of the AMPPNP bound to the same monomer, suggesting its role
 in the completion of the active site.

FIGURE 1.Nucleotide-dependent conformational changes of Hsp90. Previous
 crystallographic studies show that the conformational equilibrium of Hsp90 is
 biased by nucleotide binding and results in large changes in quarternary
 structure. However, the structural requirements for activating the ATPase
 activity remain elusive. The apo structure was taken from the full-length
 structure of the bacterial homolog, htpG (PDB: 2IOQ). The ATP-bound Hsp90 was
 taken from the Hsp82/AMPPNP/Sba1 full-length structure (PDB: 2CG9); Sba1 was
 removed to emphasize the conformational changes in Hsp90 alone. The ADP-bound
 structure is modeled from the ADP-bound htpG full-length structure (PDB: 2IOP)
 (8). The domain architecture
 highlighting the NTD, MD, and CTD is outlined in black on one monomer
 to emphasize the domain rearrangements.

Nucleotide-dependent conformational changes of Hsp90. Previous
 crystallographic studies show that the conformational equilibrium of Hsp90 is
 biased by nucleotide binding and results in large changes in quarternary
 structure. However, the structural requirements for activating the ATPase
 activity remain elusive. The apo structure was taken from the full-length
 structure of the bacterial homolog, htpG (PDB: 2IOQ). The ATP-bound Hsp90 was
 taken from the Hsp82/AMPPNP/Sba1 full-length structure (PDB: 2CG9); Sba1 was
 removed to emphasize the conformational changes in Hsp90 alone. The ADP-bound
 structure is modeled from the ADP-bound htpG full-length structure (PDB: 2IOP)
 (8). The domain architecture
 highlighting the NTD, MD, and CTD is outlined in black on one monomer
 to emphasize the domain rearrangements.

Our work is focused on discovering the key intra- and interdomain as well
 as the intra- and intermonomer interactions required to create a complete and
 functional ATPase active site (Fig.
 1). Toward this end, we have developed a heterodimeric ATPase
 assay that allows us both to assess the importance of a particular residue to
 the Hsp90 ATP cycle and, for the first time, to determine whether its role is
 via an intra- or intermonomer interaction. We show that the MD loop containing
 Arg-376 interacts synergistically with a region of the NTD on the opposite
 monomer as well as the active site on the same NTD. Additionally, small angle
 x-ray scattering (SAXS) of the mutants is used to provide a direct linkage
 between functional and structural consequences of mutation. Together, these
 data indicate the necessity of cooperative intra- and interdomain and intra-
 and intermonomer interactions and provides a clear structural rationale for
 the functional role of dimerization. It further suggests that there is a
 distinct NTD-MD conformation required for catalysis that must be somewhat
 different from the crystal structure.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURESMaterials—Geldanamycin was purchased from Sigma.Hsc82 Constructs—Yeast hsc82 was cloned from a
 yeast cosmid containing hsc82 (ATCC). PCR was used to isolate the
 gene that was subsequently cloned into the Invitrogen vector pET151/D-TOPO,
 which includes a tobacco etch virus-cleavable N-terminal His tag.
 Site-directed mutagenesis was performed by PCR using 20-nucleotide primers
 encoding for the mutated amino acid. Parental DNA was then digested using Dpn1
 after the completed reaction, and the resulting plasmid was transformed into
 DH5α (Stratagene) cells. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing of
 the appropriate regions.Hsc82 Purification—Protein was purified from induced E.
 coli cultures using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity resin (Qiagen)
 followed by anion exchange and size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex
 S200 column (GE Healthcare). Protein was concentrated in 10 mm
 Tris, pH 7.5, 100 mm NaCl using Ultrafree Biomax concentrators
 (Millipore) to a final concentration of 1-5 mg/ml based on UV280
 absorption. Protein was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80
 °C until use. If needed, His tags were removed by cleavage with tobacco
 etch virus protease, and uncleaved protein was removed via a
 nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid column.Mass Spectrometry—Hsc82 with and without its N-terminal His
 tag were diluted to 1 mg/ml from their stock concentrations. Based on the
 tagged:untagged ratios desired, each protein was mixed and equilibrated at 30
 °C for 30 min after which the proteins were set on ice. Sinapinic acid at
 10 mg/ml in 60% acetonitrile, 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid was used as the
 matrix. Protein and matrix were mixed in a 1:1, 1:2, or 1:3 ratio and spotted
 onto a MALDI plate. A Voyager-DE STR (Applied Biosystems) mass spectrometer
 was used to analyze the mass ratios and to determine the relative amount of
 heterodimer formed.ATPase Activity—This assay was adapted from Felts et
 al. (21). 2
 μm protein was used in each assay with 1 mm ATP and
 0.8 pm [γ-32P]ATP (6000 Ci/mmol) in solution. For
 the assays using geldanamycin as a control, a final concentration of 200
 μm was used. 20-min time points were taken over the course of an
 hour with the samples shaking and incubating at 37 °C. Separation of
 Pi from ATP was performed using the thin layer chromatography
 method as described (21).
 Visualization of the radiolabeled spots was performed on a Typhoon Imager (GE
 Healthcare), and quantification was performed using the program ImageQuant (GE
 Healthcare). The amount of ATP hydrolyzed at each time point was calculated by
 taking the ratio of Pi to ATP in solution. This ratio was then
 multiplied by the total amount of ATP added to the reaction and normalized by
 the total protein in solution. A linear fit of the time points gave the rate
 for each reaction.FIGURE 2.Schematic of the heterodimer assay. Differentially mutated inactive
 homodimers are mixed together to form heterodimers. If the two residues
 mutated interact in an intermonomer interaction, a WT active site would form,
 and ATP hydrolysis would occur. If the residues interact in an intramonomer
 interaction, no activity would be measured.Heterodimer Assay—The total protein concentration in each
 reaction was kept at 2 μm. Depending on the ratio desired,
 homodimers of the appropriate constructs were mixed together and incubated at
 30 °C for 30 min and put on ice. The ATPase activity was then measured
 using the assay mentioned above.Predicted inter- and intramonomer rates were calculated by accounting for
 the activity contributions of each population in solution. To calculate the
 activity contributions of the two homodimers present in solution, we used a
 least squares fitting of the heterodimer activities measured and extrapolated
 the individual contributions (MATLAB), taking into account the fraction of
 each population in solution. Predicted activities were then calculated using
 the following equations given either an intermonomer or an intramonomer
 interaction.Intermonomer (trans) activity =
 (Eq.1)\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym} 
\usepackage{amsfonts} 
\usepackage{amssymb} 
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\usepackage{pmc}
\usepackage[Euler]{upgreek}
\pagestyle{empty}

\oddsidemargin -1.0in

\begin{document}
\begin{equation*}\;\;{\alpha}{\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\beta}{\mathrm{A}}_{22}+0.5^{*}{\gamma}({\mathrm{A}}_{12}+{\mathrm{A}}_{{\mathrm{wt}}})\;\;\end{equation*}\end{document}
 Intramonomer (cis) activity =
 (Eq.2)\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym} 
\usepackage{amsfonts} 
\usepackage{amssymb} 
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\usepackage{pmc}
\usepackage[Euler]{upgreek}
\pagestyle{empty}

\oddsidemargin -1.0in

\begin{document}
\begin{equation*}\;\;{\alpha}{\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\beta}{\mathrm{A}}_{22}+0.5^{*}{\gamma}({\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\mathrm{A}}_{22})\;\;\end{equation*}\end{document}
 where α, β, and γ represent the fraction homodimer 1,
 homodimer 2, and heterodimer in solution, and A11, A22,
 A12, and Awt represent the intrinsic ATPase activities
 of the homodimer 1, homodimer 2, the heterodimer, and wild-type proteins,
 respectively. α, β, and γ were calculated using the binomial
 theorem to simulate an equilibrium of mixing between two homodimers that have
 the same dimerization affinity. In the case of the intermonomer interaction,
 there are two contributions to the heterodimer activity: the activity of the
 double mutant (A12) and the WT ATPase activity (Awt).
 With respect to an intramonomer interaction, the two activity contributions
 arise from the activities of each of the original single mutations,
 A11 and A22. The heterodimer activity in each equation
 is multiplied by 0.5 since A11 and A22 are dimer
 activities.The predicted activity curves were calculated using MATLAB and graphed in
 Kaleidagraph. We determined whether our residue of interest was involved in an
 inter- or intramonomer interaction by comparing the profiles of our
 experimentally measured heterodimers over a variety of concentrations with our
 predicted activities.SAXS Data Collection and Data Analysis—Data reported here
 were collected at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) beamline 12.3.1 and the
 Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) beamline 4.2. To minimize
 aggregation, samples were spun in a tabletop microcentrifuge for 5 min before
 data collection. SAXS data were collected at 25 °C at 2-5 mg/ml. At the
 ALS, the samples were exposed for 6 and 60 s at a detector distance of 1.6 m.
 At the SSRL, samples were exposed for ten 30-s exposures at a detector
 distance of 2.5 m. Scattering data were recorded on a Mar165 CCD detector. The
 detector channels were converted to Q = 4πsinθ/λ, where 2O is
 the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength, using a silver behenate
 sample as a calibration standard. The data were circularly averaged over the
 detector and normalized by the incident beam intensity. The raw scattering
 data were scaled, and the buffers were subtracted. Individual scattering
 curves were then merged to provide the final averaged scattering curve. The
 interatomic distance distribution functions (P(r)) were then calculated using
 the program GNOM (22).
 Dmax was determined by constraining
 rmin to equal zero and then varying
 rmax between 150 and 250 Å. Rmax
 was then chosen so that the P(r) curve smoothly approached zero at the upper
 limit. Small changes in rmax (±10 Å) did not
 affect the overall shape of the P(r) curve. Radii of gyration were calculated
 from the P(r). Comparable results were obtained from the scattering curves
 using the Guinier approximation as implemented in the program PRIMUS
 (23); however, the calculated
 uncertainties were larger due to limitations in the low angle data.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials—Geldanamycin was purchased from Sigma.

Hsc82 Constructs—Yeast hsc82 was cloned from a
 yeast cosmid containing hsc82 (ATCC). PCR was used to isolate the
 gene that was subsequently cloned into the Invitrogen vector pET151/D-TOPO,
 which includes a tobacco etch virus-cleavable N-terminal His tag.
 Site-directed mutagenesis was performed by PCR using 20-nucleotide primers
 encoding for the mutated amino acid. Parental DNA was then digested using Dpn1
 after the completed reaction, and the resulting plasmid was transformed into
 DH5α (Stratagene) cells. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing of
 the appropriate regions.

Hsc82 Purification—Protein was purified from induced E.
 coli cultures using nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity resin (Qiagen)
 followed by anion exchange and size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex
 S200 column (GE Healthcare). Protein was concentrated in 10 mm
 Tris, pH 7.5, 100 mm NaCl using Ultrafree Biomax concentrators
 (Millipore) to a final concentration of 1-5 mg/ml based on UV280
 absorption. Protein was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80
 °C until use. If needed, His tags were removed by cleavage with tobacco
 etch virus protease, and uncleaved protein was removed via a
 nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid column.

Mass Spectrometry—Hsc82 with and without its N-terminal His
 tag were diluted to 1 mg/ml from their stock concentrations. Based on the
 tagged:untagged ratios desired, each protein was mixed and equilibrated at 30
 °C for 30 min after which the proteins were set on ice. Sinapinic acid at
 10 mg/ml in 60% acetonitrile, 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid was used as the
 matrix. Protein and matrix were mixed in a 1:1, 1:2, or 1:3 ratio and spotted
 onto a MALDI plate. A Voyager-DE STR (Applied Biosystems) mass spectrometer
 was used to analyze the mass ratios and to determine the relative amount of
 heterodimer formed.

ATPase Activity—This assay was adapted from Felts et
 al. (21). 2
 μm protein was used in each assay with 1 mm ATP and
 0.8 pm [γ-32P]ATP (6000 Ci/mmol) in solution. For
 the assays using geldanamycin as a control, a final concentration of 200
 μm was used. 20-min time points were taken over the course of an
 hour with the samples shaking and incubating at 37 °C. Separation of
 Pi from ATP was performed using the thin layer chromatography
 method as described (21).
 Visualization of the radiolabeled spots was performed on a Typhoon Imager (GE
 Healthcare), and quantification was performed using the program ImageQuant (GE
 Healthcare). The amount of ATP hydrolyzed at each time point was calculated by
 taking the ratio of Pi to ATP in solution. This ratio was then
 multiplied by the total amount of ATP added to the reaction and normalized by
 the total protein in solution. A linear fit of the time points gave the rate
 for each reaction.

FIGURE 2.Schematic of the heterodimer assay. Differentially mutated inactive
 homodimers are mixed together to form heterodimers. If the two residues
 mutated interact in an intermonomer interaction, a WT active site would form,
 and ATP hydrolysis would occur. If the residues interact in an intramonomer
 interaction, no activity would be measured.

Schematic of the heterodimer assay. Differentially mutated inactive
 homodimers are mixed together to form heterodimers. If the two residues
 mutated interact in an intermonomer interaction, a WT active site would form,
 and ATP hydrolysis would occur. If the residues interact in an intramonomer
 interaction, no activity would be measured.

Heterodimer Assay—The total protein concentration in each
 reaction was kept at 2 μm. Depending on the ratio desired,
 homodimers of the appropriate constructs were mixed together and incubated at
 30 °C for 30 min and put on ice. The ATPase activity was then measured
 using the assay mentioned above.

Predicted inter- and intramonomer rates were calculated by accounting for
 the activity contributions of each population in solution. To calculate the
 activity contributions of the two homodimers present in solution, we used a
 least squares fitting of the heterodimer activities measured and extrapolated
 the individual contributions (MATLAB), taking into account the fraction of
 each population in solution. Predicted activities were then calculated using
 the following equations given either an intermonomer or an intramonomer
 interaction.

Intermonomer (trans) activity =
 (Eq.1)\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym} 
\usepackage{amsfonts} 
\usepackage{amssymb} 
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\usepackage{pmc}
\usepackage[Euler]{upgreek}
\pagestyle{empty}

\oddsidemargin -1.0in

\begin{document}
\begin{equation*}\;\;{\alpha}{\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\beta}{\mathrm{A}}_{22}+0.5^{*}{\gamma}({\mathrm{A}}_{12}+{\mathrm{A}}_{{\mathrm{wt}}})\;\;\end{equation*}\end{document}

Intramonomer (cis) activity =
 (Eq.2)\documentclass[10pt]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym} 
\usepackage{amsfonts} 
\usepackage{amssymb} 
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\usepackage{pmc}
\usepackage[Euler]{upgreek}
\pagestyle{empty}

\oddsidemargin -1.0in

\begin{document}
\begin{equation*}\;\;{\alpha}{\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\beta}{\mathrm{A}}_{22}+0.5^{*}{\gamma}({\mathrm{A}}_{11}+{\mathrm{A}}_{22})\;\;\end{equation*}\end{document}
 where α, β, and γ represent the fraction homodimer 1,
 homodimer 2, and heterodimer in solution, and A11, A22,
 A12, and Awt represent the intrinsic ATPase activities
 of the homodimer 1, homodimer 2, the heterodimer, and wild-type proteins,
 respectively. α, β, and γ were calculated using the binomial
 theorem to simulate an equilibrium of mixing between two homodimers that have
 the same dimerization affinity. In the case of the intermonomer interaction,
 there are two contributions to the heterodimer activity: the activity of the
 double mutant (A12) and the WT ATPase activity (Awt).
 With respect to an intramonomer interaction, the two activity contributions
 arise from the activities of each of the original single mutations,
 A11 and A22. The heterodimer activity in each equation
 is multiplied by 0.5 since A11 and A22 are dimer
 activities.

The predicted activity curves were calculated using MATLAB and graphed in
 Kaleidagraph. We determined whether our residue of interest was involved in an
 inter- or intramonomer interaction by comparing the profiles of our
 experimentally measured heterodimers over a variety of concentrations with our
 predicted activities.

SAXS Data Collection and Data Analysis—Data reported here
 were collected at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) beamline 12.3.1 and the
 Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL) beamline 4.2. To minimize
 aggregation, samples were spun in a tabletop microcentrifuge for 5 min before
 data collection. SAXS data were collected at 25 °C at 2-5 mg/ml. At the
 ALS, the samples were exposed for 6 and 60 s at a detector distance of 1.6 m.
 At the SSRL, samples were exposed for ten 30-s exposures at a detector
 distance of 2.5 m. Scattering data were recorded on a Mar165 CCD detector. The
 detector channels were converted to Q = 4πsinθ/λ, where 2O is
 the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength, using a silver behenate
 sample as a calibration standard. The data were circularly averaged over the
 detector and normalized by the incident beam intensity. The raw scattering
 data were scaled, and the buffers were subtracted. Individual scattering
 curves were then merged to provide the final averaged scattering curve. The
 interatomic distance distribution functions (P(r)) were then calculated using
 the program GNOM (22).
 Dmax was determined by constraining
 rmin to equal zero and then varying
 rmax between 150 and 250 Å. Rmax
 was then chosen so that the P(r) curve smoothly approached zero at the upper
 limit. Small changes in rmax (±10 Å) did not
 affect the overall shape of the P(r) curve. Radii of gyration were calculated
 from the P(r). Comparable results were obtained from the scattering curves
 using the Guinier approximation as implemented in the program PRIMUS
 (23); however, the calculated
 uncertainties were larger due to limitations in the low angle data.

RESULTSCharacterization of Heterodimers in Solution—To dissect the
 intra-versus intermonomer roles of specific residues with respect to
 the overall ATPase activity of Hsc82, it was necessary to create asymmetric
 dimers harboring different mutations on each monomer
 (Fig. 2). Because the
 KD for subunit dimerization is in the nm range
 (7), heterodimers can be formed
 simply by mixing homodimers containing different point mutations
 (14). By placing a mutation in
 one monomer that abolishes ATP hydrolysis without blocking nucleotide binding
 (E33A) (15), the role of a
 test mutation in the other monomer can be assayed by the effect of increasing
 proportions of the test mutation on the ATPase rate. First, test mutations are
 chosen that will alter ATPase rates within homodimeric Hsc82. If the test
 mutation functions by altering interactions with the active site on its own
 subunit (an intramonomer or “cis” interaction), then the activity
 of its own active site will be compromised by the mutation. If, however, the
 test mutation alters interactions with the active site on the opposite subunit
 (an intermonomer or “trans” interaction), which is already
 compromised by the E33A mutation, then it will not have a deleterious effect,
 and its own active site should be fully functional
 (Fig. 2). We can calculate the
 predicted hydrolysis rate of any mixture of the two homodimer concentrations
 using standard equilibrium measurements and homodimer activities (see
 “Experimental Procedures”). The hydrolysis rate of differentially
 mixed dimers can then be measured and compared with our predicted rates,
 allowing us to determine the role of the test residue independent of the level
 of its residual activity.FIGURE 3.Hydrolysis rates for hydrophobic mutants and the contribution of the
 middle domain arginine. A, five hydrophobic residues from both
 monomers come together and interact only in the ATP-bound closed state. One
 monomer is illustrated in brown, whereas the other monomer is shown
 in green. Two of the five residues lie on the same loop as Arg-376,
 which has been previously implicated in stabilizing the γ-phosphate of
 ATP. B, hydrolysis rates of each mutant used in this study. All rates
 have been normalized to the WT hydrolysis rate. C, heterodimer assay
 with R376A and E33A monomers. Ratios between the two homodimers were varied,
 whereas the total protein concentration was kept constant. Predicted inter-
 (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction activities are
 shown with solid lines, and the closed circles represent the
 experimental data.Although it has previously been shown that Hsc82 heterodimers could form
 (14), in our hands, proof of
 heterodimer formation upon mixing in vitro was shown both physically
 and enzymatically. Using differentially tagged constructs of Hsc82 as
 indicators (supplemental Fig. 1), tagged and untagged Hsc82 were mixed in a
 3:1, 1:1, or 1:3 ratio (untagged:tagged) and incubated at 30 °C for an
 hour. MALDI-time-of-flight was then used to probe the relative abundance of
 each dimer species in each of the reactions. As expected, three peaks are seen
 in the spectrum of the 1:1 ratio reaction corresponding to each of the pure
 homodimers and a peak between them representing the formation of heterodimer.
 When the untagged homodimer is in 3-fold excess, only two peaks are seen,
 corresponding to the excess untagged homodimer and the heterodimer. The
 converse result was obtained when the tagged homodimer was in excess. Although
 equilibrium calculations predict a small amount of the minor homodimer to be
 present in solution (12.5%), this species could not be observed in the
 experiment due to limited sensitivity when working with intact proteins of
 this size in a conventional MALDI instrument.To confirm that the heterodimers still possessed the ability to hydrolyze
 ATP, a fixed concentration of wild-type Hsc82 was incubated with increasing
 amounts of the catalytically dead E33A mutant (Glu-33 is required to
 coordinate the hydrolytic water). Activity levels of the two homodimers are
 shown in Fig. 3B. ATP
 hydrolysis rates were unaffected by the amount of added inactive mutant
 (supplemental Fig. 2). When combined with the mass spectrometric data, these
 results show that under our conditions, heterodimers can be formed in solution
 and are fully able to hydrolyze ATP, although one of the monomers is
 catalytically dead. This confirms the independent activation of the individual
 NTD ATPases. In contrast, the removal of one of the NTDs reduces, but does not
 abolish, ATP activity (14) in
 the context of heterodimers, demonstrating the structural requirement of
 having both NTDs present in the dimer to fully activate each ATPase.Influence of the Middle Domain on the ATPase Activity of
 Hsc82—Investigation of the apo and AMPPNP structures shows a group
 of residues (Thr-22, Val-23, Tyr-24, Leu-372, Leu-374, and Arg-376) that come
 together from distant parts of the apo structure to form an interacting
 cluster in the ATP state (Fig.
 3A). Arg-376 (Arg-380 in Hsp82) was previously shown to
 be important for hydrolysis, making this entire cluster an attractive starting
 point for dissecting inter- and intramonomer interactions. Unlike the E33A
 mutation, the homomeric R376A mutant significantly reduces, but does not
 abolish, ATPase activity when compared with the E33A mutation previously
 described (Fig.
 3B).FIGURE 4.Heterodimer assay on the hydrophobic residues. A-E,
 heterodimeric analysis of V23A (A), Y24A (B), T22F
 (C), L372D (D), and L374N (E). The T22F heterodimer
 assay has very small error bars that are occluded by the point size. Predicted
 inter- (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction
 activities are shown with lines, and the experimental data are
 represented by closed circles. All of the residues that originate
 from the MD result in a cis-like interaction (L372D and L374N), whereas most
 of the residues originating from the NTD (V23A, Y24A, and T22F) result in a
 trans-like interaction with Tyr-24, showing evidence of being involved in both
 cis and trans.As a first test of our assay, we wanted to biochemically confirm that
 Arg-376 affects the ATPase of its own NTD, as suggested by the Hsp82/ATP/Sba1
 structure. To do this, the mutant, R376A, was tested in our heterodimer assay
 in conjunction with the catalytically dead E33A mutation. Separately expressed
 and purified R376A and E33A were mixed in defined ratios while keeping the
 total protein concentration constant; after a period of incubation, their ATP
 hydrolysis rates were measured (Fig.
 3C). Using the behaviors of the individual mutants as
 homodimers (Fig. 3B),
 the expected activity as a function of the mixture percentages can be readily
 predicted (Fig. 3C,
 trans = black, cis = gray; see also “Experimental
 Procedures”). From this, it is clear that Arg-376 has a required
 interaction with the NTD active site on the same monomer. Interestingly, we
 see no trans-like characteristics in these data, demonstrating that there is
 no catalytic cooperativity between the two NTDs, analogous to what was shown
 with human Hsp90 (18).Contribution of Hydrophobic Interactions to Complete Active Site
 Formation—As discussed above, the Hsp82/ATP/Sba1 structure revealed
 a cluster of interacting hydrophobic and polar amino acids derived from the
 NTD and MD domains that come together in the ATP state to form both
 intermonomer and intramonomer interactions
 (Fig. 3A). The
 residues involved in this interaction are Thr-22, Val-23, and Tyr-24 from the
 NTD of one monomer and Leu-372 and Leu-374 from the MD of the other. Since the
 two leucines are located on the same loop and pack against Arg-376 (above) and
 make cross-monomer interactions in the ATP but not apo states (data not
 shown), this entire cluster seems appropriate for investigation.To test whether these residues are involved in the hydrolysis of ATP, we
 systematically mutated each residue to alanine and measured the ATPase
 activity (Fig. 3B).
 All constructs were tested in the presence of the Hsp90 family specific
 inhibitor, geldanamycin, to confirm that the activity measured in these
 experiments was from Hsc82 and not from any contaminating ATPase activity
 (data not shown). Interestingly, as a homodimer, T22A showed no significant
 loss in activity when measured at 37 °C (data not shown); however, it has
 been previously shown that T22I is a temperature-sensitive mutation resulting
 in increased ATPase activity at elevated temperatures
 (24). To probe the importance
 of enhancing hydrophobicity at this site, we constructed the T22F mutation and
 saw a 3-fold increase in activity, proving that the hydrophobic nature of this
 interaction is important for its ATPase activity. Interestingly, when this
 mutation is modeled in the Hsp82/Sba1/AMPPNP crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9)
 (data not shown), steric clashes are observed, suggesting that the actual
 hydrolysis-competent structure must be somewhat different from the solved
 crystal structure.FIGURE 5.SAXS analysis on cis and trans mutants. SAXS analysis was utilized
 to determine the effect of these mutations on the conformational equilibrium
 of Hsp90. A, WT Hsc82 in the absence (black line) and
 presence (red line) of saturating amounts (10 mm) of
 AMPPNP shows two distinct distance distribution functions with the
 nucleotide-bound state, showing a much narrower set of distances very similar
 to what is seen when the distance distribution function is calculated from the
 AMPPNP-bound crystal structure (blue line). B and
 C, V23A (B) and (C) L374N (apo = black
 line, AMPPNP = red line) show a loss of an effect when AMPPNP is
 in solution. D, however, T22F (apo = black line, AMPPNP =
 red line), with its increased ATP hydrolysis, shows a similar profile
 to that of the WT distribution in the presence of nucleotide (gray dashed
 line).As homodimers, V23A and Y24A both showed a significant loss of activity,
 whereas the L372A and L374A mutations had little effect (data not shown).
 Given the experience with Thr-22, we also explored the impact of polar
 mutations, changing Leu to either Asn or Asp. Both mutations had very
 pronounced effects, indicating the importance of hydrophobic residues in this
 network.To determine the impact of these residues with respect to the two monomers
 and their ATP active sites, we again measured each residue in our heterodimer
 assay in conjunction with the catalytically dead E33A mutation. Both V23A and
 Y24A show a clear increase in ATP hydrolysis, strongly supporting a trans
 interaction (Fig. 4, A and
 B). We also note that the Y24A heterodimer data appear to
 reside between the cis and trans predictions, suggesting that it plays a role
 in the hydrolysis of both monomers. T22F showed a small but reproducible
 curvature in the mixture plots (Fig.
 4C), demonstrating that it too participates in a trans
 interaction. Together, these results implicate this NTD region as providing
 interactions required for hydrolysis of the opposite monomer to proceed. As
 shown in Fig. 4, D and
 E, both leucine mutations interact in cis to the E33A
 mutation, suggesting that the role of these residues is to bridge the network
 between the N-terminal residues on the opposite monomer and the arginine that
 has been shown to interact with the γ-phosphate of ATP.The Hydrophobic Interaction Network Affects the Conformational
 Equilibrium of Hsc82—Given the evidence that the hydrophobic
 network affected the ATPase activity of Hsp90 and was shown to act in a
 cross-monomer interaction, we wanted to test whether or not these mutations
 had an effect on the conformational equilibrium of Hsc82 by preventing the
 stabilization of N-terminal dimerization when ATP is present. To directly
 assess the consequences of mutation on the solution structure of Hsc82, we
 used SAXS to probe the interatomic distance distribution in the presence and
 absence of the non-hydrolyzable ATP analog, AMPPNP.Upon the addition of AMPPNP at saturating concentrations, we see a
 reproducible shift in the distance distribution to smaller distances when
 compared with the apo state, indicating that a more closed and compact
 conformation is being stabilized, analogous to what is seen in the
 AMPPNP-bound crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9)
 (Fig. 5A and
 Table 1). In the presence of
 AMPPNP, the observed solution structure is not quite as compact as the crystal
 structure (radii of gyration 47 versus 41 Å, respectively);
 however, whether this represents an equilibrium between open and closed states
 or an altered conformation will require further analysis. Representative
 mutations affecting the network in both cis (L374N) and trans (V23A) were then
 tested by SAXS. For both mutations, the radii of gyration indicated a slight
 expansion in the apo state. However, in sharp contrast to the wild-type
 enzyme, the addition of AMPPNP caused little or no change in the interatomic
 distances, P(r), and radii of gyration when compared with the apo state
 (Fig. 5, B and
 C, and Table
 1). These data suggest that the network of interactions probed
 here is responsible for maintaining the conformational equilibrium of Hsc82 by
 stabilizing the closed state when nucleotide is present and perhaps altering
 the open-closed equilibrium in the absence of nucleotide. It also provides a
 mechanistic understanding for the loss of activity that is observed when these
 residues are mutated.TABLE 1Radii of gyration of Hsc82 homomeric mutations as determined by
 SAXSapoAMPPNP WT
  64.8 ± 0.1 Å
  46.5 ± 0.1 Å
  L374N
  64.6 ± 0.1 Å
  66.0 ± 0.2 Å
  V23A
  70.2 ± 0.2 Å
  70.2 ± 0.3 Å
  T22F
  68.1 ± 0.3 Å
  51.1 ± 0.1 Å
 
 Hsp82:AMPPNP
 
 crystal structure
 
 41 Å
 Given its unique ability to increase ATP hydrolysis, we also examined the
 SAXS behavior of the T22F mutation. Although both states are slightly expanded
 when compared with the native state, T22F shows a response to AMPPNP binding
 comparable with the WT protein (Fig.
 5D). This indicates that despite predictions from the
 crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9), the addition of a larger hydrophobic group
 still allows the closed state to be reached, in complete agreement with the
 observed ATPase activity of this mutant. Taken all together, the SAXS data
 confirm that the intra- and intersubunit network of hydrophobic residues is
 directly involved in the stabilization of the closed state.FIGURE 6.Synergy schematized in energy diagram format. A, two
 residues involved in one process should have an additive effect on the
 reduction of activity. The WT energetic barrier will be raised by individual
 point mutants labeled A* and B*. If
 the residues are synergistic, the double mutant will show an additive increase
 in the activation barrier (dashed line). B, two residues not
 involved in the same process will exhibit the activity of the mutation in the
 rate-limiting process. The WT energetic landscape (black line) will
 be modulated differently by individual point mutants labeled
 A* and B*. The double mutant will show
 an energy landscape (dashed line) that reflects both modulations;
 however, the activity seen will only be dependent on the mutation involved in
 the rate-limiting step.The Middle and N-terminal Domains Act
 Synergistically—Although all of the residues tested show effects on
 the ATPase activity of Hsc82 via either intermonomer or intramonomer
 interactions, and simultaneously alter the open and closed equilibrium,
 whether these residues act cooperatively to stabilize the hydrolysis-competent
 conformation of Hsc82 is unknown. To determine this, we systematically made
 the homomeric double mutations (using the wild-type Glu-33) and measured the
 hydrolysis rates. If two residues interact in the same process, such as
 stabilizing the catalytic transition state, we expect to see an additive
 effect on the loss of activity when both residues are mutated
 (Fig. 6A). However, if
 the residues are involved in separate processes (e.g. one involved in
 hydrolysis and the other in stabilizing a conformational state), then only one
 step will be rate-limiting. As a consequence, the combined mutation will not
 have an additive effect (Fig.
 6B). Instead, the observed rate will only reflect the
 rate of the mutation involved in the rate-limiting step of the reaction; the
 other mutation will be silent. To address this directly, we tested T22F, V23A,
 Y24A, and L374N each in the context of the R376A mutation and measured their
 ATP hydrolysis rates (Table 2).
 For each of the four double mutants tested, we observed a marked decrease in
 the ATPase rates corresponding to a nearly perfect additive effect. Thus
 despite their close proximity, these residues cannot be functioning primarily
 to position Arg-376 for better interaction with the ATP γ-phosphate.
 Instead, the reaction transition state for each active site is synergistically
 stabilized by residues from its own MD as well as those from the opposite
 NTD.TABLE 2ATP hydrolysis rates of both single, double, and truncation mutants of
 Hsc82ProteinActivityFold reduction (with respect to WT)pmol of ATP hydrolyzed/pmol 82/min Hsc82
  1.2 ± 0.04
  1
  T22F
  3.14 ± 0.02
  0.38
  V23A
  0.25 ± 0.08
  4.8
  Y24A
  0.39 ± 0.05
  4.8
  L372D
  0.04 ± 0.02
  60
  L374N
  0.18 ± 0.02
  3
  R376A
  0.18 ± 0.02
  6.7
  T22F/R376A
  0.75 ± 0.07
  1.6
  V23A/R376A
  0.06 ± 0.008
  20
  Y24A/R376A
  0.05 ± 0.03
  24
  L374N/R376A
  0.05 ± 0.004
  24
  N599
  0.18 ± 0.02
  6.7
 
 N599 R376A
 
 0.05 ± 0.01
 
 24
 Given the synergy observed between the two monomers, we wanted to further
 dissect the role of a key NTD-MD interaction by investigating it in isolation
 from possible trans effects. Toward this end, we measured the activity of a
 constitutively monomeric NTD-MD truncation mutant (N599) in the presence and
 absence of the R376A mutant. We confirmed, as reported previously
 (14), that the WT N599
 truncation mutant showed a substantial decrease in activity due to the loss of
 dimerization. However, when Arg-376 is mutated in this construct, we see a
 nearly complete loss of activity (Table
 2). This further decrease in activity suggests that the arginine,
 and in turn, the entire role of the network, is to help stabilize a
 catalytically competent NTD-MD conformation.

Characterization of Heterodimers in Solution—To dissect the
 intra-versus intermonomer roles of specific residues with respect to
 the overall ATPase activity of Hsc82, it was necessary to create asymmetric
 dimers harboring different mutations on each monomer
 (Fig. 2). Because the
 KD for subunit dimerization is in the nm range
 (7), heterodimers can be formed
 simply by mixing homodimers containing different point mutations
 (14). By placing a mutation in
 one monomer that abolishes ATP hydrolysis without blocking nucleotide binding
 (E33A) (15), the role of a
 test mutation in the other monomer can be assayed by the effect of increasing
 proportions of the test mutation on the ATPase rate. First, test mutations are
 chosen that will alter ATPase rates within homodimeric Hsc82. If the test
 mutation functions by altering interactions with the active site on its own
 subunit (an intramonomer or “cis” interaction), then the activity
 of its own active site will be compromised by the mutation. If, however, the
 test mutation alters interactions with the active site on the opposite subunit
 (an intermonomer or “trans” interaction), which is already
 compromised by the E33A mutation, then it will not have a deleterious effect,
 and its own active site should be fully functional
 (Fig. 2). We can calculate the
 predicted hydrolysis rate of any mixture of the two homodimer concentrations
 using standard equilibrium measurements and homodimer activities (see
 “Experimental Procedures”). The hydrolysis rate of differentially
 mixed dimers can then be measured and compared with our predicted rates,
 allowing us to determine the role of the test residue independent of the level
 of its residual activity.

FIGURE 3.Hydrolysis rates for hydrophobic mutants and the contribution of the
 middle domain arginine. A, five hydrophobic residues from both
 monomers come together and interact only in the ATP-bound closed state. One
 monomer is illustrated in brown, whereas the other monomer is shown
 in green. Two of the five residues lie on the same loop as Arg-376,
 which has been previously implicated in stabilizing the γ-phosphate of
 ATP. B, hydrolysis rates of each mutant used in this study. All rates
 have been normalized to the WT hydrolysis rate. C, heterodimer assay
 with R376A and E33A monomers. Ratios between the two homodimers were varied,
 whereas the total protein concentration was kept constant. Predicted inter-
 (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction activities are
 shown with solid lines, and the closed circles represent the
 experimental data.

Hydrolysis rates for hydrophobic mutants and the contribution of the
 middle domain arginine. A, five hydrophobic residues from both
 monomers come together and interact only in the ATP-bound closed state. One
 monomer is illustrated in brown, whereas the other monomer is shown
 in green. Two of the five residues lie on the same loop as Arg-376,
 which has been previously implicated in stabilizing the γ-phosphate of
 ATP. B, hydrolysis rates of each mutant used in this study. All rates
 have been normalized to the WT hydrolysis rate. C, heterodimer assay
 with R376A and E33A monomers. Ratios between the two homodimers were varied,
 whereas the total protein concentration was kept constant. Predicted inter-
 (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction activities are
 shown with solid lines, and the closed circles represent the
 experimental data.

Although it has previously been shown that Hsc82 heterodimers could form
 (14), in our hands, proof of
 heterodimer formation upon mixing in vitro was shown both physically
 and enzymatically. Using differentially tagged constructs of Hsc82 as
 indicators (supplemental Fig. 1), tagged and untagged Hsc82 were mixed in a
 3:1, 1:1, or 1:3 ratio (untagged:tagged) and incubated at 30 °C for an
 hour. MALDI-time-of-flight was then used to probe the relative abundance of
 each dimer species in each of the reactions. As expected, three peaks are seen
 in the spectrum of the 1:1 ratio reaction corresponding to each of the pure
 homodimers and a peak between them representing the formation of heterodimer.
 When the untagged homodimer is in 3-fold excess, only two peaks are seen,
 corresponding to the excess untagged homodimer and the heterodimer. The
 converse result was obtained when the tagged homodimer was in excess. Although
 equilibrium calculations predict a small amount of the minor homodimer to be
 present in solution (12.5%), this species could not be observed in the
 experiment due to limited sensitivity when working with intact proteins of
 this size in a conventional MALDI instrument.

To confirm that the heterodimers still possessed the ability to hydrolyze
 ATP, a fixed concentration of wild-type Hsc82 was incubated with increasing
 amounts of the catalytically dead E33A mutant (Glu-33 is required to
 coordinate the hydrolytic water). Activity levels of the two homodimers are
 shown in Fig. 3B. ATP
 hydrolysis rates were unaffected by the amount of added inactive mutant
 (supplemental Fig. 2). When combined with the mass spectrometric data, these
 results show that under our conditions, heterodimers can be formed in solution
 and are fully able to hydrolyze ATP, although one of the monomers is
 catalytically dead. This confirms the independent activation of the individual
 NTD ATPases. In contrast, the removal of one of the NTDs reduces, but does not
 abolish, ATP activity (14) in
 the context of heterodimers, demonstrating the structural requirement of
 having both NTDs present in the dimer to fully activate each ATPase.

Influence of the Middle Domain on the ATPase Activity of
 Hsc82—Investigation of the apo and AMPPNP structures shows a group
 of residues (Thr-22, Val-23, Tyr-24, Leu-372, Leu-374, and Arg-376) that come
 together from distant parts of the apo structure to form an interacting
 cluster in the ATP state (Fig.
 3A). Arg-376 (Arg-380 in Hsp82) was previously shown to
 be important for hydrolysis, making this entire cluster an attractive starting
 point for dissecting inter- and intramonomer interactions. Unlike the E33A
 mutation, the homomeric R376A mutant significantly reduces, but does not
 abolish, ATPase activity when compared with the E33A mutation previously
 described (Fig.
 3B).

FIGURE 4.Heterodimer assay on the hydrophobic residues. A-E,
 heterodimeric analysis of V23A (A), Y24A (B), T22F
 (C), L372D (D), and L374N (E). The T22F heterodimer
 assay has very small error bars that are occluded by the point size. Predicted
 inter- (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction
 activities are shown with lines, and the experimental data are
 represented by closed circles. All of the residues that originate
 from the MD result in a cis-like interaction (L372D and L374N), whereas most
 of the residues originating from the NTD (V23A, Y24A, and T22F) result in a
 trans-like interaction with Tyr-24, showing evidence of being involved in both
 cis and trans.

Heterodimer assay on the hydrophobic residues. A-E,
 heterodimeric analysis of V23A (A), Y24A (B), T22F
 (C), L372D (D), and L374N (E). The T22F heterodimer
 assay has very small error bars that are occluded by the point size. Predicted
 inter- (black) and intramonomer (gray) interaction
 activities are shown with lines, and the experimental data are
 represented by closed circles. All of the residues that originate
 from the MD result in a cis-like interaction (L372D and L374N), whereas most
 of the residues originating from the NTD (V23A, Y24A, and T22F) result in a
 trans-like interaction with Tyr-24, showing evidence of being involved in both
 cis and trans.

As a first test of our assay, we wanted to biochemically confirm that
 Arg-376 affects the ATPase of its own NTD, as suggested by the Hsp82/ATP/Sba1
 structure. To do this, the mutant, R376A, was tested in our heterodimer assay
 in conjunction with the catalytically dead E33A mutation. Separately expressed
 and purified R376A and E33A were mixed in defined ratios while keeping the
 total protein concentration constant; after a period of incubation, their ATP
 hydrolysis rates were measured (Fig.
 3C). Using the behaviors of the individual mutants as
 homodimers (Fig. 3B),
 the expected activity as a function of the mixture percentages can be readily
 predicted (Fig. 3C,
 trans = black, cis = gray; see also “Experimental
 Procedures”). From this, it is clear that Arg-376 has a required
 interaction with the NTD active site on the same monomer. Interestingly, we
 see no trans-like characteristics in these data, demonstrating that there is
 no catalytic cooperativity between the two NTDs, analogous to what was shown
 with human Hsp90 (18).

Contribution of Hydrophobic Interactions to Complete Active Site
 Formation—As discussed above, the Hsp82/ATP/Sba1 structure revealed
 a cluster of interacting hydrophobic and polar amino acids derived from the
 NTD and MD domains that come together in the ATP state to form both
 intermonomer and intramonomer interactions
 (Fig. 3A). The
 residues involved in this interaction are Thr-22, Val-23, and Tyr-24 from the
 NTD of one monomer and Leu-372 and Leu-374 from the MD of the other. Since the
 two leucines are located on the same loop and pack against Arg-376 (above) and
 make cross-monomer interactions in the ATP but not apo states (data not
 shown), this entire cluster seems appropriate for investigation.

To test whether these residues are involved in the hydrolysis of ATP, we
 systematically mutated each residue to alanine and measured the ATPase
 activity (Fig. 3B).
 All constructs were tested in the presence of the Hsp90 family specific
 inhibitor, geldanamycin, to confirm that the activity measured in these
 experiments was from Hsc82 and not from any contaminating ATPase activity
 (data not shown). Interestingly, as a homodimer, T22A showed no significant
 loss in activity when measured at 37 °C (data not shown); however, it has
 been previously shown that T22I is a temperature-sensitive mutation resulting
 in increased ATPase activity at elevated temperatures
 (24). To probe the importance
 of enhancing hydrophobicity at this site, we constructed the T22F mutation and
 saw a 3-fold increase in activity, proving that the hydrophobic nature of this
 interaction is important for its ATPase activity. Interestingly, when this
 mutation is modeled in the Hsp82/Sba1/AMPPNP crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9)
 (data not shown), steric clashes are observed, suggesting that the actual
 hydrolysis-competent structure must be somewhat different from the solved
 crystal structure.

FIGURE 5.SAXS analysis on cis and trans mutants. SAXS analysis was utilized
 to determine the effect of these mutations on the conformational equilibrium
 of Hsp90. A, WT Hsc82 in the absence (black line) and
 presence (red line) of saturating amounts (10 mm) of
 AMPPNP shows two distinct distance distribution functions with the
 nucleotide-bound state, showing a much narrower set of distances very similar
 to what is seen when the distance distribution function is calculated from the
 AMPPNP-bound crystal structure (blue line). B and
 C, V23A (B) and (C) L374N (apo = black
 line, AMPPNP = red line) show a loss of an effect when AMPPNP is
 in solution. D, however, T22F (apo = black line, AMPPNP =
 red line), with its increased ATP hydrolysis, shows a similar profile
 to that of the WT distribution in the presence of nucleotide (gray dashed
 line).

SAXS analysis on cis and trans mutants. SAXS analysis was utilized
 to determine the effect of these mutations on the conformational equilibrium
 of Hsp90. A, WT Hsc82 in the absence (black line) and
 presence (red line) of saturating amounts (10 mm) of
 AMPPNP shows two distinct distance distribution functions with the
 nucleotide-bound state, showing a much narrower set of distances very similar
 to what is seen when the distance distribution function is calculated from the
 AMPPNP-bound crystal structure (blue line). B and
 C, V23A (B) and (C) L374N (apo = black
 line, AMPPNP = red line) show a loss of an effect when AMPPNP is
 in solution. D, however, T22F (apo = black line, AMPPNP =
 red line), with its increased ATP hydrolysis, shows a similar profile
 to that of the WT distribution in the presence of nucleotide (gray dashed
 line).

As homodimers, V23A and Y24A both showed a significant loss of activity,
 whereas the L372A and L374A mutations had little effect (data not shown).
 Given the experience with Thr-22, we also explored the impact of polar
 mutations, changing Leu to either Asn or Asp. Both mutations had very
 pronounced effects, indicating the importance of hydrophobic residues in this
 network.

To determine the impact of these residues with respect to the two monomers
 and their ATP active sites, we again measured each residue in our heterodimer
 assay in conjunction with the catalytically dead E33A mutation. Both V23A and
 Y24A show a clear increase in ATP hydrolysis, strongly supporting a trans
 interaction (Fig. 4, A and
 B). We also note that the Y24A heterodimer data appear to
 reside between the cis and trans predictions, suggesting that it plays a role
 in the hydrolysis of both monomers. T22F showed a small but reproducible
 curvature in the mixture plots (Fig.
 4C), demonstrating that it too participates in a trans
 interaction. Together, these results implicate this NTD region as providing
 interactions required for hydrolysis of the opposite monomer to proceed. As
 shown in Fig. 4, D and
 E, both leucine mutations interact in cis to the E33A
 mutation, suggesting that the role of these residues is to bridge the network
 between the N-terminal residues on the opposite monomer and the arginine that
 has been shown to interact with the γ-phosphate of ATP.

The Hydrophobic Interaction Network Affects the Conformational
 Equilibrium of Hsc82—Given the evidence that the hydrophobic
 network affected the ATPase activity of Hsp90 and was shown to act in a
 cross-monomer interaction, we wanted to test whether or not these mutations
 had an effect on the conformational equilibrium of Hsc82 by preventing the
 stabilization of N-terminal dimerization when ATP is present. To directly
 assess the consequences of mutation on the solution structure of Hsc82, we
 used SAXS to probe the interatomic distance distribution in the presence and
 absence of the non-hydrolyzable ATP analog, AMPPNP.

Upon the addition of AMPPNP at saturating concentrations, we see a
 reproducible shift in the distance distribution to smaller distances when
 compared with the apo state, indicating that a more closed and compact
 conformation is being stabilized, analogous to what is seen in the
 AMPPNP-bound crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9)
 (Fig. 5A and
 Table 1). In the presence of
 AMPPNP, the observed solution structure is not quite as compact as the crystal
 structure (radii of gyration 47 versus 41 Å, respectively);
 however, whether this represents an equilibrium between open and closed states
 or an altered conformation will require further analysis. Representative
 mutations affecting the network in both cis (L374N) and trans (V23A) were then
 tested by SAXS. For both mutations, the radii of gyration indicated a slight
 expansion in the apo state. However, in sharp contrast to the wild-type
 enzyme, the addition of AMPPNP caused little or no change in the interatomic
 distances, P(r), and radii of gyration when compared with the apo state
 (Fig. 5, B and
 C, and Table
 1). These data suggest that the network of interactions probed
 here is responsible for maintaining the conformational equilibrium of Hsc82 by
 stabilizing the closed state when nucleotide is present and perhaps altering
 the open-closed equilibrium in the absence of nucleotide. It also provides a
 mechanistic understanding for the loss of activity that is observed when these
 residues are mutated.

TABLE 1Radii of gyration of Hsc82 homomeric mutations as determined by
 SAXSapoAMPPNP WT
  64.8 ± 0.1 Å
  46.5 ± 0.1 Å
  L374N
  64.6 ± 0.1 Å
  66.0 ± 0.2 Å
  V23A
  70.2 ± 0.2 Å
  70.2 ± 0.3 Å
  T22F
  68.1 ± 0.3 Å
  51.1 ± 0.1 Å
 
 Hsp82:AMPPNP
 
 crystal structure
 
 41 Å

Radii of gyration of Hsc82 homomeric mutations as determined by
 SAXS

Given its unique ability to increase ATP hydrolysis, we also examined the
 SAXS behavior of the T22F mutation. Although both states are slightly expanded
 when compared with the native state, T22F shows a response to AMPPNP binding
 comparable with the WT protein (Fig.
 5D). This indicates that despite predictions from the
 crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9), the addition of a larger hydrophobic group
 still allows the closed state to be reached, in complete agreement with the
 observed ATPase activity of this mutant. Taken all together, the SAXS data
 confirm that the intra- and intersubunit network of hydrophobic residues is
 directly involved in the stabilization of the closed state.

FIGURE 6.Synergy schematized in energy diagram format. A, two
 residues involved in one process should have an additive effect on the
 reduction of activity. The WT energetic barrier will be raised by individual
 point mutants labeled A* and B*. If
 the residues are synergistic, the double mutant will show an additive increase
 in the activation barrier (dashed line). B, two residues not
 involved in the same process will exhibit the activity of the mutation in the
 rate-limiting process. The WT energetic landscape (black line) will
 be modulated differently by individual point mutants labeled
 A* and B*. The double mutant will show
 an energy landscape (dashed line) that reflects both modulations;
 however, the activity seen will only be dependent on the mutation involved in
 the rate-limiting step.

Synergy schematized in energy diagram format. A, two
 residues involved in one process should have an additive effect on the
 reduction of activity. The WT energetic barrier will be raised by individual
 point mutants labeled A* and B*. If
 the residues are synergistic, the double mutant will show an additive increase
 in the activation barrier (dashed line). B, two residues not
 involved in the same process will exhibit the activity of the mutation in the
 rate-limiting process. The WT energetic landscape (black line) will
 be modulated differently by individual point mutants labeled
 A* and B*. The double mutant will show
 an energy landscape (dashed line) that reflects both modulations;
 however, the activity seen will only be dependent on the mutation involved in
 the rate-limiting step.

The Middle and N-terminal Domains Act
 Synergistically—Although all of the residues tested show effects on
 the ATPase activity of Hsc82 via either intermonomer or intramonomer
 interactions, and simultaneously alter the open and closed equilibrium,
 whether these residues act cooperatively to stabilize the hydrolysis-competent
 conformation of Hsc82 is unknown. To determine this, we systematically made
 the homomeric double mutations (using the wild-type Glu-33) and measured the
 hydrolysis rates. If two residues interact in the same process, such as
 stabilizing the catalytic transition state, we expect to see an additive
 effect on the loss of activity when both residues are mutated
 (Fig. 6A). However, if
 the residues are involved in separate processes (e.g. one involved in
 hydrolysis and the other in stabilizing a conformational state), then only one
 step will be rate-limiting. As a consequence, the combined mutation will not
 have an additive effect (Fig.
 6B). Instead, the observed rate will only reflect the
 rate of the mutation involved in the rate-limiting step of the reaction; the
 other mutation will be silent. To address this directly, we tested T22F, V23A,
 Y24A, and L374N each in the context of the R376A mutation and measured their
 ATP hydrolysis rates (Table 2).
 For each of the four double mutants tested, we observed a marked decrease in
 the ATPase rates corresponding to a nearly perfect additive effect. Thus
 despite their close proximity, these residues cannot be functioning primarily
 to position Arg-376 for better interaction with the ATP γ-phosphate.
 Instead, the reaction transition state for each active site is synergistically
 stabilized by residues from its own MD as well as those from the opposite
 NTD.

TABLE 2ATP hydrolysis rates of both single, double, and truncation mutants of
 Hsc82ProteinActivityFold reduction (with respect to WT)pmol of ATP hydrolyzed/pmol 82/min Hsc82
  1.2 ± 0.04
  1
  T22F
  3.14 ± 0.02
  0.38
  V23A
  0.25 ± 0.08
  4.8
  Y24A
  0.39 ± 0.05
  4.8
  L372D
  0.04 ± 0.02
  60
  L374N
  0.18 ± 0.02
  3
  R376A
  0.18 ± 0.02
  6.7
  T22F/R376A
  0.75 ± 0.07
  1.6
  V23A/R376A
  0.06 ± 0.008
  20
  Y24A/R376A
  0.05 ± 0.03
  24
  L374N/R376A
  0.05 ± 0.004
  24
  N599
  0.18 ± 0.02
  6.7
 
 N599 R376A
 
 0.05 ± 0.01
 
 24

ATP hydrolysis rates of both single, double, and truncation mutants of
 Hsc82

Given the synergy observed between the two monomers, we wanted to further
 dissect the role of a key NTD-MD interaction by investigating it in isolation
 from possible trans effects. Toward this end, we measured the activity of a
 constitutively monomeric NTD-MD truncation mutant (N599) in the presence and
 absence of the R376A mutant. We confirmed, as reported previously
 (14), that the WT N599
 truncation mutant showed a substantial decrease in activity due to the loss of
 dimerization. However, when Arg-376 is mutated in this construct, we see a
 nearly complete loss of activity (Table
 2). This further decrease in activity suggests that the arginine,
 and in turn, the entire role of the network, is to help stabilize a
 catalytically competent NTD-MD conformation.

DISCUSSIONATP hydrolysis plays a critical role in Hsp90 function, ultimately
 providing the energy required to drive large scale conformational changes in
 Hsp90 and to remodel and/or release substrate client proteins. Thus developing
 a high resolution understanding of the linkage between conformational change
 and ATPase activity is a fundamental prerequisite for deciphering Hsp90
 function. Although nucleotide hydrolysis is intrinsically an activity of the
 NTD and MD domains, it is greatly stimulated via CTD-mediated dimerization. In
 a mechanism analogous to other GHKL family members, it was argued that NTD
 dimerization was required. The recently solved structure of Hsp82 in the
 presence of AMPPNP and the Sba1 co-chaperone
 (8) confirmed the NTD
 dimerization and also gave the first structural understanding of why the MD is
 required for ATP hydrolysis by showing that Arg-380 (Arg-376 in Hsc82) is
 directed toward and interacts with the γ-phosphate of the bound AMPPNP.
 However, despite the obvious NTD dimerization seen in the crystal structure
 (PDB: 2CG9), kinetic data had suggested that the two ATPase active sites
 function independently
 (18).FIGURE 7.Model for the ATPase activation of Hsp90. A, residues
 (shown with spheres) acting in trans are shaded blue, and
 those interacting in cis are shaded red. Tyr-24 is shown in
 purple to indicate its contribution both in cis and in trans as
 observed in the data. Arg-376 can be seen interacting with the bound ATP
 molecule (shown in cyan) on the same monomer. B, only upon
 nucleotide binding and formation of the hydrophobic cross-monomer network can
 the catalytically active NTD-MD conformation be stabilized and the Arg-376
 correctly oriented at the γ-phosphate of ATP. The black arrow
 denotes the N-terminal dimerization region coming together. The blue
 and red arrows represent the trans and cis interactions required for
 stabilization of N-terminal dimerization, respectively.To better understand the functional importance of dimerization, we focused
 on exploring the role of interdomain and intermonomer interactions in
 stabilizing the ATP hydrolysis-competent conformation of Hsc82. Because the
 residues investigated in this study are conserved among family members, the
 results obtained from Hsc82 should be directly applicable to the entire
 family. Using a novel heterodimeric assay, we identified Thr-22, Val-23, and
 Tyr-24 in the NTD as playing a role in the hydrolysis rate of the opposite
 monomer and MD residues Leu-372, Leu-374, and Arg-376 as being important for
 the ATPase activity of the same monomer. Through double mutations, these
 intra- and inter-subunit interactions appear to work not via Arg-376, but in
 parallel with it, to cooperatively stabilize the same hydrolysis-competent
 state (Fig. 7A).
 Significantly, our SAXS measurements indicate that mutations that alter the
 cis-trans interaction network also alter the hydrodynamic radius, suggesting
 that the two are causally linked. Destabilizing the network leads to a loss of
 AMPPNP-induced domain closure, which in turn leads to a loss of ATPase
 activity.The functional importance of this interaction network was also confirmed by
 the increase in activity observed when Thr-22 was substituted with Phe.
 Although the crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9) predicts that a Phe could not be
 accommodated at this site, both the functional and the SAXS data clearly
 indicate that T22F is compatible with a closed state. Although we initially
 imagined that it enhanced ATPase activity by shifting the open-closed
 equilibrium in favor of the active, closed state, the SAXS data suggest that
 both in the presence and in the absence of nucleotide, T22F slightly prefers a
 more open state. From this, it would be necessary to infer that the T22F
 closed state is even more catalytically active than initially appreciated.We propose a model where stabilization of the ATP hydrolysis transition
 state of Hsp90 requires that a very specific NTD-MD conformation be obtained.
 Nucleotide binding and the cis interactions uncovered in this work act to
 directly stabilize this conformation. Although obviously important, from our
 data, it appears that NTD dimerization works largely in an indirect manner to
 reinforce the cis interactions that stabilize the active conformation of the
 opposite monomer. This model proposes that the functional role of the closed
 state and NTD dimerization is not to activate hydrolysis per se but
 to preferentially stabilize the catalytically correct NTD-MD conformation. In
 support of this, the N599 truncation mutant data indicate that cis
 stabilization interactions play an important role even in the isolated
 monomer.This work confirms the lack of catalytic cooperativity previously observed
 (18); the ATP binding and
 hydrolysis of one monomer does not depend on the ability of the other monomer
 to bind or hydrolyze ATP. By contrast, our data show a clear structural
 cooperativity between the two monomers, where the interdomain and intersubunit
 interactions synergistically stabilize the active closed conformation. One
 possible explanation for this difference in cooperativity is that perhaps the
 catalytically active state is not symmetric as is generally thought but rather
 asymmetric where one ATP active site is correctly oriented, allowing
 hydrolysis to proceed and the other site unable to hydrolyze ATP. An
 asymmetric dimerization would still require structural cooperativity to orient
 one active site correctly but would not be cooperative with respect to ATP
 hydrolysis since only one site at a time would be functional. Notably, an
 asymmetric conformation has been observed by single particle electron
 microscopic studies on a yeast Hsp90/Cdc37/Cdk4 complex
 (25). Although the data
 presented here and all previously reported kinetic data fit with an asymmetric
 model, a more formal structural investigation is necessary to confirm such a
 hypothesis.Co-chaperones play an important role both in client protein recruitment and
 in modulating the Hsp90 ATP cycle
 (26-30).
 By comparing the HtpG apo state and the Hsp82 AMPPNP-bound state, a movement
 of the MD loop by ∼7 Å is observed from a retracted position in the
 apo state to an extended conformation interacting with the opposite NTD. In
 contrast, no movement is seen in the NTD region containing residues 22-24 when
 the two states are compared. This supports a previous proposal suggesting that
 binding the co-chaperone Aha1 activates Hsp90 hydrolysis via alterations of
 the MD loop discussed here
 (31). Although based on
 crystallization of the Aha1 NTD with an isolated Hsp90 MD, it is clear from
 the present work that interactions of this loop with its own NTD and the trans
 NTD are vitally important and that even subtle changes could have significant
 effects on the hydrolysis rate. By contrast, whereas the crystal structure
 (PDB: 2CG9) of Sba1 bound to Hsp90 has been tremendously important, the
 mechanism of the inhibitory effects of Sba1 on the ATP hydrolysis rate
 (20,
 32) has yet to be understood.
 Our data on the T22F mutant and its modeling provide the first direct evidence
 that an alternate conformation may be more relevant for ATP hydrolysis than
 the one seen in the crystal structure. Further experiments aimed at
 understanding the effects of the interactions between Hsp90 and its
 co-chaperones on its conformational stabilization and activation are
 required.

ATP hydrolysis plays a critical role in Hsp90 function, ultimately
 providing the energy required to drive large scale conformational changes in
 Hsp90 and to remodel and/or release substrate client proteins. Thus developing
 a high resolution understanding of the linkage between conformational change
 and ATPase activity is a fundamental prerequisite for deciphering Hsp90
 function. Although nucleotide hydrolysis is intrinsically an activity of the
 NTD and MD domains, it is greatly stimulated via CTD-mediated dimerization. In
 a mechanism analogous to other GHKL family members, it was argued that NTD
 dimerization was required. The recently solved structure of Hsp82 in the
 presence of AMPPNP and the Sba1 co-chaperone
 (8) confirmed the NTD
 dimerization and also gave the first structural understanding of why the MD is
 required for ATP hydrolysis by showing that Arg-380 (Arg-376 in Hsc82) is
 directed toward and interacts with the γ-phosphate of the bound AMPPNP.
 However, despite the obvious NTD dimerization seen in the crystal structure
 (PDB: 2CG9), kinetic data had suggested that the two ATPase active sites
 function independently
 (18).

FIGURE 7.Model for the ATPase activation of Hsp90. A, residues
 (shown with spheres) acting in trans are shaded blue, and
 those interacting in cis are shaded red. Tyr-24 is shown in
 purple to indicate its contribution both in cis and in trans as
 observed in the data. Arg-376 can be seen interacting with the bound ATP
 molecule (shown in cyan) on the same monomer. B, only upon
 nucleotide binding and formation of the hydrophobic cross-monomer network can
 the catalytically active NTD-MD conformation be stabilized and the Arg-376
 correctly oriented at the γ-phosphate of ATP. The black arrow
 denotes the N-terminal dimerization region coming together. The blue
 and red arrows represent the trans and cis interactions required for
 stabilization of N-terminal dimerization, respectively.

Model for the ATPase activation of Hsp90. A, residues
 (shown with spheres) acting in trans are shaded blue, and
 those interacting in cis are shaded red. Tyr-24 is shown in
 purple to indicate its contribution both in cis and in trans as
 observed in the data. Arg-376 can be seen interacting with the bound ATP
 molecule (shown in cyan) on the same monomer. B, only upon
 nucleotide binding and formation of the hydrophobic cross-monomer network can
 the catalytically active NTD-MD conformation be stabilized and the Arg-376
 correctly oriented at the γ-phosphate of ATP. The black arrow
 denotes the N-terminal dimerization region coming together. The blue
 and red arrows represent the trans and cis interactions required for
 stabilization of N-terminal dimerization, respectively.

To better understand the functional importance of dimerization, we focused
 on exploring the role of interdomain and intermonomer interactions in
 stabilizing the ATP hydrolysis-competent conformation of Hsc82. Because the
 residues investigated in this study are conserved among family members, the
 results obtained from Hsc82 should be directly applicable to the entire
 family. Using a novel heterodimeric assay, we identified Thr-22, Val-23, and
 Tyr-24 in the NTD as playing a role in the hydrolysis rate of the opposite
 monomer and MD residues Leu-372, Leu-374, and Arg-376 as being important for
 the ATPase activity of the same monomer. Through double mutations, these
 intra- and inter-subunit interactions appear to work not via Arg-376, but in
 parallel with it, to cooperatively stabilize the same hydrolysis-competent
 state (Fig. 7A).
 Significantly, our SAXS measurements indicate that mutations that alter the
 cis-trans interaction network also alter the hydrodynamic radius, suggesting
 that the two are causally linked. Destabilizing the network leads to a loss of
 AMPPNP-induced domain closure, which in turn leads to a loss of ATPase
 activity.

The functional importance of this interaction network was also confirmed by
 the increase in activity observed when Thr-22 was substituted with Phe.
 Although the crystal structure (PDB: 2CG9) predicts that a Phe could not be
 accommodated at this site, both the functional and the SAXS data clearly
 indicate that T22F is compatible with a closed state. Although we initially
 imagined that it enhanced ATPase activity by shifting the open-closed
 equilibrium in favor of the active, closed state, the SAXS data suggest that
 both in the presence and in the absence of nucleotide, T22F slightly prefers a
 more open state. From this, it would be necessary to infer that the T22F
 closed state is even more catalytically active than initially appreciated.

We propose a model where stabilization of the ATP hydrolysis transition
 state of Hsp90 requires that a very specific NTD-MD conformation be obtained.
 Nucleotide binding and the cis interactions uncovered in this work act to
 directly stabilize this conformation. Although obviously important, from our
 data, it appears that NTD dimerization works largely in an indirect manner to
 reinforce the cis interactions that stabilize the active conformation of the
 opposite monomer. This model proposes that the functional role of the closed
 state and NTD dimerization is not to activate hydrolysis per se but
 to preferentially stabilize the catalytically correct NTD-MD conformation. In
 support of this, the N599 truncation mutant data indicate that cis
 stabilization interactions play an important role even in the isolated
 monomer.

This work confirms the lack of catalytic cooperativity previously observed
 (18); the ATP binding and
 hydrolysis of one monomer does not depend on the ability of the other monomer
 to bind or hydrolyze ATP. By contrast, our data show a clear structural
 cooperativity between the two monomers, where the interdomain and intersubunit
 interactions synergistically stabilize the active closed conformation. One
 possible explanation for this difference in cooperativity is that perhaps the
 catalytically active state is not symmetric as is generally thought but rather
 asymmetric where one ATP active site is correctly oriented, allowing
 hydrolysis to proceed and the other site unable to hydrolyze ATP. An
 asymmetric dimerization would still require structural cooperativity to orient
 one active site correctly but would not be cooperative with respect to ATP
 hydrolysis since only one site at a time would be functional. Notably, an
 asymmetric conformation has been observed by single particle electron
 microscopic studies on a yeast Hsp90/Cdc37/Cdk4 complex
 (25). Although the data
 presented here and all previously reported kinetic data fit with an asymmetric
 model, a more formal structural investigation is necessary to confirm such a
 hypothesis.

Co-chaperones play an important role both in client protein recruitment and
 in modulating the Hsp90 ATP cycle
 (26-30).
 By comparing the HtpG apo state and the Hsp82 AMPPNP-bound state, a movement
 of the MD loop by ∼7 Å is observed from a retracted position in the
 apo state to an extended conformation interacting with the opposite NTD. In
 contrast, no movement is seen in the NTD region containing residues 22-24 when
 the two states are compared. This supports a previous proposal suggesting that
 binding the co-chaperone Aha1 activates Hsp90 hydrolysis via alterations of
 the MD loop discussed here
 (31). Although based on
 crystallization of the Aha1 NTD with an isolated Hsp90 MD, it is clear from
 the present work that interactions of this loop with its own NTD and the trans
 NTD are vitally important and that even subtle changes could have significant
 effects on the hydrolysis rate. By contrast, whereas the crystal structure
 (PDB: 2CG9) of Sba1 bound to Hsp90 has been tremendously important, the
 mechanism of the inhibitory effects of Sba1 on the ATP hydrolysis rate
 (20,
 32) has yet to be understood.
 Our data on the T22F mutant and its modeling provide the first direct evidence
 that an alternate conformation may be more relevant for ATP hydrolysis than
 the one seen in the crystal structure. Further experiments aimed at
 understanding the effects of the interactions between Hsp90 and its
 co-chaperones on its conformational stabilization and activation are
 required.

Supplementary Material[Author Profile]

Supplementary Material

[Author Profile]
