---
pmid: '10864329'
title: Redundant roles for the TFIID and SAGA complexes in global transcription.
authors:
- Lee TI
- Causton HC
- Holstege FC
- Shen WC
- Hannett N
- Jennings EG
- Winston F
- Green MR
- Young RA
journal: Nature
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/35015104
---

# Redundant roles for the TFIID and SAGA complexes in global transcription.
**Authors:** Lee TI, Causton HC, Holstege FC, Shen WC, Hannett N, Jennings EG, Winston F, Green MR, Young RA
**Journal:** Nature (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/35015104](https://doi.org/10.1038/35015104)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2000 Jun 8;405(6787):701-4. doi: 10.1038/35015104.

Redundant roles for the TFIID and SAGA complexes in global transcription.

Lee TI(1), Causton HC, Holstege FC, Shen WC, Hannett N, Jennings EG, Winston F, 
Green MR, Young RA.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, 
USA.

The transcription factors TFIID and SAGA are multi-subunit complexes involved in 
transcription by RNA polymerase II. TFIID and SAGA contain common TATA-binding 
protein (TBP)-associated factor (TAF(II)) subunits and each complex contains a 
subunit with histone acetyltransferase activity. These observations have raised 
questions about whether the functions of the two complexes in vivo are unique or 
overlapping. Here we use genome-wide expression analysis to investigate how 
expression of the yeast genome depends on both shared and unique subunits of 
these two complexes. We find that expression of most genes requires one or more 
of the common TAF(II) subunits, indicating that the functions of TFIID and SAGA 
are widely required for gene expression. Among the subunits shared by TFIID and 
SAGA are three histone-like TAF(II)s, which have been proposed to form a 
sub-complex and mediate a common function in global transcription. Unexpectedly, 
we find that the histone-like TAF(II)s have distinct roles in expression of the 
yeast genome. Most importantly, we show that the histone acetylase components of 
TFIID and SAGA (TAF(II)145 and Gcn5) are functionally redundant, indicating that 
expression of a large fraction of yeast genes can be regulated through the 
action of either complex.

DOI: 10.1038/35015104
PMID: 10864329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
