---
pmid: '10534613'
title: Ectodysplasin, a protein required for epithelial morphogenesis, is a novel
  TNF homologue and promotes cell-matrix adhesion.
authors:
- Mikkola ML
- Pispa J
- Pekkanen M
- Paulin L
- Nieminen P
- Kere J
- Thesleff I
journal: Mech Dev
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(99)00180-x
---

# Ectodysplasin, a protein required for epithelial morphogenesis, is a novel TNF homologue and promotes cell-matrix adhesion.
**Authors:** Mikkola ML, Pispa J, Pekkanen M, Paulin L, Nieminen P, Kere J, Thesleff I
**Journal:** Mech Dev (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0925-4773(99)00180-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0925-4773(99)00180-x)

## Abstract

1. Mech Dev. 1999 Nov;88(2):133-46. doi: 10.1016/s0925-4773(99)00180-x.

Ectodysplasin, a protein required for epithelial morphogenesis, is a novel TNF 
homologue and promotes cell-matrix adhesion.

Mikkola ML(1), Pispa J, Pekkanen M, Paulin L, Nieminen P, Kere J, Thesleff I.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter, 
00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. marja.mikkola@helsinki.fi

In the mouse Tabby (Ta) mutant and human X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia (EDA) syndrome development of several ectodermal organs such as hair, 
teeth, and sweat glands is impaired. The gene behind Tabby and EDA has been 
cloned, and several alternative transcripts have been isolated. The protein 
product named ectodysplasin had no obvious function or prominent homology to 
other known gene products apart from a short collagen-like sequence. We have 
isolated two novel Ta transcripts which are variants of the longest isoform of 
Tabby, named Ta-A. In situ hybridizations revealed Ta-A to be the major 
transcript in the developing embryo. It was detected in the endoderm of early 
embryos and subsequently in specific locations in the neuroepithelium and 
ectoderm. Unexpectedly, sequence analysis of the most C-terminal domain of Ta 
revealed that ectodysplasin is a novel member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) 
ligand superfamily. Mouse ectodysplasin was biochemically and functionally 
characterized, and shown to be a glycosylated, oligomeric type II membrane 
protein (N-terminus inside), all characteristics typical to TNF-like proteins. 
Members of the TNF family are critically involved in host defence and immune 
response often mediating either apoptosis or cell survival. Expression of Ta in 
several epithelial cell lines did not result in prominent changes in cell 
morphology and did not promote apoptosis. Instead, it was shown to promote cell 
adhesion to extracellular matrix, a function consistent with its postulated role 
in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions regulating the development of ectodermal 
appendages. Ectodysplasin is the first TNF-like signaling molecule described 
known to be required for epithelial morphogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4773(99)00180-x
PMID: 10534613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
