---
pmid: '12006984'
title: Structural basis for the selective activation of Rho GTPases by Dbl exchange
  factors.
authors:
- Snyder JT
- Worthylake DK
- Rossman KL
- Betts L
- Pruitt WM
- Siderovski DP
- Der CJ
- Sondek J
journal: Nat Struct Biol
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsb796
---

# Structural basis for the selective activation of Rho GTPases by Dbl exchange factors.
**Authors:** Snyder JT, Worthylake DK, Rossman KL, Betts L, Pruitt WM, Siderovski DP, Der CJ, Sondek J
**Journal:** Nat Struct Biol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsb796](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsb796)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Biol. 2002 Jun;9(6):468-75. doi: 10.1038/nsb796.

Structural basis for the selective activation of Rho GTPases by Dbl exchange 
factors.

Snyder JT(1), Worthylake DK, Rossman KL, Betts L, Pruitt WM, Siderovski DP, Der 
CJ, Sondek J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Program in Molecular and Cellular 
Biophysics, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Activation of Rho-family GTPases involves the removal of bound GDP and the 
subsequent loading of GTP, all catalyzed by guanine nucleotide exchange factors 
(GEFs) of the Dbl-family. Despite high sequence conservation among Rho GTPases, 
Dbl proteins possess a wide spectrum of discriminatory potentials for Rho-family 
members. To rationalize this specificity, we have determined crystal structures 
of the conserved, catalytic fragments (Dbl and pleckstrin homology domains) of 
the exchange factors intersectin and Dbs in complex with their cognate GTPases, 
Cdc42 and RhoA, respectively. Structure-based mutagenesis of intersectin and Dbs 
reveals the key determinants responsible for promoting exchange activity in 
Cdc42, Rac1 and RhoA. These findings provide critical insight into the 
structural features necessary for the proper pairing of Dbl-exchange factors 
with Rho GTPases and now allow for the detailed manipulation of signaling 
pathways mediated by these oncoproteins in vivo.

DOI: 10.1038/nsb796
PMID: 12006984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
