---
pmid: '16188939'
title: The adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) exists in two distinct soluble
  complexes with different functions.
authors:
- Penman GA
- Leung L
- Näthke IS
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.02589
---

# The adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) exists in two distinct soluble complexes with different functions.
**Authors:** Penman GA, Leung L, Näthke IS
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.02589](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.02589)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2005 Oct 15;118(Pt 20):4741-50. doi: 10.1242/jcs.02589. Epub 2005 
Sep 27.

The adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) exists in two distinct soluble 
complexes with different functions.

Penman GA(1), Leung L, Näthke IS.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, WTB, University of Dundee, Dow Street, 
Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.

Mutations resulting in the truncation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) 
protein are common to most colonic tumours. The APC protein has emerged as a 
multifunctional protein that contributes to cytoskeletal organisation and is 
involved in the regulation of beta-catenin. Both, changes in transcription due 
to increases in beta-catenin, as well as defects in directed cell migration and 
cell division contribute to cancer when APC is mutated. Little is known about 
how separate functions of APC are coordinated. In this study, we identified two 
distinct soluble protein pools containing APC. We found that one of these pools 
represents the fully assembled beta-catenin-targeting complex. The second pool 
contained at least two different forms of APC: APC that was bound to partially 
assembled beta-catenin-targeting complexes and APC that could bind microtubules. 
Consistent with the previously proposed role for glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
(GSK3beta) in modulating the assembly and activity of the beta-catenin-targeting 
complex, formation of the fully assembled complex was reduced by inhibitors of 
GSK3beta. Similarly, tumour cells with truncated APC only contained the 
partially assembly beta-catenin-targeting complex. We also found that highly 
elevated levels of beta-catenin in tumour cells containing wild-type APC 
correlated with a decrease in the ability of the endogenous APC protein to bind 
microtubules. Additionally, APC lacking the direct microtubule binding site was 
more effective at downregulating beta-catenin. Together, our data suggest that 
the interaction of APC with microtubules and the beta-catenin-targeting complex 
are mutually exclusive, and indicate that the distribution of endogenous APC 
between different pools is dynamic, which allows cells to distribute it as 
required.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.02589
PMID: 16188939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
