---
pmid: '19366428'
title: Arabidopsis ROF1 (FKBP62) modulates thermotolerance by interacting with HSP90.1
  and affecting the accumulation of HsfA2-regulated sHSPs.
authors:
- Meiri D
- Breiman A
journal: Plant J
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03878.x
---

# Arabidopsis ROF1 (FKBP62) modulates thermotolerance by interacting with HSP90.1 and affecting the accumulation of HsfA2-regulated sHSPs.
**Authors:** Meiri D, Breiman A
**Journal:** Plant J (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03878.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03878.x)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2009 Aug;59(3):387-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03878.x. Epub
2009  Apr 2.

Arabidopsis ROF1 (FKBP62) modulates thermotolerance by interacting with HSP90.1 
and affecting the accumulation of HsfA2-regulated sHSPs.

Meiri D(1), Breiman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Arabidopsis ROF1 (AtFKBP62) is a peptidyl prolyl cis/trans isomerase and a 
member of the FKBP (FK506 binding protein) family. ROF1 expression is induced by 
heat stress and developmentally regulated. In this study, we show that ROF1 
binds heat shock proteins HSP90.1 via its tetratricopeptide repeat domain, and 
localizes in the cytoplasm under normal conditions. Exposure to heat stress 
induces nuclear localization of the ROF1-HSP90.1 complex, which is dependent 
upon the presence of the transcription factor HsfA2, which interacts with 
HSP90.1 but not with ROF1. Nuclear localization of ROF1 was not detected in 
Arabidopsis HSP90.1 and HsfA2 knockout mutants. The rof1 knockout plants 
exhibited collapse when 24-48 h passed between acclimation at 37 degrees C and 
exposure to 45 degrees C. Transgenic ROF1 over-expressors showed better survival 
in response to exposure to 45 degrees C than wild-type plants did. In rof1 
knockout mutants, the level of expression of small HSPs regulated by HsfA2 was 
dramatically reduced after exposure to 37 degrees C and recovery for 24-48 h, 
and correlates well with the mutant phenotype. We suggest a role for ROF1 in 
prolongation of thermotolerance by sustaining the levels of small HSPs that are 
essential for survival at high temperatures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03878.x
PMID: 19366428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
