---
pmid: '16319068'
title: Camptothecin induces nuclear export of prohibitin preferentially in transformed
  cells through a CRM-1-dependent mechanism.
authors:
- Rastogi S
- Joshi B
- Fusaro G
- Chellappan S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M508669200
---

# Camptothecin induces nuclear export of prohibitin preferentially in transformed cells through a CRM-1-dependent mechanism.
**Authors:** Rastogi S, Joshi B, Fusaro G, Chellappan S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M508669200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M508669200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 3;281(5):2951-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M508669200. Epub 2005 
Nov 30.

Camptothecin induces nuclear export of prohibitin preferentially in transformed 
cells through a CRM-1-dependent mechanism.

Rastogi S(1), Joshi B, Fusaro G, Chellappan S.

Author information:
(1)Drug Discovery Program, Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. Lee 
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, University of South Florida, 
Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Prohibitin is a growth-suppressive protein that has multiple functions in the 
nucleus and the mitochondria. Our earlier studies had shown that prohibitin 
represses the activity of E2F transcription factors while enhancing p53-mediated 
transcription. At the same time, prohibitin has been implicated in mediating the 
proper folding of mitochondrial proteins. We had found that treatment of cells 
with camptothecin, a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, led to the export of prohibitin 
and p53 from the nucleus to the mitochondria. Here we show that the 
camptothecin-induced export of prohibitin occurs preferentially in transformed 
cell lines, but not in untransformed or primary cells. Cells that did not 
display the translocation of prohibitin were refractive to the apoptotic effects 
of camptothecin. The translocation was mediated by a putative nuclear export 
signal at the C-terminal region of prohibitin; fusion of the nuclear export 
signal (NES) of prohibitin to green fluorescence protein led to its export from 
the nucleus. Leptomycin B could inhibit the nuclear export of prohibitin showing 
that it was a CRM-1-dependent event driven by Ran GTPase. Confirming this, 
prohibitin was found to physically interact with CRM-1, and this interaction was 
significantly higher in transformed cells. Delivery of a peptide corresponding 
to the NES of prohibitin prevented the export of prohibitin to cytoplasm and 
protected cells from apoptosis. These results suggest that the regulated 
translocation of prohibitin from the nucleus to the mitochondria facilitates its 
pleiotropic functions and might contribute to its anti-proliferative and tumor 
suppressive properties.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M508669200
PMID: 16319068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
