---
reference_id: PMID:10849009
title: The PKC targeting protein RACK1 interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus activator protein BZLF1.
authors:
- Baumann M
- Gires O
- Kolch W
- Mischak H
- Zeidler R
- Pich D
- Hammerschmidt W
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01430.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The PKC targeting protein RACK1 interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus activator protein BZLF1.
**Authors:** Baumann M, Gires O, Kolch W, Mischak H, Zeidler R, Pich D, Hammerschmidt W
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01430.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01430.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jun;267(12):3891-901. doi:
10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01430.x.

The PKC targeting protein RACK1 interacts with the Epstein-Barr virus activator
protein BZLF1.

Baumann M(1), Gires O, Kolch W, Mischak H, Zeidler R, Pich D, Hammerschmidt W.

Author information:
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Clinical Molecular Biology and Tumor Genetics, Department of Gene Vectors,
München, Germany.

Phorbol esters reactivate Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) from latently infected cells
via transcriptional activation of the viral immediate-early gene BZLF1. BZLF1 is
a member of the extended AP-1 family of transcription factors that binds to
specific BZLF1-binding motifs within early EBV promoters and to consensus AP-1
sites. Regulation of BZLF1's activity is achieved at the transcriptional level
as well as through post-translational modifications. Recently, we reported that
the transcriptional activity of BZLF1 is augmented by TPA [Baumann, M., Mischak,
H., Dammeier, S., Kolch, W., Gires, O., Pich, D., Zeidler, R., Delecluse, H. J.
& Hammerschmidt, W., (1998) J. Virol. 72, 8105-8114]. The increase of BZLF1's
activity depends on a single serine residue (S186) that is phosphorylated by
protein kinase C (PKC) in vitro and in vivo after stimulation with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Here, we identified RACK1 as a
binding partner of BZLF1 in a yeast interaction trap assay. RACK stands for
receptor of activated C-kinase and is involved in targeting activated PKCs and
other signaling proteins. In vivo, RACK1 binds directly to the transactivation
domain of BZLF1. Although a functional relationship between BZLF1 and PKC could
be mediated by RACKs, RACK1 did not have a detectable effect on the
phosphorylation status of BZLF1 in in vitro or in vivo phosphorylation assays.
We suggest that RACK1 may act as a scaffolding protein on BZLF1 independently of
activated PKCs.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.2000.01430.x
PMID: 10849009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]