---
pmid: '18515354'
title: The identification and structural characterization of C7orf24 as gamma-glutamyl
  cyclotransferase. An essential enzyme in the gamma-glutamyl cycle.
authors:
- Oakley AJ
- Yamada T
- Liu D
- Coggan M
- Clark AG
- Board PG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803623200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The identification and structural characterization of C7orf24 as gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase. An essential enzyme in the gamma-glutamyl cycle.
**Authors:** Oakley AJ, Yamada T, Liu D, Coggan M, Clark AG, Board PG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M803623200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M803623200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Aug 8;283(32):22031-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803623200. Epub
2008  May 30.

The identification and structural characterization of C7orf24 as gamma-glutamyl 
cyclotransferase. An essential enzyme in the gamma-glutamyl cycle.

Oakley AJ(1), Yamada T, Liu D, Coggan M, Clark AG, Board PG.

Author information:
(1)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, 
Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 14;283(46):32152.

The hypothetical protein C7orf24 has been implicated as a cancer marker with a 
potential role in cell proliferation. We have identified C7orf24 as 
gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase (GGCT) that catalyzes the formation of 
5-oxoproline (pyroglutamic acid) from gamma-glutamyl dipeptides and potentially 
plays a significant role in glutathione homeostasis. In the present study we 
have identified the first cDNA clones encoding a gamma-glutamyl 
cyclotransferase. The GGCT gene is located on chromosome 7p14-15 and consists of 
four exons that span 8 kb. The primary sequence is 188 amino acids in length and 
is unlike any protein of known function. We crystallized functional recombinant 
gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase and determined its structure at 1.7 A 
resolution. The enzyme is a dimer of 20,994-Da subunits. The topology of GGCT is 
unrelated to other enzymes associated with cyclotransferase-like activity. The 
fold was originally classified as "BtrG-like," a small family that only includes 
structures of hypothetical proteins from Mus musculus, Escherichia coli, 
Pyrococcus horikoshii, and Arabidopsis thaliana. Since this is the first member 
of this family with a defined function, we propose to refer to this structure as 
the gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase fold. We have identified a potential active 
site pocket that contains a highly conserved glutamic acid (Glu(98)) and propose 
that it acts as a general acid/base in the reaction mechanism. Mutation of 
Glu(98) to Ala or Gln completely inactivates the enzyme without altering the 
overall fold.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M803623200
PMID: 18515354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
