---
pmid: '16461914'
title: Core domain interactions in full-length p53 in solution.
authors:
- Veprintsev DB
- Freund SM
- Andreeva A
- Rutledge SE
- Tidow H
- Cañadillas JM
- Blair CM
- Fersht AR
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1413758
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0511130103
---

# Core domain interactions in full-length p53 in solution.
**Authors:** Veprintsev DB, Freund SM, Andreeva A, Rutledge SE, Tidow H, Cañadillas JM, Blair CM, Fersht AR
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0511130103](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0511130103)
**PMC:** [PMC1413758](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1413758/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Feb 14;103(7):2115-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0511130103. Epub 2006 Feb 6.

Core domain interactions in full-length p53 in solution.

Veprintsev DB(1), Freund SM, Andreeva A, Rutledge SE, Tidow H, Cañadillas JM, 
Blair CM, Fersht AR.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Protein Engineering, Medical Research 
Council Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

The tumor suppressor p53 consists of four 393-residue chains, each of which has 
two natively unfolded (N- and C-terminal) and two folded (core and 
tetramerization) domains. Their structural organization is poorly characterized 
as the protein tends to aggregate, has defied crystallization, and is at the 
limits of NMR studies. We first stabilized the protein by mutation to make it 
more suitable for extended study and then acquired NMR spectra on full-length 
protein and various combinations of shorter domain constructs. The NMR spectrum 
(15N,1H transverse relaxation optimized spectroscopy) of full-length p53 was 
close to that expected from the sum of the spectra of isolated individual 
domains. However, patterns of changes in chemical shifts revealed unexpected 
interactions between the core domains. We used the NMR data as constraints in 
docking algorithms and found a previously uncharacterized self-complementary 
surface for the association of core domains into dimers within the tetrameric 
complex. Binding to DNA requires about a 70 degrees rotation to break those 
subunit interactions and form the known protein:protein interface in the p53-DNA 
complex. We verified the interactions by the effects of mutation on DNA binding. 
Spectroscopic, biophysical, and mutational data conspired to give a picture of 
the p53 tetramer as a dimer of loosely tethered core dimers of appropriate 
symmetry to be poised to bind target DNA.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0511130103
PMCID: PMC1413758
PMID: 16461914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts 
declared.

## Full Text

Abstract

The tumor suppressor p53 consists of four 393-residue chains, each of which has two natively unfolded (N- and C-terminal) and two folded (core and tetramerization) domains. Their structural organization is poorly characterized as the protein tends to aggregate, has defied crystallization, and is at the limits of NMR studies. We first stabilized the protein by mutation to make it more suitable for extended study and then acquired NMR spectra on full-length protein and various combinations of shorter domain constructs. The NMR spectrum ( 15 N, 1 H transverse relaxation optimized spectroscopy) of full-length p53 was close to that expected from the sum of the spectra of isolated individual domains. However, patterns of changes in chemical shifts revealed unexpected interactions between the core domains. We used the NMR data as constraints in docking algorithms and found a previously uncharacterized self-complementary surface for the association of core domains into dimers within the tetrameric complex. Binding to DNA requires about a 70° rotation to break those subunit interactions and form the known protein:protein interface in the p53–DNA complex. We verified the interactions by the effects of mutation on DNA binding. Spectroscopic, biophysical, and mutational data conspired to give a picture of the p53 tetramer as a dimer of loosely tethered core dimers of appropriate symmetry to be poised to bind target DNA.
