---
pmid: '10951563'
title: 'Gros1, a potential growth suppressor on chromosome 1: its identity to basement
  membrane-associated proteoglycan, leprecan.'
authors:
- Kaul SC
- Sugihara T
- Yoshida A
- Nomura H
- Wadhwa R
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203696
---

# Gros1, a potential growth suppressor on chromosome 1: its identity to basement membrane-associated proteoglycan, leprecan.
**Authors:** Kaul SC, Sugihara T, Yoshida A, Nomura H, Wadhwa R
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203696](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203696)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2000 Jul 27;19(32):3576-83. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203696.

Gros1, a potential growth suppressor on chromosome 1: its identity to basement 
membrane-associated proteoglycan, leprecan.

Kaul SC(1), Sugihara T, Yoshida A, Nomura H, Wadhwa R.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Bioscience and Human-Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.

By immunoscreening with an antibody raised against a plasma membrane protein, we 
have cloned a growth suppressor gene, Gros1 and assigned it to short arm of 
human chromosome 1. Two alternatively spliced forms of the gene encoding 84- and 
41-kDa (carboxy-terminus truncated) proteins were cloned. The two transcripts, 
4.4 and 2.7 kb, were expressed weakly in most of the human tissues, with a high 
expression of the smaller transcript in placenta, ovary and testis. Normal human 
fibroblasts in culture showed two transcripts, with a higher level of expression 
of the 4.4 kb transcript. Transformed cells on the other hand showed predominant 
expression of the 2.7 kb transcript. Two Gros1 transcripts were also detected in 
most of the mouse tissues. Stable transfection of the mouse cDNA encoding the 
85-kDa protein into NIH3T3 cells resulted in their slow growth and reduced 
colony-forming efficiency. Stable clones expressing antisense RNA on the other 
hand exhibited higher colony forming efficiency. While our data implied that 
Gros1 is a novel growth suppressor gene on human chromosome 1, an independent 
study has recently characterized its rat-homolog as a leucine proline-enriched 
novel basement membrane-associated proteoglycan leprecan. We describe here 
cloning, expression and biological activity analysis implying that this novel 
proteoglycan is a potential growth suppressor on chromosome 1p31, frequently 
altered in many malignancies.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203696
PMID: 10951563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
