---
pmid: '19706527'
title: The BH4 domain of Bcl-2 inhibits ER calcium release and apoptosis by binding
  the regulatory and coupling domain of the IP3 receptor.
authors:
- Rong YP
- Bultynck G
- Aromolaran AS
- Zhong F
- Parys JB
- De Smedt H
- Mignery GA
- Roderick HL
- Bootman MD
- Distelhorst CW
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2728114
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907555106
---

# The BH4 domain of Bcl-2 inhibits ER calcium release and apoptosis by binding the regulatory and coupling domain of the IP3 receptor.
**Authors:** Rong YP, Bultynck G, Aromolaran AS, Zhong F, Parys JB, De Smedt H, Mignery GA, Roderick HL, Bootman MD, Distelhorst CW
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0907555106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0907555106)
**PMC:** [PMC2728114](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2728114/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14397-402. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0907555106. Epub 2009 Aug 17.

The BH4 domain of Bcl-2 inhibits ER calcium release and apoptosis by binding the 
regulatory and coupling domain of the IP3 receptor.

Rong YP(1), Bultynck G, Aromolaran AS, Zhong F, Parys JB, De Smedt H, Mignery 
GA, Roderick HL, Bootman MD, Distelhorst CW.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Although the presence of a BH4 domain distinguishes the antiapoptotic protein 
Bcl-2 from its proapoptotic relatives, little is known about its function. BH4 
deletion converts Bcl-2 into a proapoptotic protein, whereas a TAT-BH4 fusion 
peptide inhibits apoptosis and improves survival in models of disease due to 
accelerated apoptosis. Thus, the BH4 domain has antiapoptotic activity 
independent of full-length Bcl-2. Here we report that the BH4 domain mediates 
interaction of Bcl-2 with the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor, an 
IP3-gated Ca(2+) channel on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). BH4 peptide binds to 
the regulatory and coupling domain of the IP3 receptor and inhibits 
IP3-dependent channel opening, Ca(2+) release from the ER, and Ca(2+)-mediated 
apoptosis. A peptide inhibitor of Bcl-2-IP3 receptor interaction prevents these 
BH4-mediated effects. By inhibiting proapoptotic Ca(2+) signals at their point 
of origin, the Bcl-2 BH4 domain has the facility to block diverse pathways 
through which Ca(2+) induces apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0907555106
PMCID: PMC2728114
PMID: 19706527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
