---
pmid: '11571277'
title: PrPC directly interacts with proteins involved in signaling pathways.
authors:
- Spielhaupter C
- Schätzl HM
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103289200
---

# PrPC directly interacts with proteins involved in signaling pathways.
**Authors:** Spielhaupter C, Schätzl HM
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M103289200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M103289200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44604-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M103289200. Epub 
2001 Sep 24.

PrPC directly interacts with proteins involved in signaling pathways.

Spielhaupter C(1), Schätzl HM.

Author information:
(1)Max von Pettenkofer Institute, Department of Virology, Gene Center Munich, 
Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, D-81377 
Munich, Germany.

The cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) is a conserved glycoprotein predominantly 
expressed in neuronal cells. Its purpose in living cells is still enigmatic. To 
elucidate on its cellular function, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen for 
interactors. We used murine PrP(C) (amino acids 23-231) as bait to search a 
mouse brain cDNA expression library. Several interaction partners were 
identified. Three of them with a high homology to known sequences were further 
characterized. These candidates were the neuronal phosphoprotein synapsin Ib, 
the adaptor protein Grb2, and the still uncharacterized prion interactor Pint1. 
The in vivo interaction of the three proteins with PrP(C) was confirmed by 
co-immunoprecipitation assays with recombinant and authentic proteins in 
mammalian cells. The binding regions were mapped using truncated PrP constructs. 
As both synapsin Ib and Grb2 are implicated in neuronal signaling processes, our 
findings further strengthen the putative role of the prion protein in signal 
transduction.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M103289200
PMID: 11571277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
