---
pmid: '12577067'
title: A proteomics strategy to elucidate functional protein-protein interactions
  applied to EGF signaling.
authors:
- Blagoev B
- Kratchmarova I
- Ong SE
- Nielsen M
- Foster LJ
- Mann M
journal: Nat Biotechnol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nbt790
---

# A proteomics strategy to elucidate functional protein-protein interactions applied to EGF signaling.
**Authors:** Blagoev B, Kratchmarova I, Ong SE, Nielsen M, Foster LJ, Mann M
**Journal:** Nat Biotechnol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nbt790](https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt790)

## Abstract

1. Nat Biotechnol. 2003 Mar;21(3):315-8. doi: 10.1038/nbt790. Epub 2003 Feb 10.

A proteomics strategy to elucidate functional protein-protein interactions 
applied to EGF signaling.

Blagoev B(1), Kratchmarova I, Ong SE, Nielsen M, Foster LJ, Mann M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Experimental BioInformatics, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense 
M, Denmark.

Mass spectrometry-based proteomics can reveal protein-protein interactions on a 
large scale, but it has been difficult to separate background binding from 
functionally important interactions and still preserve weak binders. To 
investigate the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway, we employ 
stable isotopic amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to differentially label 
proteins in EGF-stimulated versus unstimulated cells. Combined cell lysates were 
affinity-purified over the SH2 domain of the adapter protein Grb2 (GST-SH2 
fusion protein) that specifically binds phosphorylated EGFR and Src homologous 
and collagen (Shc) protein. We identified 228 proteins, of which 28 were 
selectively enriched upon stimulation. EGFR and Shc, which interact directly 
with the bait, had large differential ratios. Many signaling molecules 
specifically formed complexes with the activated EGFR-Shc, as did plectin, 
epiplakin, cytokeratin networks, histone H3, the glycosylphosphatidylinositol 
(GPI)-anchored molecule CD59, and two novel proteins. SILAC combined with 
modification-based affinity purification is a useful approach to detect specific 
and functional protein-protein interactions.

DOI: 10.1038/nbt790
PMID: 12577067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
