---
pmid: '8402648'
title: 'Investigation of the subcellular distribution of the bcl-2 oncoprotein: residence
  in the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer mitochondrial membranes.'
authors:
- Krajewski S
- Tanaka S
- Takayama S
- Schibler MJ
- Fenton W
- Reed JC
journal: Cancer Res
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# Investigation of the subcellular distribution of the bcl-2 oncoprotein: residence in the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer mitochondrial membranes.
**Authors:** Krajewski S, Tanaka S, Takayama S, Schibler MJ, Fenton W, Reed JC
**Journal:** Cancer Res (1993)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Res. 1993 Oct 1;53(19):4701-14.

Investigation of the subcellular distribution of the bcl-2 oncoprotein: 
residence in the nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer 
mitochondrial membranes.

Krajewski S(1), Tanaka S, Takayama S, Schibler MJ, Fenton W, Reed JC.

Author information:
(1)Oncogene and Tumor Suppression Gene Program, La Jolla Cancer Research 
Foundation, California 92037.

A multidisciplinary approach was taken to investigate the intracellular 
locations of the 26-kDa integral membrane protein encoded by the bcl-2 gene. 
Subcellular fractionation analysis of a t(14;18)-containing lymphoma cell line 
revealed the presence of Bcl-2 protein in nuclear, heavy-membrane, and 
light-membrane fractions but not in cytosol. Sedimentation of heavy-membrane 
fractions in Nycodenz and Percoll continuous gradients demonstrated comigration 
of p26-Bcl-2 with mitochondrial but not other organelle-associated proteins. 
Fractionation of light-membrane fractions using discontinuous sucrose-gradients 
revealed association of Bcl-2 protein primarily with lighter-density microsomes 
(smooth endoplasmic reticulum) as opposed to heavy-density microsomes (rough 
endoplasmic reticulum). Immune microscopy studies using laser-scanning 
microscopy, pre- and postembedding electron microscopic methods, and six 
different anti-Bcl-2 antibodies demonstrated Bcl-2 immunoreactivity in the 
nuclear envelope and outer mitochondrial membrane in a patchy distribution. 
Furthermore, anti-Bcl-2 antibody immunoreactivity generally appeared to directly 
overlie the nuclear envelope in high magnification electron microscopic studies, 
reminiscent of nuclear pore complexes. Addition of in vitro translated p26-Bcl-2 
to isolated translocation-competent mitochondria revealed transmembrane 
domain-dependent association of Bcl-2 protein with mitochondria but provided no 
evidence for import into a protease-resistant compartment, consistent with 
immunomicroscopic localization to the outer mitochondrial membrane. Taken 
together, the findings demonstrate that p26-Bcl-2 resides primarily in the 
nuclear envelope, endoplasmic reticulum, and outer mitochondrial membrane in a 
nonuniform distribution suggestive of participation in protein complexes perhaps 
involved in some aspect of transport.

PMID: 8402648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
