---
pmid: '12147689'
title: Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2)-induced vesicle movement depends
  on N-WASP and involves Nck, WIP, and Grb2.
authors:
- Benesch S
- Lommel S
- Steffen A
- Stradal TE
- Scaplehorn N
- Way M
- Wehland J
- Rottner K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204145200
---

# Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2)-induced vesicle movement depends on N-WASP and involves Nck, WIP, and Grb2.
**Authors:** Benesch S, Lommel S, Steffen A, Stradal TE, Scaplehorn N, Way M, Wehland J, Rottner K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M204145200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M204145200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 4;277(40):37771-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204145200. Epub
2002  Jul 29.

Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2)-induced vesicle movement depends on 
N-WASP and involves Nck, WIP, and Grb2.

Benesch S(1), Lommel S, Steffen A, Stradal TE, Scaplehorn N, Way M, Wehland J, 
Rottner K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung 
(GBF), Mascheroder Weg 1, D-38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP)/Scar family proteins promote actin 
polymerization by stimulating the actin-nucleating activity of the Arp2/3 
complex. While Scar/WAVE proteins are thought to be involved in lamellipodia 
protrusion, the hematopoietic WASP has been implicated in various actin-based 
processes such as chemotaxis, podosome formation, and phagocytosis. Here we show 
that the ubiquitously expressed N-WASP is essential for actin assembly at the 
surface of endomembranes induced as a consequence of increased 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP2) levels. This process resulting in 
the motility of intracellular vesicles at the tips of actin comets involved the 
recruitment of the Src homology 3 (SH3)-SH2 adaptor proteins Nck and Grb2 as 
well as of WASP interacting protein (WIP). Reconstitution of vesicle movement in 
N-WASP-defective cells by expression of various N-WASP mutant proteins revealed 
three independent domains capable of interaction with the vesicle surface, of 
which both the WH1 and the polyproline domains contributed significantly to 
N-WASP recruitment and/or activation. In contrast, the direct interaction of 
N-WASP with the Rho-GTPase Cdc42 was not required for reconstitution of vesicle 
motility. Our data reveal a distinct cellular phenotype for N-WASP loss of 
function, which adds to accumulating evidence that the proposed link between 
actin and membrane dynamics may, at least partially, be reflected by the 
actin-based movement of vesicles through the cytoplasm.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204145200
PMID: 12147689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
