---
pmid: '16843901'
title: Multiple distinct assemblies reveal conformational flexibility in the small
  heat shock protein Hsp26.
authors:
- White HE
- Orlova EV
- Chen S
- Wang L
- Ignatiou A
- Gowen B
- Stromer T
- Franzmann TM
- Haslbeck M
- Buchner J
- Saibil HR
journal: Structure
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2006.05.021
---

# Multiple distinct assemblies reveal conformational flexibility in the small heat shock protein Hsp26.
**Authors:** White HE, Orlova EV, Chen S, Wang L, Ignatiou A, Gowen B, Stromer T, Franzmann TM, Haslbeck M, Buchner J, Saibil HR
**Journal:** Structure (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2006.05.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2006.05.021)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2006 Jul;14(7):1197-204. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2006.05.021.

Multiple distinct assemblies reveal conformational flexibility in the small heat 
shock protein Hsp26.

White HE(1), Orlova EV, Chen S, Wang L, Ignatiou A, Gowen B, Stromer T, 
Franzmann TM, Haslbeck M, Buchner J, Saibil HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Crystallography, Birkbeck College, London WC1E 7HX, United 
Kingdom.

Small heat shock proteins are a superfamily of molecular chaperones that 
suppress protein aggregation and provide protection from cell stress. A key 
issue for understanding their action is to define the interactions of subunit 
domains in these oligomeric assemblies. Cryo-electron microscopy of yeast Hsp26 
reveals two distinct forms, each comprising 24 subunits arranged in a porous 
shell with tetrahedral symmetry. The subunits form elongated, asymmetric dimers 
that assemble via trimeric contacts. Modifications of both termini cause 
rearrangements that yield a further four assemblies. Each subunit contains an 
N-terminal region, a globular middle domain, the alpha-crystallin domain, and a 
C-terminal tail. Twelve of the C termini form 3-fold assembly contacts which are 
inserted into the interior of the shell, while the other 12 C termini form 
contacts on the surface. Hinge points between the domains allow a variety of 
assembly contacts, providing the flexibility required for formation of 
supercomplexes with non-native proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2006.05.021
PMID: 16843901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
