---
pmid: '1699136'
title: Distinct nuclear and spindle pole body population of cyclin-cdc2 in fission
  yeast.
authors:
- Alfa CE
- Ducommun B
- Beach D
- Hyams JS
journal: Nature
year: '1990'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/347680a0
---

# Distinct nuclear and spindle pole body population of cyclin-cdc2 in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Alfa CE, Ducommun B, Beach D, Hyams JS
**Journal:** Nature (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1038/347680a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/347680a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1990 Oct 18;347(6294):680-2. doi: 10.1038/347680a0.

Distinct nuclear and spindle pole body population of cyclin-cdc2 in fission 
yeast.

Alfa CE(1), Ducommun B, Beach D, Hyams JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University College London, UK.

Cyclins, as subunits of the protein kinase encoded by the cdc2 gene are major 
controlling elements of the eukaryotic cell cycle. The fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe has a B-type cyclin, which is a nuclear protein 
encoded by the cdc13 gene. Here we demonstrate the presence of two spatially 
distinct cdc13 cyclin populations in the nucleus of S. pombe, one of which is 
associated with the mitotic spindle poles. Both populations colocalize with the 
product of the cdc2 gene (p34cdc2). Treatment of cells with the antimicrotubule 
drug thiabendazole prevents cyclin degradation and blocks the tyrosine 
dephosphorylation and activation of cdc2. These results suggest a key regulatory 
role of the cdc2-cyclin complex in the initiation of mitotic spindle formation 
and also that mitotic microtubule function is required for cdc2 activation.

DOI: 10.1038/347680a0
PMID: 1699136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
