---
pmid: '11546814'
title: Domain mapping of human PEX5 reveals functional and structural similarities
  to Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pex18p and Pex21p.
authors:
- Dodt G
- Warren D
- Becker E
- Rehling P
- Gould SJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106932200
---

# Domain mapping of human PEX5 reveals functional and structural similarities to Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pex18p and Pex21p.
**Authors:** Dodt G, Warren D, Becker E, Rehling P, Gould SJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M106932200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M106932200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41769-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M106932200. Epub
2001  Sep 6.

Domain mapping of human PEX5 reveals functional and structural similarities to 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pex18p and Pex21p.

Dodt G(1), Warren D, Becker E, Rehling P, Gould SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Systembiochemie Ruhr-Universität, 44801 
Bochum, Germany. gabriele.dodt@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

PEX5 functions as an import receptor for proteins with the type-1 peroxisomal 
targeting signal (PTS1). Although PEX5 is not involved in the import of 
PTS2-targeted proteins in yeast, it is essential for PTS2 protein import in 
mammalian cells. Human cells generate two isoforms of PEX5 through alternative 
splicing, PEX5S and PEX5L, and PEX5L contains an additional insert 37 amino 
acids long. Only one isoform, PEX5L, is involved in PTS2 protein import, and 
PEX5L physically interacts with PEX7, the import receptor for PTS2-containing 
proteins. In this report we map the regions of human PEX5L involved in PTS2 
protein import, PEX7 interaction, and targeting to peroxisomes. These studies 
revealed that amino acids 1-230 of PEX5L are required for PTS2 protein import, 
amino acids 191-222 are sufficient for PEX7 interaction, and amino acids 1-214 
are sufficient for targeting to peroxisomes. We also identified a 21-amino 
acid-long peptide motif of PEX5L, amino acids 209-229, that overlaps the regions 
sufficient for full PTS2 rescue activity and PEX7 interaction and is shared by 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Pex18p and Pex21p, two yeast peroxins that act only in 
PTS2 protein import in yeast. A mutation in PEX5 that changes a conserved serine 
of this motif abrogates PTS2 protein import in mammalian cells and reduces the 
interaction of PEX5L and PEX7 in vitro. This peptide motif also lies within 
regions of Pex18p and Pex21p that interact with yeast PEX7. Based on these and 
other results, we propose that mammalian PEX5L may have acquired some of the 
functions that yeast Pex18p and/or Pex21p perform in PTS2 protein import. This 
hypothesis may explain the essential role of PEX5L in PTS2 protein import in 
mammalian cells and its lack of importance for PTS2 protein import in yeast.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M106932200
PMID: 11546814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
