---
pmid: '22493059'
title: LST8 regulates cell growth via target-of-rapamycin complex 2 (TORC2).
authors:
- Wang T
- Blumhagen R
- Lao U
- Kuo Y
- Edgar BA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3372270
doi: 10.1128/MCB.06474-11
---

# LST8 regulates cell growth via target-of-rapamycin complex 2 (TORC2).
**Authors:** Wang T, Blumhagen R, Lao U, Kuo Y, Edgar BA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.06474-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.06474-11)
**PMC:** [PMC3372270](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3372270/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jun;32(12):2203-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06474-11. Epub 2012
Apr  9.

LST8 regulates cell growth via target-of-rapamycin complex 2 (TORC2).

Wang T(1), Blumhagen R, Lao U, Kuo Y, Edgar BA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington, USA. wangtao1006@nibs.ac.cn

The evolutionarily conserved serine/threonine protein kinase target-of-rapamycin 
(TOR) controls cell growth as a core component of TOR complexes 1 (TORC1) and 2 
(TORC2). Although TORC1 is the more central growth regulator, TORC2 has also 
been shown to affect cell growth. Here, we demonstrate that Drosophila LST8, the 
only conserved TOR-binding protein present in both TORC1 and TORC2, functions 
exclusively in TORC2 and is not required for TORC1 activity. In mutants lacking 
LST8, expression of TOR and RAPTOR, together with their upstream activator Rheb, 
was sufficient to provide TORC1 activity and stimulate cell and organ growth. 
Furthermore, using an lst8 knockout mutation, we show that TORC2 regulates cell 
growth cell autonomously. Surprisingly, however, TORC2 does not regulate cell 
growth via its best-characterized target, AKT. Our findings support the possible 
application of TORC2-specific drugs in cancer therapy.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.06474-11
PMCID: PMC3372270
PMID: 22493059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
