---
pmid: '11237865'
title: Roles of the forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) phosphorylation sites in regulating
  14-3-3 binding, transactivation and nuclear targetting.
authors:
- Rena G
- Prescott AR
- Guo S
- Cohen P
- Unterman TG
journal: Biochem J
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1221692
doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3540605
---

# Roles of the forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) phosphorylation sites in regulating 14-3-3 binding, transactivation and nuclear targetting.
**Authors:** Rena G, Prescott AR, Guo S, Cohen P, Unterman TG
**Journal:** Biochem J (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1042/0264-6021:3540605](https://doi.org/10.1042/0264-6021:3540605)
**PMC:** [PMC1221692](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1221692/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 15;354(Pt 3):605-12. doi: 10.1042/0264-6021:3540605.

Roles of the forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR) phosphorylation sites in 
regulating 14-3-3 binding, transactivation and nuclear targetting.

Rena G(1), Prescott AR, Guo S, Cohen P, Unterman TG.

Author information:
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, UK.

The transcription factor, forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR), is phosphorylated 
at three amino acid residues (Thr-24, Ser-256 and Ser-319) by protein kinase B 
(PKB)alpha. In the present study, mutagenesis has been used to study the roles 
of these phosphorylation events in regulating FKHR function in transfected 
HEK-293 cells. We find that the overexpression of FKHR[S256A] (where 
Ser-256-->Ala) blocks PKB activity in cells, preventing phosphorylation of the 
endogenous substrates FKHRL1 and glycogen synthase kinase-3. Thus some reported 
effects of overexpression of this and other mutants may be indirect, and result 
from suppression of the phosphorylation of other sites on FKHR and/or other PKB 
substrates. For example, we have shown that Thr-24 phosphorylation alone is 
critical for interaction with 14-3-3 proteins, and that the substitution of 
Ser-256 with an alanine residue indirectly blocks 14-3-3 protein binding by 
preventing the phosphorylation of Thr-24. We also found that insulin-like growth 
factor (IGF)-1 and serum-induced nuclear exclusion of FKHR[S256A] depends on the 
degree of overexpression of this mutant. Our results indicated that the 
interaction of FKHR with 14-3-3 proteins was not required for IGF-1-stimulated 
exclusion of FKHR from the nucleus. We present evidence in support of another 
mechanism, which depends on the phosphorylation of Ser-256 and may involve the 
masking of a nuclear localization signal. Finally, we have demonstrated that the 
failure of IGF-1 to suppress transactivation by FKHR[S256A] is not explained 
entirely by its failure to bind 14-3-3 proteins or to undergo nuclear exclusion. 
This result suggests that Ser-256 phosphorylation may also suppress 
transactivation by FKHR by yet another mechanism, perhaps by disrupting the 
interaction of FKHR with target DNA binding sites and/or the function of the 
transactivation domain.

DOI: 10.1042/0264-6021:3540605
PMCID: PMC1221692
PMID: 11237865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
