---
pmid: '23318452'
title: 'The function of ORAOV1/LTO1, a gene that is overexpressed frequently in cancer:
  essential roles in the function and biogenesis of the ribosome.'
authors:
- Zhai C
- Li Y
- Mascarenhas C
- Lin Q
- Li K
- Vyrides I
- Grant CM
- Panaretou B
journal: Oncogene
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.604
---

# The function of ORAOV1/LTO1, a gene that is overexpressed frequently in cancer: essential roles in the function and biogenesis of the ribosome.
**Authors:** Zhai C, Li Y, Mascarenhas C, Lin Q, Li K, Vyrides I, Grant CM, Panaretou B
**Journal:** Oncogene (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/onc.2012.604](https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2012.604)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 23;33(4):484-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.604. Epub 2013 Jan
14.

The function of ORAOV1/LTO1, a gene that is overexpressed frequently in cancer: 
essential roles in the function and biogenesis of the ribosome.

Zhai C(1), Li Y(1), Mascarenhas C(2), Lin Q(1), Li K(3), Vyrides I(1), Grant 
CM(2), Panaretou B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)1] Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, King's College London, London, UK [2] 
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

ORAOV1 (oral cancer overexpressed) is overexpressed in many solid tumours, 
making a key contribution to the development of cancer, but the cellular role of 
ORAOV1 is unknown. The yeast orthologue of this protein is encoded by the 
hitherto uncharacterized essential gene, YNL260c. Expression of ORAOV1 restores 
viability to yeast cells lacking YNL260c. Under nonpermissive conditions, our 
conditional mutants of YNL260c are defective in the maturation of the 60S 
ribosomal subunit, whereas maturation of the 40S subunit is unaffected. Also, 
initiation of translation is abrogated when YNL260c function is lost. YNL260c is 
indispensible for life in oxygen, but is nonessential under anaerobic 
conditions. Consequently, the toxic affects of aerobic metabolism on biogenesis 
and function of the ribosome are alleviated by YNL260c, hence, we rename YNL260c 
as LTO1; required for biogenesis of the large ribosomal subunit and initiation 
of translation in oxygen. Lto1 is found in a complex with Rli1/ABCE1, an 
ATP-binding cassette (ABC)-ATPase bearing N-terminal [4Fe-4S] clusters. Like 
Lto1, the Rli1/ABCE1 [4Fe-4S] clusters are not required for viability under 
anaerobic conditions, but are essential in the presence of oxygen. Loss of Lto1 
function renders cells susceptible to hydroperoxide pro-oxidants, though this 
type of sensitivity is specific to certain types of oxidative stress as the lto1 
mutants are not sensitive to an agent that oxidizes thiols. These findings 
reflect a functional interaction between Lto1 and the Rli1/ABCE1 [4Fe-4S] 
clusters, as part of a complex, which relieves the toxic effects of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) on biogenesis and function of the ribosome. This complex 
also includes Yae1, which bridges the interaction between Lto1 and Rli1/ABCE1. 
Interactions between members of this complex were demonstrated both in vivo and 
in vitro. An increased generation of ROS is a feature shared by many cancers. 
The ORAOV1 complex could prevent ROS-induced ribosomal damage, explaining why 
overexpression of ORAOV1 is so common in solid tumours.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2012.604
PMID: 23318452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
