---
pmid: '17290223'
title: Impaired DNA damage checkpoint response in MIF-deficient mice.
authors:
- Nemajerova A
- Mena P
- Fingerle-Rowson G
- Moll UM
- Petrenko O
journal: EMBO J
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1852846
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601564
---

# Impaired DNA damage checkpoint response in MIF-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Nemajerova A, Mena P, Fingerle-Rowson G, Moll UM, Petrenko O
**Journal:** EMBO J (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7601564](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7601564)
**PMC:** [PMC1852846](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1852846/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2007 Feb 21;26(4):987-97. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601564. Epub 2007 Feb
 8.

Impaired DNA damage checkpoint response in MIF-deficient mice.

Nemajerova A(1), Mena P, Fingerle-Rowson G, Moll UM, Petrenko O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony 
Brook, NY 11794, USA, and University Hospital Cologne, Medical Clinic I, 
Hematology and Oncology, Germany.

Recent studies demonstrated that proinflammatory migration inhibitory 
factor(MIF) blocks p53-dependent apoptosis and interferes with the tumor 
suppressor activity of p53. To explore the mechanism underlying this MIF-p53 
relationship, we studied spontaneous tumorigenesis in genetically matched p53-/- 
and MIF-/-p53-/- mice. We show that the loss of MIF expression aggravates the 
tumor-prone phenotype of p53-/- mice and predisposes them to a broader tumor 
spectrum, including B-cell lymphomas and carcinomas. Impaired DNA damage 
response is at the root of tumor predisposition of MIF-/-p53-/- mice. We provide 
evidence that MIF plays a role in regulating the activity of Cul1-containing SCF 
ubiquitin ligases. The loss of MIF expression uncouples Chk1/Chk2-responsive DNA 
damage checkpoints from SCF-dependent degradation of key cell-cycle regulators 
such as Cdc25A, E2F1 and DP1, creating conditions for the genetic instability of 
cells. These MIF effects depend on its association with the Jab1/CSN5 subunit of 
the COP9/CSN signalosome. Given that CSN plays a central role in the assembly of 
SCF complexes in vivo, regulation of Jab1/CSN5 by MIF is required to sustain 
optimal composition and function of the SCF complex.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601564
PMCID: PMC1852846
PMID: 17290223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
