---
pmid: '20421892'
title: PRMT5 regulates Golgi apparatus structure through methylation of the golgin
  GM130.
authors:
- Zhou Z
- Sun X
- Zou Z
- Sun L
- Zhang T
- Guo S
- Wen Y
- Liu L
- Wang Y
- Qin J
- Li L
- Gong W
- Bao S
journal: Cell Res
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.56
---

# PRMT5 regulates Golgi apparatus structure through methylation of the golgin GM130.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, Sun X, Zou Z, Sun L, Zhang T, Guo S, Wen Y, Liu L, Wang Y, Qin J, Li L, Gong W, Bao S
**Journal:** Cell Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2010.56](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2010.56)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2010 Sep;20(9):1023-33. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.56. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

PRMT5 regulates Golgi apparatus structure through methylation of the golgin 
GM130.

Zhou Z(1), Sun X, Zou Z, Sun L, Zhang T, Guo S, Wen Y, Liu L, Wang Y, Qin J, Li 
L, Gong W, Bao S.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics 
and Developmental Biology (IGDB), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, 
China.

Maintenance of the Golgi apparatus (GA) structure and function depends on Golgi 
matrix proteins. The posttranslational modification of Golgi proteins such as 
phosphorylation of members of the golgin and GRASP families is important for 
determining Golgi architecture. Some Golgi proteins including golgin-84 are also 
known to be methylated, but the function of golgin methylation remains unclear. 
Here, we show that the protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) localizes to 
the GA and forms complexes with several components involved in GA ribbon 
formation and vesicle tethering. PRMT5 interacts with the golgin GM130, and 
depletion of PRMT5 causes defects in Golgi ribbon formation. Furthermore, PRMT5 
methylates N-terminal arginines in GM130, and such arginine methylation appears 
critical for GA ribbon formation. Our findings reveal a molecular mechanism by 
which PRMT5-dependent arginine methylation of GM130 controls the maintenance of 
GA architecture.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2010.56
PMID: 20421892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
