---
pmid: '10075919'
title: Crystal structure of a heparin- and integrin-binding segment of human fibronectin.
authors:
- Sharma A
- Askari JA
- Humphries MJ
- Jones EY
- Stuart DI
journal: EMBO J
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1171236
doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.6.1468
---

# Crystal structure of a heparin- and integrin-binding segment of human fibronectin.
**Authors:** Sharma A, Askari JA, Humphries MJ, Jones EY, Stuart DI
**Journal:** EMBO J (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/18.6.1468](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/18.6.1468)
**PMC:** [PMC1171236](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1171236/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1999 Mar 15;18(6):1468-79. doi: 10.1093/emboj/18.6.1468.

Crystal structure of a heparin- and integrin-binding segment of human 
fibronectin.

Sharma A(1), Askari JA, Humphries MJ, Jones EY, Stuart DI.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, University of Oxford, Rex Richardson 
Building, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QU, UK.

The crystal structure of human fibronectin (FN) type III repeats 12-14 reveals 
the primary heparin-binding site, a clump of positively charged residues in 
FN13, and a putative minor site approximately 60 A away in FN14. The IDAPS motif 
implicated in integrin alpha4beta1 binding is at the FN13-14 junction, rendering 
the critical Asp184 inaccessible to integrin. Asp184 clamps the BC loop of FN14, 
whose sequence (PRARI) is reminiscent of the synergy sequence (PHSRN) of FN9. 
Mutagenesis studies prompted by this observation reveal that both arginines of 
the PRARI sequence are important for alpha4beta1 binding to FN12-14. The PRARI 
motif may represent a new class of integrin-binding sites. The spatial 
organization of the binding sites suggests that heparin and integrin may bind in 
concert.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/18.6.1468
PMCID: PMC1171236
PMID: 10075919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The crystal structure of human fibronectin (FN) type III repeats 12-14 reveals the primary heparin-binding site, a clump of positively charged residues in FN13, and a putative minor site approximately 60 A away in FN14. The IDAPS motif implicated in integrin alpha4beta1 binding is at the FN13-14 junction, rendering the critical Asp184 inaccessible to integrin. Asp184 clamps the BC loop of FN14, whose sequence (PRARI) is reminiscent of the synergy sequence (PHSRN) of FN9. Mutagenesis studies prompted by this observation reveal that both arginines of the PRARI sequence are important for alpha4beta1 binding to FN12-14. The PRARI motif may represent a new class of integrin-binding sites. The spatial organization of the binding sites suggests that heparin and integrin may bind in concert.
