---
pmid: '22484317'
title: Human prion protein binds Argonaute and promotes accumulation of microRNA effector
  complexes.
authors:
- Gibbings D
- Leblanc P
- Jay F
- Pontier D
- Michel F
- Schwab Y
- Alais S
- Lagrange T
- Voinnet O
journal: Nat Struct Mol Biol
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2273
---

# Human prion protein binds Argonaute and promotes accumulation of microRNA effector complexes.
**Authors:** Gibbings D, Leblanc P, Jay F, Pontier D, Michel F, Schwab Y, Alais S, Lagrange T, Voinnet O
**Journal:** Nat Struct Mol Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nsmb.2273](https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2273)

## Abstract

1. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Apr 8;19(5):517-24, S1. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2273.

Human prion protein binds Argonaute and promotes accumulation of microRNA 
effector complexes.

Gibbings D(1), Leblanc P, Jay F, Pontier D, Michel F, Schwab Y, Alais S, 
Lagrange T, Voinnet O.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Biologie 
Moléculaire des Plantes, Strasbourg, France.

Despite intense research in the context of neurodegenerative diseases associated 
with its misfolding, the endogenous human prion protein PrP(C) (or PRNP) has 
poorly understood physiological functions. Whereas most PrP(C) is exposed to the 
extracellular environment, conserved domains result in transmembrane forms of 
PrP(C) that traffic in the endolysosomal system and are linked to inherited and 
infectious neuropathologies. One transmembrane PrP(C) variant orients the 
N-terminal 'octarepeat' domain into the cytoplasm. Here we demonstrate that the 
octarepeat domain of human PrP(C) contains GW/WG motifs that bind Argonaute 
(AGO) proteins, the essential components of microRNA (miRNA)-induced silencing 
complexes (miRISCs). Transmembrane PrP(C) preferentially binds AGO, and PrP(C) 
promotes formation or stability of miRISC effector complexes containing the 
trinucleotide repeat-containing gene 6 proteins (TNRC6) and miRNA-repressed 
mRNA. Accordingly, effective repression of several miRNA targets requires 
PrP(C). We propose that dynamic interactions between PrP(C)-enriched endosomes 
and subcellular foci of AGO underpin these effects.

DOI: 10.1038/nsmb.2273
PMID: 22484317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
