---
reference_id: PMID:12024217
title: Comparison of the genomes of two Xanthomonas pathogens with differing host specificities.
authors:
- da Silva AC
- Ferro JA
- Reinach FC
- Farah CS
- Furlan LR
- Quaggio RB
- Monteiro-Vitorello CB
- Van Sluys MA
- Almeida NF
- Alves LM
- do Amaral AM
- Bertolini MC
- Camargo LE
- Camarotte G
- Cannavan F
- Cardozo J
- Chambergo F
- Ciapina LP
- Cicarelli RM
- Coutinho LL
- Cursino-Santos JR
- El-Dorry H
- Faria JB
- Ferreira AJ
- Ferreira RC
- Ferro MI
- Formighieri EF
- Franco MC
- Greggio CC
- Gruber A
- Katsuyama AM
- Kishi LT
- Leite RP
- Lemos EG
- Lemos MV
- Locali EC
- Machado MA
- Madeira AM
- Martinez-Rossi NM
- Martins EC
- Meidanis J
- Menck CF
- Miyaki CY
- Moon DH
- Moreira LM
- Novo MT
- Okura VK
- Oliveira MC
- Oliveira VR
- Pereira HA
- Rossi A
- Sena JA
- Silva C
- de Souza RF
- Spinola LA
- Takita MA
- Tamura RE
- Teixeira EC
- Tezza RI
- Trindade dos Santos M
- Truffi D
- Tsai SM
- White FF
- Setubal JC
- Kitajima JP
journal: Nature
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/417459a
keywords:
- Gene Order/genetics
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- Host-Parasite Interactions
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Phylogeny
- Plants/microbiology
- Regulon/genetics
- Replication Origin/genetics
- Species Specificity
- Virulence/genetics
- "Xanthomonas/classification, genetics, pathogenicity, physiology"
- "Xanthomonas campestris/genetics, pathogenicity, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Comparison of the genomes of two Xanthomonas pathogens with differing host specificities.
**Authors:** da Silva AC, Ferro JA, Reinach FC, Farah CS, Furlan LR, Quaggio RB, Monteiro-Vitorello CB, Van Sluys MA, Almeida NF, Alves LM, do Amaral AM, Bertolini MC, Camargo LE, Camarotte G, Cannavan F, Cardozo J, Chambergo F, Ciapina LP, Cicarelli RM, Coutinho LL, Cursino-Santos JR, El-Dorry H, Faria JB, Ferreira AJ, Ferreira RC, Ferro MI, Formighieri EF, Franco MC, Greggio CC, Gruber A, Katsuyama AM, Kishi LT, Leite RP, Lemos EG, Lemos MV, Locali EC, Machado MA, Madeira AM, Martinez-Rossi NM, Martins EC, Meidanis J, Menck CF, Miyaki CY, Moon DH, Moreira LM, Novo MT, Okura VK, Oliveira MC, Oliveira VR, Pereira HA, Rossi A, Sena JA, Silva C, de Souza RF, Spinola LA, Takita MA, Tamura RE, Teixeira EC, Tezza RI, Trindade dos Santos M, Truffi D, Tsai SM, White FF, Setubal JC, Kitajima JP
**Journal:** Nature (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/417459a](https://doi.org/10.1038/417459a)

## Content

1. Nature. 2002 May 23;417(6887):459-63. doi: 10.1038/417459a.

Comparison of the genomes of two Xanthomonas pathogens with differing host 
specificities.

da Silva AC(1), Ferro JA, Reinach FC, Farah CS, Furlan LR, Quaggio RB, 
Monteiro-Vitorello CB, Van Sluys MA, Almeida NF, Alves LM, do Amaral AM, 
Bertolini MC, Camargo LE, Camarotte G, Cannavan F, Cardozo J, Chambergo F, 
Ciapina LP, Cicarelli RM, Coutinho LL, Cursino-Santos JR, El-Dorry H, Faria JB, 
Ferreira AJ, Ferreira RC, Ferro MI, Formighieri EF, Franco MC, Greggio CC, 
Gruber A, Katsuyama AM, Kishi LT, Leite RP, Lemos EG, Lemos MV, Locali EC, 
Machado MA, Madeira AM, Martinez-Rossi NM, Martins EC, Meidanis J, Menck CF, 
Miyaki CY, Moon DH, Moreira LM, Novo MT, Okura VK, Oliveira MC, Oliveira VR, 
Pereira HA, Rossi A, Sena JA, Silva C, de Souza RF, Spinola LA, Takita MA, 
Tamura RE, Teixeira EC, Tezza RI, Trindade dos Santos M, Truffi D, Tsai SM, 
White FF, Setubal JC, Kitajima JP.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes 
748, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

The genus Xanthomonas is a diverse and economically important group of bacterial 
phytopathogens, belonging to the gamma-subdivision of the Proteobacteria. 
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri (Xac) causes citrus canker, which affects most 
commercial citrus cultivars, resulting in significant losses worldwide. Symptoms 
include canker lesions, leading to abscission of fruit and leaves and general 
tree decline. Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) causes black rot, 
which affects crucifers such as Brassica and Arabidopsis. Symptoms include 
marginal leaf chlorosis and darkening of vascular tissue, accompanied by 
extensive wilting and necrosis. Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris is grown 
commercially to produce the exopolysaccharide xanthan gum, which is used as a 
viscosifying and stabilizing agent in many industries. Here we report and 
compare the complete genome sequences of Xac and Xcc. Their distinct disease 
phenotypes and host ranges belie a high degree of similarity at the genomic 
level. More than 80% of genes are shared, and gene order is conserved along most 
of their respective chromosomes. We identified several groups of strain-specific 
genes, and on the basis of these groups we propose mechanisms that may explain 
the differing host specificities and pathogenic processes.

DOI: 10.1038/417459a
PMID: 12024217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]