---
pmid: '23255046'
title: NSBP-1 mediates the effects of cholesterol on insulin/IGF-1 signaling in Caenorhabditis
  elegans.
authors:
- Cheong MC
- Lee HJ
- Na K
- Joo HJ
- Avery L
- You YJ
- Paik YK
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3759162
doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1221-0
---

# NSBP-1 mediates the effects of cholesterol on insulin/IGF-1 signaling in Caenorhabditis elegans.
**Authors:** Cheong MC, Lee HJ, Na K, Joo HJ, Avery L, You YJ, Paik YK
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-012-1221-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-012-1221-0)
**PMC:** [PMC3759162](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3759162/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 May;70(9):1623-36. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1221-0.
Epub  2012 Dec 20.

NSBP-1 mediates the effects of cholesterol on insulin/IGF-1 signaling in 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Cheong MC(1), Lee HJ, Na K, Joo HJ, Avery L, You YJ, Paik YK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Integrated Omics for Biomedical Science (WCU 
Program), College of Life Science and Biotechnology and Yonsei Proteome Research 
Center, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Sudaemoon-ku, Seoul 120-749, 
Korea.

Nematode sterol-binding protein 1 (NSBP-1) is a homolog of nucleosome assembly 
protein 1 in mammals that is expressed widely in Caenorhabditis elegans. NSBP-1 
mutants are biologically lethal, demonstrating the significance of the gene in 
growth and development. We investigated how cholesterol influences the insulin 
signaling pathway through this novel sterol-binding protein in C. elegans. Here 
we report that NSBP-1 influences many biological processes mediated by insulin 
signaling, such as longevity, dauer formation, fat storage, and resistance to 
oxidative stress. We found that NSBP-1 is phosphorylated by AKT-1 downstream of 
insulin signaling. In the absence of insulin signaling, NSBP-1 is translocated 
to the nucleus and binds to DAF-16, a FOXO transcription factor, in a 
cholesterol-dependent manner. Moreover, NSBP-1 and DAF-16 regulate a common set 
of genes that can directly modulate fat storage, longevity, and resistance to 
stress. Together, our results present a new steroid-binding molecule that can 
connect sterol signaling to insulin signaling through direct interaction with 
FOXO.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-012-1221-0
PMCID: PMC3759162
PMID: 23255046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
