---
pmid: '11086025'
title: Interaction between complement receptor gC1qR and hepatitis C virus core protein
  inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.
authors:
- Kittlesen DJ
- Chianese-Bullock KA
- Yao ZQ
- Braciale TJ
- Hahn YS
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC381434
doi: 10.1172/JCI10323
---

# Interaction between complement receptor gC1qR and hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.
**Authors:** Kittlesen DJ, Chianese-Bullock KA, Yao ZQ, Braciale TJ, Hahn YS
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI10323](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI10323)
**PMC:** [PMC381434](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC381434/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 2000 Nov;106(10):1239-49. doi: 10.1172/JCI10323.

Interaction between complement receptor gC1qR and hepatitis C virus core protein 
inhibits T-lymphocyte proliferation.

Kittlesen DJ(1), Chianese-Bullock KA, Yao ZQ, Braciale TJ, Hahn YS.

Author information:
(1)Beirne Carter Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an important human pathogen that is remarkably 
efficient at establishing persistent infection. The HCV core protein is the 
first protein expressed during the early phase of HCV infection. Our previous 
work demonstrated that the HCV core protein suppresses host immune responses, 
including anti-viral cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses in a murine model. To 
investigate the mechanism of HCV core-mediated immunosuppression, we searched 
for host proteins capable of associating with the core protein using a yeast 
two-hybrid system. Using the core protein as bait, we screened a human T 
cell-enriched expression library and identified a gene encoding the gC1q 
receptor (gC1qR). C1q is a ligand of gC1qR and is involved in the early host 
defense against infection. Like C1q, HCV core can inhibit T-cell proliferative 
responses in vitro. This core-induced anti-T-cell proliferation is reversed by 
addition of anti-gC1qR Ab in a T-cell proliferation assay. Furthermore, 
biochemical analysis of the interaction between core and gC1qR indicates that 
HCV core binds the region spanning amino acids 188 to 259 of gC1qR, a site 
distinct from the binding region of C1q. The inhibition of T-cell responsiveness 
by HCV core may have important implications for HCV persistence in humans.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI10323
PMCID: PMC381434
PMID: 11086025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
