---
pmid: '20515660'
title: Suppression of Akt1 phosphorylation by adenoviral transfer of the PTEN gene
  inhibits hypoxia-induced proliferation of rat pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells.
authors:
- Luo C
- Yi B
- Bai L
- Xia Y
- Wang G
- Qian G
- Feng H
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.140
---

# Suppression of Akt1 phosphorylation by adenoviral transfer of the PTEN gene inhibits hypoxia-induced proliferation of rat pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells.
**Authors:** Luo C, Yi B, Bai L, Xia Y, Wang G, Qian G, Feng H
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.140](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.140)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 2;397(3):486-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.140. Epub 2010 May 31.

Suppression of Akt1 phosphorylation by adenoviral transfer of the PTEN gene 
inhibits hypoxia-induced proliferation of rat pulmonary arterial smooth muscle 
cells.

Luo C(1), Yi B, Bai L, Xia Y, Wang G, Qian G, Feng H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical 
University, Chongqing 400038, PR China.

Recent findings identify the role of proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth 
muscle cells (PASMCs) in pulmonary vascular remodeling. Phosphoinositide 3 
kinase (PI3K) and serine/threonine kinase (Akt) proteins are expressed in 
vascular smooth muscle cells. In addition, phosphatase and tensin homolog 
deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) has been identified as a negative regulator of 
cytokine signaling that inhibits the PI3K-Akt pathway. However, little is known 
about the role of PTEN/Akt signaling in hypoxia-associated vascular remodeling. 
In this study, we found that hypoxia-induced the expression of Akt1 mRNA and 
phosphorylated protein by at least twofold in rat PASMCs. Phospho-PTEN 
significantly decreased in the nuclei of PASMCs after hypoxic stimulation. After 
forcing over-expression of PTEN by adenovirus-mediated PTEN (Ad-PTEN) 
transfection, the expression of phospho-Akt1 was significantly suppressed in 
PASMCs at all time-points measured. Additionally, we showed here that hypoxia 
increased proliferation of PASMCs by nearly twofold and over-expression of PTEN 
significantly inhibited hypoxia-induced PASMCs proliferation. These findings 
suggest that phospho-PTEN loss in the nuclei of PASMCs under hypoxic conditions 
may be the major cause of aberrant activation of Akt1 and may, therefore, play 
an important role in hypoxia-associated pulmonary arterial remodeling. Finally, 
the fact that transfection with Ad-PTEN inhibits the phosphorylation of Akt1 in 
PASMCs suggests a potential therapeutic effect on hypoxia-associated pulmonary 
arterial remodeling.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.140
PMID: 20515660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
