---
pmid: '20573181'
title: Progressive accumulation of amyloid-beta oligomers in Alzheimer's disease and
  in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice is accompanied by selective alterations
  in synaptic scaffold proteins.
authors:
- Pham E
- Crews L
- Ubhi K
- Hansen L
- Adame A
- Cartier A
- Salmon D
- Galasko D
- Michael S
- Savas JN
- Yates JR
- Glabe C
- Masliah E
journal: FEBS J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2933033
doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07719.x
---

# Progressive accumulation of amyloid-beta oligomers in Alzheimer's disease and in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice is accompanied by selective alterations in synaptic scaffold proteins.
**Authors:** Pham E, Crews L, Ubhi K, Hansen L, Adame A, Cartier A, Salmon D, Galasko D, Michael S, Savas JN, Yates JR, Glabe C, Masliah E
**Journal:** FEBS J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07719.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07719.x)
**PMC:** [PMC2933033](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2933033/)

## Abstract

1. FEBS J. 2010 Jul;277(14):3051-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07719.x. Epub 
2010 Jun 22.

Progressive accumulation of amyloid-beta oligomers in Alzheimer's disease and in 
amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice is accompanied by selective 
alterations in synaptic scaffold proteins.

Pham E(1), Crews L, Ubhi K, Hansen L, Adame A, Cartier A, Salmon D, Galasko D, 
Michael S, Savas JN, Yates JR, Glabe C, Masliah E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093-0624, USA.

The cognitive impairment in patients with Alzheimer's disease is closely 
associated with synaptic loss in the neocortex and limbic system. Although the 
neurotoxic effects of aggregated amyloid-beta oligomers in Alzheimer's disease 
have been studied extensively in experimental models, less is known about the 
characteristics of these aggregates across the spectrum of Alzheimer's disease. 
In this study, postmortem frontal cortex samples from controls and patients with 
Alzheimer's disease were fractionated and analyzed for levels of oligomers and 
synaptic proteins. We found that the levels of oligomers correlated with the 
severity of cognitive impairment (blessed information-memory-concentration score 
and mini-mental state examination) and with the loss of synaptic markers. 
Reduced levels of the synaptic vesicle protein, vesicle-associated membrane 
protein-2, and the postsynaptic protein, postsynaptic density-95, correlated 
with the levels of oligomers in the various fractions analyzed. The strongest 
associations were found with amyloid-beta dimers and pentamers. 
Co-immunoprecipitation and double-labeling experiments supported the possibility 
that amyloid-beta and postsynaptic density-95 interact at synaptic sites. 
Similarly, in transgenic mice expressing high levels of neuronal amyloid 
precursor protein, amyloid-beta co-immunoprecipitated with postsynaptic 
density-95. This was accompanied by a decrease in the levels of the postsynaptic 
proteins Shank1 and Shank3 in patients with Alzheimer's disease and in the 
brains of amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. In conclusion, this study 
suggests that the presence of a subpopulation of amyloid-beta oligomers in the 
brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease might be related to alterations in 
selected synaptic proteins and cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07719.x
PMCID: PMC2933033
PMID: 20573181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
