---
pmid: '24766807'
title: Cancer-associated PTEN mutants act in a dominant-negative manner to suppress
  PTEN protein function.
authors:
- Papa A
- Wan L
- Bonora M
- Salmena L
- Song MS
- Hobbs RM
- Lunardi A
- Webster K
- Ng C
- Newton RH
- Knoblauch N
- Guarnerio J
- Ito K
- Turka LA
- Beck AH
- Pinton P
- Bronson RT
- Wei W
- Pandolfi PP
journal: Cell
year: '2014'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4098792
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.027
---

# Cancer-associated PTEN mutants act in a dominant-negative manner to suppress PTEN protein function.
**Authors:** Papa A, Wan L, Bonora M, Salmena L, Song MS, Hobbs RM, Lunardi A, Webster K, Ng C, Newton RH, Knoblauch N, Guarnerio J, Ito K, Turka LA, Beck AH, Pinton P, Bronson RT, Wei W, Pandolfi PP
**Journal:** Cell (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.027)
**PMC:** [PMC4098792](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4098792/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2014 Apr 24;157(3):595-610. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.027.

Cancer-associated PTEN mutants act in a dominant-negative manner to suppress 
PTEN protein function.

Papa A(1), Wan L(2), Bonora M(3), Salmena L(1), Song MS(1), Hobbs RM(1), Lunardi 
A(1), Webster K(1), Ng C(1), Newton RH(4), Knoblauch N(2), Guarnerio J(1), Ito 
K(1), Turka LA(4), Beck AH(2), Pinton P(3), Bronson RT(5), Wei W(2), Pandolfi 
PP(6).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine Section of 
General Pathology University of Ferrara, Ferrara 44124, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.
(6)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2014 Apr 24;157(3):527-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.008.

PTEN dysfunction plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of hereditary and 
sporadic cancers. Here, we show that PTEN homodimerizes and, in this active 
conformation, exerts lipid phosphatase activity on PtdIns(3,4,5)P3. We 
demonstrate that catalytically inactive cancer-associated PTEN mutants 
heterodimerize with wild-type PTEN and constrain its phosphatase activity in a 
dominant-negative manner. To study the consequences of homo- and 
heterodimerization of wild-type and mutant PTEN in vivo, we generated Pten 
knockin mice harboring two cancer-associated PTEN mutations (PtenC124S and 
PtenG129E). Heterozygous Pten(C124S/+) and Pten(G129E/+) cells and tissues 
exhibit increased sensitivity to PI3-K/Akt activation compared to wild-type and 
Pten(+/-) counterparts, whereas this difference is no longer apparent between 
Pten(C124S/-) and Pten(-/-) cells. Notably, Pten KI mice are more tumor prone 
and display features reminiscent of complete Pten loss. Our findings reveal that 
PTEN loss and PTEN mutations are not synonymous and define a working model for 
the function and regulation of PTEN.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.03.027
PMCID: PMC4098792
PMID: 24766807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Introduction

Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Deleted on Chromosome Ten ( PTEN ) is a tumor suppressor frequently lost or mutated in human cancers and in a number of tumor syndromes, referred to as “PTEN hamartoma tumor syndromes” (PHTS), which include Cowden Disease (CD) and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome ( Hollander et al., 2011 ).

To study the consequences of Pten loss in vivo, we and others generated animal models with partial and total loss of Pten ( Di Cristofano et al., 1998 ; Podsypanina et al., 1999 ; Suzuki et al., 1998 ). Total Pten loss was found to lead to embryonic lethality, and additional investigations in a hypomorphic allelic series of mice with sequentially lower Pten expression revealed that even small reductions in Pten doses can elicit cancer phenotypes ( Alimonti et al., 2010 ; Trotman et al., 2003 ). Conversely, systemic elevation of Pten through transgenic overexpression results in a constitutively augmented tumor-suppressive state ( Garcia-Cao et al., 2012 ).

PTEN functions as a dual-specificity protein phosphatase (DSP) with predominant enzymatic activity on phosphoinositides ( Maehama and Dixon, 1998 ). As a phospholipid phosphatase, PTEN catalyzes the hydrolysis of the second messenger PtdIns (3,4,5)P 3 (PIP3) and counteracts the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, thus regulating cellular growth, proliferation and metabolism ( Maehama and Dixon, 1998 ).

In line with its protein phosphatase function, PTEN has been shown to dephosphorylate phospho-peptides in vitro ( Myers et al., 1998 ), and reported phospho-protein targets include the focal adhesion kinase, c-SRC, as well as PTEN itself ( Tamura et al., 1999 ; Tibarewal et al., 2012 ; Zhang et al., 2011 ).

Heterozygous deletion of Pten in mice faithfully phenocopies biological features found in many human tumors with partial loss of PTEN ( Di Cristofano et al., 1998 ). However, reports indicate that genetic loss of PTEN and mutations leading to PTEN loss-of-function may not be equivalent. For instance, Marsh et al. reported a genotype-phenotype correlation in patients diagnosed with CD who developed several tumors, including breast tumors. Importantly, they found that patients harboring missense PTEN mutations in the phosphatase core developed higher numbers of lesions than patients with truncating mutations ( Marsh et al., 1998 ). This led us to hypothesize that expression of catalytically inactive mutant PTEN enzyme may be more unfavorable than PTEN protein loss.

Regulation of PTEN function occurs through various post-translational modifications implicated in PTEN membrane recruitment, sub-cellular localization, or protein-protein interactions ( Wang and Jiang, 2008 ). Structurally, PTEN belongs to the Class I Cys-based protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP), and more specifically to the VH1-like family ( Alonso et al., 2004 ). PTEN contains an N-terminal phosphatase domain with a conserved active site; a C-terminal C2 domain followed by two PEST sequences, and a PDZ-binding domain ( Lee et al., 1999 ). It has been reported that PTEN interacts with a number of PDZ-domain bearing proteins to achieve higher levels of complex formation ( Sotelo et al., 2012 ; Vazquez et al., 2001 ). We therefore hypothesized, and have here demonstrated, that PTEN can interact with itself. We show that dimer PTEN is active toward its phosphoinositide substrate PIP3, and thereby inhibits the activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. Critically, we find that in a dimeric conformation, cancer-associated missense mutations have dominant negative consequences over wild-type protein function, with ensuing implications for tumorigenesis.

Discussion

In this study we have demonstrated that PTEN dimerization is critical for its lipid phosphatase function. We have also proposed that dimeric PTEN complexes are more active than PTEN monomer in dephosphorylating PIP3 and regulating PI3K signaling. By studying two PTEN cancer-associated mutations, we revealed that while disrupting PTEN activity in-cis , PTENC124S and PTENG129E inhibit the wt protein function in-trans in a dominant negative manner as a result of hetero-dimerization. In turn, this reduced Pten lipid-phosphatase activity leads to Akt hyper-activation and increased tumorigenesis in the mouse.

These findings allow us to reach several conclusions. Mechanistically, we have defined that PTEN exists as a dimer. Given that PTEN is part of the VH1-like family of DSPs, it is relevant that the prototypical VH1 phosphatase is known to exist in a dimeric-quaternary complex whose assembly is essential for the recognition of its substrate, STAT1 ( Koksal and Cingolani, 2011 ). Moreover, phosphorylation of the PTEN tail is known to produce an inactive form of the enzyme in a closed conformation ( Leslie and Foti, 2011 ). In agreement, we provide evidence that dephosphorylation of the PTEN-tail, while favoring a more open conformation, also allows subsequent dimerization and, possibly, oligomerisation, in view of the multiple interfaces found to mediate the PTEN-PTEN interaction.

The role of PTEN dimerization in cancer is particularly important when we consider the high frequency of PTEN mutations in sporadic tumors and inherited syndromes. In this study, we have analyzed in vivo and in vitro two cancer- and CD-associated missense mutations, and extended our analysis to a third mutation, PTENR130G. In the future, it will be important to study various PTEN mutations in a systematic manner. It is tempting to speculate that other PTEN mutants may affect the function of the PTEN wt protein through physical interactions, and perhaps at multiple levels, e.g. by affecting PTEN extracellular export ( Hopkins et al., 2013 ; Putz et al., 2012 ).

Clinically, our study implies that patients harboring these, or similar loss-of-function missense mutations, may be more susceptible to malignant cancer, and may develop it more rapidly, than patients expressing reduced levels of PTEN, or expressing PTEN destabilizing mutations. Thus we propose that PTEN mutational status may be utilized to stratify patients who may benefit from earlier and more radical therapeutic intervention modalities, potentially leading to improved prognoses.

Although we cannot exclude the possibility that certain PTEN mutations may become competent toward targets not recognized by the wild-type protein in a “gain-of-function” scenario ( Wang et al., 2010 ), our genetic analyses support a model in which the ability of mutant PTEN to interfere with wt protein function contributes to exacerbation of tumor spectrum compared to Pten heterozygosity ( Fig. 7G ). While these mutations induce acceleration of tumorigenesis, they specifically act by further lowering Pten activity rather than engaging alternative pathways. Accordingly, we found that Pten KI mice developed Lhermitte-Duclos disease, as previously reported in mice with total conditional Pten loss, while lesions of different histological origins not associated with Pten loss (such as sarcomas) were not observed.

Additionally, in monitoring the activation status of proposed PTEN phospho-protein targets we found no obvious changes upon IGF stimulation, or variation between tumor spectra of the two Pten KI models. This implies that even if cancer-relevant PTEN phospho-protein targets are present and deregulated in Pten C124S/+ mice, concomitant Akt hyper-activation may overcome their effects, perhaps due to increased cellular senescence ( Figure S6G ). While several reports have highlighted the possibility that PTEN protein phosphatase activity may be related to regulation of migration and invasion ( Tibarewal et al., 2012 ), in our in vivo analysis of the Pten KI mice we did not observe metastasis. However, the general exacerbation of solid tumorigenesis in multiple organs and pronounced lympho-proliferation may have masked a possible metastatic phenotype in elder mutants.

In summary, we have identified new features of PTEN biology through the characterization of cancer associated PTEN missense mutations. Given the ongoing development of agents targeting the PI3K pathway including AKT-inhibitors, our findings may help to identify patients that may be sensitive to these agents due to high levels of AKT activation associated with a PTEN mutant state.
