---
pmid: '9461064'
title: Generation of APLP2 KO mice and early postnatal lethality in APLP2/APP double
  KO mice.
authors:
- von Koch CS
- Zheng H
- Chen H
- Trumbauer M
- Thinakaran G
- van der Ploeg LH
- Price DL
- Sisodia SS
journal: Neurobiol Aging
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00151-6
---

# Generation of APLP2 KO mice and early postnatal lethality in APLP2/APP double KO mice.
**Authors:** von Koch CS, Zheng H, Chen H, Trumbauer M, Thinakaran G, van der Ploeg LH, Price DL, Sisodia SS
**Journal:** Neurobiol Aging (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00151-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00151-6)

## Abstract

1. Neurobiol Aging. 1997 Nov-Dec;18(6):661-9. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00151-6.

Generation of APLP2 KO mice and early postnatal lethality in APLP2/APP double KO 
mice.

von Koch CS(1), Zheng H, Chen H, Trumbauer M, Thinakaran G, van der Ploeg LH, 
Price DL, Sisodia SS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) is a member of a larger gene family including 
amyloid precursor-like proteins (APLP), APLP2 and APLP1. To examine the function 
of APLP2 in vivo, we generated APLP2 knockout (KO) mice. They are of normal 
size, fertile, and appear healthy up to 22 months of age. We observed no 
impaired axonal outgrowth of olfactory sensory neurons following bulbectomy, 
suggesting against an important role for APLP2 alone in this process. Because 
APLP2 and APP are highly homologous and may serve similar functions in vivo, we 
generated mice with targeted APLP2 and APP alleles. Approximately 80% of double 
KO mice die within the first week after birth, suggesting that APLP2 and APP are 
required for early postnatal development. The surviving approximately 20% of 
double KO mice are 20-30% reduced in weight and show difficulty in righting, 
ataxia, spinning behavior, and a head tilt, suggesting a deficit in balance 
and/or strength. Adult double KO mice mate poorly, despite apparent normal 
ovarian and testicular development. Otherwise, double KO mice appear healthy up 
to 13 months of age. We conclude, that APLP2 and APP can substitute for each 
other functionally.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00151-6
PMID: 9461064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
