---
pmid: '12612082'
title: A novel RING finger protein, human enhancer of invasion 10, alters mitotic
  progression through regulation of cyclin B levels.
authors:
- Toby GG
- Gherraby W
- Coleman TR
- Golemis EA
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC149478
doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.6.2109-2122.2003
---

# A novel RING finger protein, human enhancer of invasion 10, alters mitotic progression through regulation of cyclin B levels.
**Authors:** Toby GG, Gherraby W, Coleman TR, Golemis EA
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.23.6.2109-2122.2003](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.23.6.2109-2122.2003)
**PMC:** [PMC149478](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC149478/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Mar;23(6):2109-22. doi: 10.1128/MCB.23.6.2109-2122.2003.

A novel RING finger protein, human enhancer of invasion 10, alters mitotic 
progression through regulation of cyclin B levels.

Toby GG(1), Gherraby W, Coleman TR, Golemis EA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Science, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme Avenue, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The process of cellular morphogenesis is highly conserved in eukaryotes and is 
dependent upon the function of proteins that are centrally involved in 
specification of the cell cycle. The human enhancer of invasion clone 10 (HEI10) 
protein was identified from a HeLa cell library based on its ability to promote 
yeast agar invasion and filamentation. Through two-hybrid screening, the mitotic 
cyclin B1 and an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme were isolated as 
HEI10-interacting proteins. Mutation of the HEI10 divergent RING finger motif 
(characteristic of E3 ubiquitin ligases) and Cdc2/cyclin binding and 
phosphorylation sites alter HEI10-dependent yeast phenotypes, including delay in 
G(2)/M transition. In vertebrates, the addition of HEI10 inhibits nuclear 
envelope breakdown and mitotic entry in Xenopus egg extracts. Mechanistically, 
HEI10 expression reduces cyclin B levels in cycling Xenopus eggs and reduces 
levels of the cyclin B ortholog Clb2p in yeast. HEI10 is itself a specific in 
vitro substrate of purified cyclin B/cdc2, with a TPVR motif as primary 
phosphorylation site. Finally, HEI10 is itself ubiquitinated in egg extracts and 
is also autoubiquitinated in vitro. These and other points lead to a model in 
which HEI10 defines a divergent class of E3 ubiquitin ligase, functioning in 
progression through G(2)/M.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.23.6.2109-2122.2003
PMCID: PMC149478
PMID: 12612082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
