---
pmid: '21697092'
title: Structural basis of multifunctionality in a vitamin B12-processing enzyme.
authors:
- Koutmos M
- Gherasim C
- Smith JL
- Banerjee R
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3191019
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.261370
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Structural basis of multifunctionality in a vitamin B12-processing enzyme.
**Authors:** Koutmos M, Gherasim C, Smith JL, Banerjee R
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.261370](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.261370)
**PMC:** [PMC3191019](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3191019/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29780-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.261370. Epub 
2011 Jun 22.

Structural basis of multifunctionality in a vitamin B12-processing enzyme.

Koutmos M(1), Gherasim C, Smith JL, Banerjee R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and the Life Sciences Institute, 
University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0600, USA.

An early step in the intracellular processing of vitamin B(12) involves CblC, 
which exhibits dual reactivity, catalyzing the reductive decyanation of 
cyanocobalamin (vitamin B(12)), and the dealkylation of alkylcobalamins (e.g. 
methylcobalamin; MeCbl). Insights into how the CblC scaffold supports this 
chemical dichotomy have been unavailable despite it being the most common locus 
of patient mutations associated with inherited cobalamin disorders that manifest 
in both severe homocystinuria and methylmalonic aciduria. Herein, we report 
structures of human CblC, with and without bound MeCbl, which provide novel 
biochemical insights into its mechanism of action. Our results reveal that CblC 
is the most divergent member of the NADPH-dependent flavin reductase family and 
can use FMN or FAD as a prosthetic group to catalyze reductive decyanation. 
Furthermore, CblC is the first example of an enzyme with glutathione transferase 
activity that has a sequence and structure unrelated to the GST superfamily. 
CblC thus represents an example of evolutionary adaptation of a common 
structural platform to perform diverse chemistries. The CblC structure allows us 
to rationalize the biochemical basis of a number of pathological mutations 
associated with severe clinical phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.261370
PMCID: PMC3191019
PMID: 21697092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
