---
pmid: '20807680'
title: Monitoring differences in gene expression levels and polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA)
  production in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 grown on different carbon sources.
authors:
- Wang Q
- Nomura CT
journal: J Biosci Bioeng
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.08.001
---

# Monitoring differences in gene expression levels and polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 grown on different carbon sources.
**Authors:** Wang Q, Nomura CT
**Journal:** J Biosci Bioeng (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.08.001)

## Abstract

1. J Biosci Bioeng. 2010 Dec;110(6):653-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.08.001.

Monitoring differences in gene expression levels and polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
production in Pseudomonas putida KT2440 grown on different carbon sources.

Wang Q(1), Nomura CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, State University of New York-College of 
Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Pseudomonas putida has a variety of potential uses in bioremediation and 
biosynthesis of biodegradable plastics. P. putida is able to utilize a wide 
range of carbon sources. In this study, P. putida KT2440 was grown on glucose, 
glycerol, citrate, or fatty acid (lauric acid) as the sole carbon source. 
Differences in expression levels of genes involved in the Entner-Doudoroff 
pathway, glycerol metabolism, TCA cycle and β-oxidation were detected using 
quantitative real-time PCR. When glycerol was the sole carbon source, expression 
of genes related to glycerol metabolism was enhanced with the exception of the 
negative regulon gene glpR. There were no significant differences in expression 
levels of genes that putatively encode enzymes involved in the Entner-Doudoroff 
pathway for cells grown on glucose as compared to cells grown on other carbon 
sources. Exceptions to this trend were the ABC transporter genes. Genes encoding 
enzymes selected from the TCA cycle all showed higher expression levels in cells 
grown on citrate. Two genes for β-oxidation enzymes, fadB and the long-chain 
fatty acid transporter gene, showed higher expression level when cells were 
grown on lauric acid. Genes encoding enzymes involved in PHA synthesis, phaC1, 
phaC2, phaZ, and phaJ4, all showed higher expression levels when cells were 
grown on lauric acid. This study has identified genes involved in the metabolism 
of different carbon sources and PHA synthesis. This information will be 
invaluable to understand how genes are regulated and construct transgenic 
strains to utilize carbon sources more efficiently and better produce PHAs.

Copyright © 2010 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2010.08.001
PMID: 20807680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
