---
pmid: '18644858'
title: Architecture of the SWI/SNF-nucleosome complex.
authors:
- Dechassa ML
- Zhang B
- Horowitz-Scherer R
- Persinger J
- Woodcock CL
- Peterson CL
- Bartholomew B
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2547009
doi: 10.1128/MCB.00693-08
---

# Architecture of the SWI/SNF-nucleosome complex.
**Authors:** Dechassa ML, Zhang B, Horowitz-Scherer R, Persinger J, Woodcock CL, Peterson CL, Bartholomew B
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.00693-08](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.00693-08)
**PMC:** [PMC2547009](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2547009/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(19):6010-21. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00693-08. Epub 2008
Jul  21.

Architecture of the SWI/SNF-nucleosome complex.

Dechassa ML(1), Zhang B, Horowitz-Scherer R, Persinger J, Woodcock CL, Peterson 
CL, Bartholomew B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Southern Illinois 
University, 1245 Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, IL 62901-4413, USA.

The SWI/SNF complex disrupts and mobilizes chromatin in an ATP-dependent manner. 
SWI/SNF interactions with nucleosomes were mapped by DNA footprinting and 
site-directed DNA and protein cross-linking when SWI/SNF was recruited by a 
transcription activator. SWI/SNF was found by DNA footprinting to contact 
tightly around one gyre of DNA spanning approximately 50 bp from the nucleosomal 
entry site to near the dyad axis. The DNA footprint is consistent with 
nucleosomes binding to an asymmetric trough of SWI/SNF that was revealed by the 
improved imaging of free SWI/SNF. The DNA site-directed cross-linking revealed 
that the catalytic subunit Swi2/Snf2 is associated with nucleosomes two helical 
turns from the dyad axis and that the Snf6 subunit is proximal to the 
transcription factor recruiting SWI/SNF. The highly conserved Snf5 subunit 
associates with the histone octamer and not with nucleosomal DNA. The model of 
the binding trough of SWI/SNF illustrates how nucleosomal DNA can be mobilized 
while SWI/SNF remains bound.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.00693-08
PMCID: PMC2547009
PMID: 18644858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
