---
pmid: '34743205'
title: CRL2-KLHDC3 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex suppresses ferroptosis through promoting
  p14(ARF) degradation.
authors:
- Zhang P
- Gao K
- Zhang L
- Sun H
- Zhao X
- Liu Y
- Lv Z
- Shi Q
- Chen Y
- Jiao D
- Li Y
- Gu W
- Wang C
journal: Cell Death Differ
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC8991197
doi: 10.1038/s41418-021-00890-0
---

# CRL2-KLHDC3 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex suppresses ferroptosis through promoting p14(ARF) degradation.
**Authors:** Zhang P, Gao K, Zhang L, Sun H, Zhao X, Liu Y, Lv Z, Shi Q, Chen Y, Jiao D, Li Y, Gu W, Wang C
**Journal:** Cell Death Differ (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41418-021-00890-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-021-00890-0)
**PMC:** [PMC8991197](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8991197/)

## Abstract

1. Cell Death Differ. 2022 Apr;29(4):758-771. doi: 10.1038/s41418-021-00890-0.
Epub  2021 Nov 6.

CRL2-KLHDC3 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex suppresses ferroptosis through promoting 
p14(ARF) degradation.

Zhang P(#)(1)(2), Gao K(#)(3), Zhang L(#)(4), Sun H(4), Zhao X(4), Liu Y(4), Lv 
Z(5), Shi Q(4), Chen Y(4), Jiao D(4), Li Y(4), Gu W(6), Wang C(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University 
Shanghai Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, MOE 
Engineering Research Center of Gene Technology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China. pzzhang@fudan.edu.cn.
(2)Institute for Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA. pzzhang@fudan.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. 
kungao@tongji.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University 
Shanghai Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, MOE 
Engineering Research Center of Gene Technology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Institute for Cancer Genetics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA. wg8@cumc.columbia.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University 
Shanghai Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, MOE 
Engineering Research Center of Gene Technology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China. chenjiwang@fudan.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The cystine/glutamate antiporter SLC7A11 (commonly known as xCT) functions to 
import cystine for glutathione biosynthesis, thereby protecting cells from 
oxidative stress and ferroptosis, a regulated form of non-apoptotic cell death 
driven by the accumulation of lipid-based reactive oxygen species (ROS). p14ARF, 
a well-established tumor suppressor, promotes ferroptosis by inhibiting 
NRF2-mediated SLC7A11 transcription. Here, we demonstrate the crucial role of 
Cullin 2 RING E3 ligase (CRL2)-KLHDC3 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex in regulating 
p14ARF protein stability. KLHDC3 acts as a CRL2 adaptor that specifically 
recognizes a C-terminal degron in p14ARF and triggers p14ARF for 
ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation. This regulation mode is absent in the murine 
p14ARF homolog, p19arf which lacks the C-terminal degron. We also show that 
KLHDC3 suppresses ferroptosis in vitro and supports tumor growth in vivo by 
relieving p14ARF-mediated suppression of SLC7A11 transcription. Overall, these 
findings reveal that the protein stability and pro-ferroptotic function of 
p14ARF are controlled by a CRL2 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, and suggest that 
suppression of the p14ARF-NRF2-SLC7A11 regulatory pathway by KLHDC3 
overexpression likely contributes to cancer progression.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to ADMC Associazione 
Differenziamento e Morte Cellulare.

DOI: 10.1038/s41418-021-00890-0
PMCID: PMC8991197
PMID: 34743205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
