---
pmid: '22057101'
title: ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B-dependent
  CRMP2 phosphorylation.
authors:
- Wakatsuki S
- Saitoh F
- Araki T
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb2373
---

# ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B-dependent CRMP2 phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Wakatsuki S, Saitoh F, Araki T
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb2373](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb2373)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Nov 6;13(12):1415-23. doi: 10.1038/ncb2373.

ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B-dependent 
CRMP2 phosphorylation.

Wakatsuki S(1), Saitoh F, Araki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Peripheral Nervous System Research, National Institute of 
Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawa-higashi, 
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Wallerian degeneration is observed in many neurological disorders, and it is 
therefore important to elucidate the axonal degeneration mechanism to prevent, 
and further develop treatment for, such diseases. The ubiquitin-proteasome 
system (UPS) has been implicated in Wallerian degeneration, but the underlying 
molecular mechanism remains unclear. Here we show that ZNRF1, an E3 ligase, 
promotes Wallerian degeneration by targeting AKT to degrade through the UPS. AKT 
phosphorylates glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK3B), and thereby inactivates it 
in axons. AKT overexpression significantly delays axonal degeneration. 
Overexpression of the active (non-phosphorylated) form of GSK3B induces CRMP2 
phosphorylation, which is required for the microtubule reorganization observed 
in the degenerating axon. The inhibition of GSK3B and the overexpression of 
non-phosphorylated CRMP2 both protected axons from Wallerian degeneration. These 
findings indicate that the ZNRF1-AKT-GSK3B-CRMP2 pathway plays an important role 
in controlling Wallerian degeneration.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb2373
PMID: 22057101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
