---
pmid: '19124738'
title: RhoH plays critical roles in Fc epsilon RI-dependent signal transduction in
  mast cells.
authors:
- Oda H
- Fujimoto M
- Patrick MS
- Chida D
- Sato Y
- Azuma Y
- Aoki H
- Abe T
- Suzuki H
- Shirai M
journal: J Immunol
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.957
---

# RhoH plays critical roles in Fc epsilon RI-dependent signal transduction in mast cells.
**Authors:** Oda H, Fujimoto M, Patrick MS, Chida D, Sato Y, Azuma Y, Aoki H, Abe T, Suzuki H, Shirai M
**Journal:** J Immunol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.957](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.957)

## Abstract

1. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):957-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.957.

RhoH plays critical roles in Fc epsilon RI-dependent signal transduction in mast 
cells.

Oda H(1), Fujimoto M, Patrick MS, Chida D, Sato Y, Azuma Y, Aoki H, Abe T, 
Suzuki H, Shirai M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Research Institute, International Medical Center of 
Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

RhoH is an atypical small G protein with defective GTPase activity that is 
specifically expressed in hematopoietic lineage cells. RhoH has been implicated 
in regulation of several physiological processes including hematopoiesis, 
integrin activation, and T cell differentiation and activation. In the present 
study, we investigated the role of RhoH in mast cells by generating RhoH 
knockout mice. Despite observing normal development of mast cells in vivo, 
passive systemic anaphylaxis and histamine release were impaired in these mice. 
We also observed defective degranulation and cytokine production upon 
FcepsilonRI ligation in RhoH-deficient bone marrow-derived mast cells. 
Furthermore, FcepsilonRI-dependent activation of Syk and phosphorylation of its 
downstream targets, including LAT, SLP76, PLCgamma1, and PLCgamma2 were 
impaired, however phosphorylation of the gamma-subunit of FcepsilonRI remained 
intact. We also found RhoH-Syk association that was greatly enhanced by active 
Fyn. Our results indicate that RhoH regulates FcepsilonRI signaling in mast 
cells by facilitating Syk activation, possibly as an adaptor molecule for Syk.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.182.2.957
PMID: 19124738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
