---
pmid: '20368097'
title: GATA3 siRNA inhibits the binding of NFAT1 to interleukin-13 promoter in human
  T cells.
authors:
- Yao X
- Yang Y
- He HY
- Wang M
- Yin KS
- Huang M
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
---

# GATA3 siRNA inhibits the binding of NFAT1 to interleukin-13 promoter in human T cells.
**Authors:** Yao X, Yang Y, He HY, Wang M, Yin KS, Huang M
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2010)

## Abstract

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Mar 20;123(6):739-44.

GATA3 siRNA inhibits the binding of NFAT1 to interleukin-13 promoter in human T 
cells.

Yao X(1), Yang Y, He HY, Wang M, Yin KS, Huang M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-13 (IL-13) is recognized to be a key modulator in the 
pathogenesis of Th2-induced allergic inflammation. Transcription factors GATA3 
and NFAT1 have been both implicated in the regulation of Th2 cytokines. We 
previously demonstrated the GATA3-NFAT1 association during human T cell 
activation. However, the function of the GATA3-NFAT1 complex in Th2 cytokines 
regulation is still unknown. Small interference RNA (siRNA) was constructed to 
knock down GATA3 expression in Hut-78 cells to investigate the possible role of 
GATA3-NFAT1 complex in IL-13 transcription.
METHODS: Cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies to mimic 
in vivo antigen-mediated co-stimulation; the expression of IL-13 mRNA was 
determined by real-time PCR; chromation immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assay was 
employed to investigate the NFAT1 binding to IL-13 promoter.
RESULTS: GATA3 siRNA suppressed the expression of GATA3 both in mRNA and protein 
levels in Hut-78 cells. The binding of NFAT1 to IL-13 promoter was inhibited by 
GATA3 siRNA in activated T cells, which was followed by the reduction of IL-13 
transcription.
CONCLUSION: GATA3-NFAT1 complex may play an important role in the regulation of 
IL-13 transcription in human T cells.

PMID: 20368097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
