---
pmid: '10441503'
title: The carboxyl methyltransferase modifying G proteins is a metalloenzyme.
authors:
- Desrosiers RR
- Nguyen QT
- Béliveau R
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0936
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The carboxyl methyltransferase modifying G proteins is a metalloenzyme.
**Authors:** Desrosiers RR, Nguyen QT, Béliveau R
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/bbrc.1999.0936](https://doi.org/10.1006/bbrc.1999.0936)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):790-7. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1999.0936.

The carboxyl methyltransferase modifying G proteins is a metalloenzyme.

Desrosiers RR(1), Nguyen QT, Béliveau R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Médecine Moléculaire, Centre de Cancérologie Charles Bruneau, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, Succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, Québec, H3C 
3P8, Canada.

The prenylated protein carboxyl methyltransferase (PPMT) catalyzes the 
posttranslational methylation of isoprenylated C-terminal cysteine residues 
found in many signaling proteins such as the small monomeric G proteins and the 
gamma subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins. Here we report that both 
membrane-bound PPMT from rat kidney and the recombinant bacterially expressed 
form of the enzyme required divalent cations for catalytic activity. Unlike EDTA 
and EGTA, the metal chelator 1,10-phenanthroline strongly inhibited the PPMT 
activity of kidney intracellular membranes in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 
1,10-Phenanthroline was found to inhibit the methylation of the prenylcysteine 
analog N-acetyl-S-all-trans-geranylgeranyl-l-cysteine, a synthetic substrate for 
PPMT, with an IC(50) of 2.2 mM. Gel electrophoretic analysis demonstrated that 
1,10-phenanthroline almost totally abolished the labeling of methylated proteins 
in kidney intracellular membranes. Immunoblotting analysis showed that one of 
the two major peaks of (3)H-methylated proteins in intracellular membranes 
comigrated with the small G proteins Ras, Cdc42, RhoA, and Rab1. In addition, 
the methylation of immunoprecipitated Ras and RhoA from kidney intracellular 
membranes was strongly inhibited when 1,10-phenanthroline was present. Treatment 
of kidney intracellular membranes with 1,10-phenanthroline increased the 
proteolytic degradation of PPMT by exogenous trypsin, compared to untreated 
membranes. We conclude from these data that metal ions are essential for the 
activity and the stabilization of PPMT. The finding that PPMT is a metalloenzyme 
may provide new insights into the functions played by this methyltransferase in 
signal transduction processes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1999.0936
PMID: 10441503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
