---
pmid: '16246723'
title: Molecular basis for the recognition of phosphorylated and phosphoacetylated
  histone h3 by 14-3-3.
authors:
- Macdonald N
- Welburn JP
- Noble ME
- Nguyen A
- Yaffe MB
- Clynes D
- Moggs JG
- Orphanides G
- Thomson S
- Edmunds JW
- Clayton AL
- Endicott JA
- Mahadevan LC
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.08.032
---

# Molecular basis for the recognition of phosphorylated and phosphoacetylated histone h3 by 14-3-3.
**Authors:** Macdonald N, Welburn JP, Noble ME, Nguyen A, Yaffe MB, Clynes D, Moggs JG, Orphanides G, Thomson S, Edmunds JW, Clayton AL, Endicott JA, Mahadevan LC
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2005.08.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2005.08.032)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2005 Oct 28;20(2):199-211. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.08.032.

Molecular basis for the recognition of phosphorylated and phosphoacetylated 
histone h3 by 14-3-3.

Macdonald N(1), Welburn JP, Noble ME, Nguyen A, Yaffe MB, Clynes D, Moggs JG, 
Orphanides G, Thomson S, Edmunds JW, Clayton AL, Endicott JA, Mahadevan LC.

Author information:
(1)Syngenta Central Toxicology Laboratory, Alderley Park, Macclesfield, SK10 
4TJ, United Kingdom.

Phosphorylation of histone H3 is implicated in transcriptional activation and 
chromosome condensation, but its immediate molecular function has remained 
obscure. By affinity chromatography of nuclear extracts against modified H3 tail 
peptides, we identified 14-3-3 isoforms as proteins that bind these tails in a 
strictly phosphorylation-dependent manner. Acetylation of lysines 9 and 14 does 
not impede 14-3-3 binding to serine 10-phosphorylated H3 tails. In vivo, 14-3-3 
is inducibly recruited to c-fos and c-jun nucleosomes upon gene activation, 
concomitant with H3 phosphoacetylation. We have determined the structures of 
14-3-3zeta complexed with serine 10-phosphorylated or phosphoacetylated H3 
peptides. These reveal a distinct mode of 14-3-3/phosphopeptide binding and 
provide a structural understanding for the lack of effect of acetylation at 
lysines 9 and 14 on this interaction. 14-3-3 isoforms thus represent a class of 
proteins that mediate the effect of histone phosphorylation at inducible genes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2005.08.032
PMID: 16246723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
