---
pmid: '23620513'
title: ApoE influences amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/Aβ association
  in physiological conditions.
authors:
- Verghese PB
- Castellano JM
- Garai K
- Wang Y
- Jiang H
- Shah A
- Bu G
- Frieden C
- Holtzman DM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3651443
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1220484110
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# ApoE influences amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/Aβ association in physiological conditions.
**Authors:** Verghese PB, Castellano JM, Garai K, Wang Y, Jiang H, Shah A, Bu G, Frieden C, Holtzman DM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1220484110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1220484110)
**PMC:** [PMC3651443](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3651443/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):E1807-16. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1220484110. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

ApoE influences amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance despite minimal apoE/Aβ association in 
physiological conditions.

Verghese PB(1), Castellano JM, Garai K, Wang Y, Jiang H, Shah A, Bu G, Frieden 
C, Holtzman DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) alleles may shift the onset of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) through apoE protein isoforms changing the probability of amyloid-β (Aβ) 
accumulation. It has been proposed that differential physical interactions of 
apoE isoforms with soluble Aβ (sAβ) in brain fluids influence the metabolism of 
Aβ, providing a mechanism to account for how APOE influences AD risk. In 
contrast, we provide clear evidence that apoE and sAβ interactions occur 
minimally in solution and in the cerebrospinal fluid of human subjects, 
producing apoE3 and apoE4 isoforms as assessed by multiple biochemical and 
analytical techniques. Despite minimal extracellular interactions with sAβ in 
fluid, we find that apoE isoforms regulate the metabolism of sAβ by astrocytes 
and in the interstitial fluid of mice that received apoE infusions during brain 
Aβ microdialysis. We find that a significant portion of apoE and sAβ compete for 
the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1)-dependent cellular 
uptake pathway in astrocytes, providing a mechanism to account for apoE's 
regulation of sAβ metabolism despite minimal evidence of direct interactions in 
extracellular fluids. We propose that apoE influences sAβ metabolism not through 
direct binding to sAβ in solution but through its actions with other interacting 
receptors/transporters and cell surfaces. These results provide an alternative 
frame work for the mechanistic explanations on how apoE isoforms influence the 
risk of AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1220484110
PMCID: PMC3651443
PMID: 23620513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: D.M.H. is a 
scientific advisor to C2N Diagnostics and is a co-inventor on US patent 
7,892,845 “Methods for measuring the metabolism of neurally derived biomolecules 
in vivo.” Washington University with D.M.H. as co-inventor also has submitted 
the US non-provisional patent application “Methods for measuring the metabolism 
of CNS derived biomolecules in vivo,” serial #12/267,974. D.M.H. has consulted 
for Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Satori, Innogenetics, and AstraZeneca.
