---
pmid: '11273725'
title: Mutations that alter the surface charge of alpha-tropomyosin are associated
  with dilated cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Olson TM
- Kishimoto NY
- Whitby FG
- Michels VV
journal: J Mol Cell Cardiol
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/jmcc.2000.1339
---

# Mutations that alter the surface charge of alpha-tropomyosin are associated with dilated cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Olson TM, Kishimoto NY, Whitby FG, Michels VV
**Journal:** J Mol Cell Cardiol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/jmcc.2000.1339](https://doi.org/10.1006/jmcc.2000.1339)

## Abstract

1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2001 Apr;33(4):723-32. doi: 10.1006/jmcc.2000.1339.

Mutations that alter the surface charge of alpha-tropomyosin are associated with 
dilated cardiomyopathy.

Olson TM(1), Kishimoto NY, Whitby FG, Michels VV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology and Biochemistry, University 
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84113, USA. olson.timothy@mayo.edu

Proteins in cardiac myocytes assemble into contractile units known as 
sarcomeres. Contractile force is generated by interaction between sarcomeric 
thick and thin filaments. Thin filaments also transmit force within and between 
myocytes. Mutations in genes encoding the thin filament proteins actin and 
tropomyosin cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Mutations affecting functionally 
distinct domains of actin also cause dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). We used a 
non-positional candidate gene approach to test further the hypothesis that 
dysfunction of sarcomeric thin filaments, due to different mutations in the same 
gene, can lead to either hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy. Mutational 
analyses of alpha-tropomyosin 1 were performed in patients with idiopathic DCM. 
We identified two mutations that alter highly conserved residues and that, 
unlike hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-associated mutations, cause localized charge 
reversal on the surface of tropomyosin. Therefore, substitution of different 
amino acid residues in the same thin filament proteins is associated with the 
distinct phenotypes of cardiac hypertrophy or congestive heart failure.

DOI: 10.1006/jmcc.2000.1339
PMID: 11273725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
