---
pmid: '21397192'
title: 'Interferon-inducible protein 16: insight into the interaction with tumor suppressor
  p53.'
authors:
- Liao JC
- Lam R
- Brazda V
- Duan S
- Ravichandran M
- Ma J
- Xiao T
- Tempel W
- Zuo X
- Wang YX
- Chirgadze NY
- Arrowsmith CH
journal: Structure
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3760383
doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.12.015
---

# Interferon-inducible protein 16: insight into the interaction with tumor suppressor p53.
**Authors:** Liao JC, Lam R, Brazda V, Duan S, Ravichandran M, Ma J, Xiao T, Tempel W, Zuo X, Wang YX, Chirgadze NY, Arrowsmith CH
**Journal:** Structure (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.str.2010.12.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2010.12.015)
**PMC:** [PMC3760383](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3760383/)

## Abstract

1. Structure. 2011 Mar 9;19(3):418-29. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2010.12.015.

Interferon-inducible protein 16: insight into the interaction with tumor 
suppressor p53.

Liao JC(1), Lam R, Brazda V, Duan S, Ravichandran M, Ma J, Xiao T, Tempel W, Zuo 
X, Wang YX, Chirgadze NY, Arrowsmith CH.

Author information:
(1)Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute, Ontario Cancer Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2C4, Canada.

IFI16 is a member of the interferon-inducible HIN-200 family of nuclear 
proteins. It has been implicated in transcriptional regulation by modulating 
protein-protein interactions with p53 tumor suppressor protein and other 
transcription factors. However, the mechanisms of interaction remain unknown. 
Here, we report the crystal structures of both HIN-A and HIN-B domains of IFI16 
determined at 2.0 and 2.35 Å resolution, respectively. Each HIN domain comprises 
a pair of tightly packed OB-fold subdomains that appear to act as a single unit. 
We show that both HIN domains of IFI16 are capable of enhancing p53-DNA complex 
formation and transcriptional activation via distinctive means. HIN-A domain 
binds to the basic C terminus of p53, whereas the HIN-B domain binds to the core 
DNA-binding region of p53. Both interactions are compatible with the DNA-bound 
state of p53 and together contribute to the effect of full-length IFI16 on 
p53-DNA complex formation and transcriptional activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2010.12.015
PMCID: PMC3760383
PMID: 21397192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Interferons (IFNs) are cytokines involved in diverse biological functions including regulation of antiviral, antibacterial, immune, and inflammatory responses ( Gutterman, 1994 ; Stark et al., 1998 ). The effects of IFN stimulation are often manifested through activation of IFN-inducible genes. Although many genes are known to be activated by this pathway, their biological and functional importance remains unclear.

The IFN-inducible HIN-200 gene family encodes a class of homologous proteins that share a 200-amino acid signature motif (HIN) ( Dawson and Trapani, 1996 ). Four human (IFI16, MNDA, AIM2, and IFIX) and five mouse (p202a, p202b, p203, p204, and p205) members of this family have been identified ( Figure 1A ). Most of the HIN-200 proteins possess two major protein domains. At the N terminus, there is a conserved α-helical PYRIN domain, which belongs to the death domain-containing protein superfamily involved in apoptosis, inflammation, and immune responses ( Hiller et al., 2003 ; Stehlik and Reed, 2004 ). At the C terminus, all HIN-200 proteins possess either one or two copies of a conserved HIN domain, which has been implicated in DNA binding, as well as in mediating protein-protein interactions for transcriptional regulation ( Koul et al., 1998 ; Xin et al., 2003 ; Ludlow et al., 2005 ; Yan et al., 2008 ).

The mouse protein p202a, containing two HIN domains exclusively, is the most studied member of the HIN-200 family. The HIN repeats in p202a have been shown to interact with numerous transcription factors including pRB, p53, NFκB, AP-1, MyoD, and E2F, indicating that the HIN domain may serve as a scaffold to assemble large protein complexes to modulate the transcription of target genes ( Choubey, 2000 ; Xin et al., 2003 ). The human HIN-200 homolog IFI16, whose primary sequence predicts a PYRIN domain and two tandem HIN domains, has also been implicated in binding to pRB, E2F1, p53, and BRCA1 ( Johnstone et al., 2000 ; Aglipay et al., 2003 ; Xin et al., 2003 ). Recently, human AIM2 was shown to be essential for sensing cytoplasmic foreign DNA through its HIN domain and interacting with an apoptosis-associated protein, ASC, via its PYRIN domain, leading to activation of inflammatory responses ( Fernandes-Alnemri et al., 2009 ; Hornung et al., 2009 ; Roberts et al., 2009 ).

The observation that these HIN-200 proteins interact with several cellular regulators involved in cell cycle control, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis hints that the physiological role of HIN-200 proteins may lie beyond the IFN system ( Ludlow et al., 2005 ; Ding et al., 2006 ). Indeed, IFI16 is widely expressed in normal human endothelial and epithelial cells in addition to hematopoietic cells ( Gariglio et al., 2002 ; Wei et al., 2003 ; Raffaella et al., 2004 ; Ludlow et al., 2005 ). Several studies have demonstrated that loss or reduced expression of IFI16 is often associated with various forms of human cancers, including those of the pancreas, prostate, and breast ( Trapani et al., 1992 ; Xin et al., 2003 ; Fujiuchi et al., 2004 ); leading to the notion that IFI16 may play an important role in tumor suppression. However, the molecular mechanism by which IFI16 exerts its activity remains unknown. Understanding the IFI16-mediated protein-protein interaction will provide insight into its mechanism of action and function.

Inactivation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene occurs in more than half of human cancers, and loss of p53 function is a fundamental step in the pathogenesis of most human cancers ( Vogelstein and Kinzler, 1992 ). The p53 protein functions as a transcription factor and can transactivate cellular genes through sequence-specific DNA binding to their promoters ( Prives and Manley, 2001 ). Although the physiological significance of IFI16 in p53 biology is still under investigation, it has been reported to regulate p53-mediated transcriptional activation ( Johnstone et al., 2000 ; Fujiuchi et al., 2004 ; Xin et al., 2004 ). In addition, IFI16 also plays a role in p53-mediated transmission of apoptosis signaling in response to DNA damage, by upregulating p53 and downregulating MDM2 ( Fujiuchi et al., 2004 ). Furthermore, tetracycline-regulated IFI16 also induced apoptosis in the presence of ionizing radiation when coexpressed with p53 in human bladder carcinoma p53-deficient EJ cells ( Fujiuchi et al., 2004 ). Together, these studies suggest that IFI16 is involved in the regulation of p53 stability, p53-mediated transcriptional activation, and apoptosis.

In order to better understand the molecular details and mechanism of p53 regulation by IFI16, here, we present the crystal structures of the HIN-A and HIN-B domains of IFI16 determined at 2.0 and 2.35 Å resolution, respectively. These structures represent the first experimentally determined HIN domain structures reported in the HIN-200 protein family. Although they are structurally similar, HIN-A recognizes the C terminus of p53, whereas HIN-B binds to the DNA-binding region of p53, highlighting important functional differences between the two HIN domains. Furthermore, the two HIN domains of IFI16 may work cooperatively to stimulate the transcriptional activity of p53. Together, our structures provide a molecular description of the conserved HIN domain in this family, and offer insight into the mechanism by which IFI16 recognizes, binds, and potentially regulates p53.

Conclusion

IFI16 plays an important role in regulating cell proliferation and transcription through different protein-protein interactions. We have solved the crystal structures of the HIN-A and HIN-B domains of IFI16, representing the first experimentally determined HIN domain structures of the HIN-200 family. Despite having low-sequence identity to the OB folds commonly found in various proteins, both HIN domains of IFI16 possess tandem OB folds joined by an α-helical interdomain linker. It is worth noting that the majority of the OB-fold structures reported to date in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) are solitary. Thus, IFI16 joins mouse BRCA2 (PDB: 1MIU), Oxytricha nova α-TEBP (PDB: 2I0Q), and human RPA70 (PDB: 1JMC) to be the only proteins with structural information showing consecutive OB folds. Structural analysis of the human RPA70 has revealed a similar domain organization such that it has four domains (RPA70N, DBD-A, DBD-B, DBD-C) each with an OB fold. The N-terminal OB fold of RPA70 has a role in mediating protein-protein interaction with p53 ( Bochkareva et al., 2005 ), whereas the remaining three OB folds all participate in single-stranded DNA binding ( Bochkarev et al., 1997 , 2000 , 2001 ). Although the HIN domain of IFI16 constitutes a unique arrangement of tandem OB folds with specific interdomain interactions, it is possible that the four OB folds are also involved in a modular and concerted fashion for multiple substrate recognition analogous to those of RPA70.

The work presented here extends previous studies demonstrating the association of IFI16 HIN-A domain with the C terminus of p53 and further defines the mechanism by which IFI16 stimulates p53-mediated transcriptional activation. Although HIN-A and HIN-B domains of IFI16 are structurally similar and both modulate p53 sequence-specific DNA binding, they interact with p53 differently. IFI16 recognizes the basic p53 C terminus through an acidic/hydrophobic surface present on and unique to HIN-A domain, whereas HIN-B domain associates instead with core domain of p53. It is likely that HIN-A domain prevents p53 from nonspecific DNA interaction via its C terminus, whereas HIN-B domain stabilizes p53-DNA binding. Given its putative role as a scaffold molecule, full-length IFI16 is also likely involved in recruitment of additional factors to the p53-binding sites via its PYRIN domain. Indeed, the BRCA1 tumor suppressor protein is known to interact with IFI16 PYRIN domain and promote p53-dependent apoptosis ( Aglipay et al., 2003 ). Interestingly, we and others have shown that p53 can also associate directly with BRCA1 ( Zhang et al., 1998 ; Mark et al., 2005 ), thus suggesting intricate crosstalk among the three proteins and also adding another level of complexity in the function and regulation of IFI16.
