---
pmid: '15625192'
title: A Toll-interleukin 1 repeat protein at the synapse specifies asymmetric odorant
  receptor expression via ASK1 MAPKKK signaling.
authors:
- Chuang CF
- Bargmann CI
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC545892
doi: 10.1101/gad.1276505
---

# A Toll-interleukin 1 repeat protein at the synapse specifies asymmetric odorant receptor expression via ASK1 MAPKKK signaling.
**Authors:** Chuang CF, Bargmann CI
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1276505](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1276505)
**PMC:** [PMC545892](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC545892/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2005 Jan 15;19(2):270-81. doi: 10.1101/gad.1276505. Epub 2004 Dec
29.

A Toll-interleukin 1 repeat protein at the synapse specifies asymmetric odorant 
receptor expression via ASK1 MAPKKK signaling.

Chuang CF(1), Bargmann CI.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

A stochastic lateral signaling interaction between two developing Caenorhabditis 
elegans AWC olfactory neurons causes them to take on asymmetric patterns of 
odorant receptor expression, called AWC(OFF) and AWC(ON). Here we show that the 
AWC lateral signaling gene tir-1 (previously known as nsy-2) encodes a conserved 
post-synaptic protein that specifies the choice between AWC(OFF) and AWC(ON). 
Genetic evidence suggests that tir-1 acts downstream of a voltage-gated calcium 
channel and CaMKII (UNC-43) to regulate AWC asymmetry via the NSY-1(ASK1) 
p38/JNK MAP (mitogen-activated protein) kinase cascade. TIR-1 localizes NSY-1 to 
post-synaptic regions of AWC, and TIR-1 binds UNC-43, suggesting that it 
assembles a synaptic signaling complex that regulates odorant receptor 
expression. Temperature-shift experiments indicate that tir-1 affects AWC during 
a critical period late in embryogenesis, near the time of AWC synapse formation. 
TIR-1 is a multidomain protein with a TIR (Toll-interleukin-1 receptor) domain 
that activates signaling, SAM repeats that mediate localization to post-synaptic 
regions of axons, and an N-terminal inhibitory domain. TIR-1 and other TIR 
proteins are implicated in vertebrate and invertebrate innate immunity, as are 
NSY-1/ASK1 kinases, so this pathway may also have a conserved function in immune 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1276505
PMCID: PMC545892
PMID: 15625192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
