---
pmid: '10196144'
title: Dominant negative isoform of rat norepinephrine transporter produced by alternative
  RNA splicing.
authors:
- Kitayama S
- Ikeda T
- Mitsuhata C
- Sato T
- Morita K
- Dohi T
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.16.10731
---

# Dominant negative isoform of rat norepinephrine transporter produced by alternative RNA splicing.
**Authors:** Kitayama S, Ikeda T, Mitsuhata C, Sato T, Morita K, Dohi T
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.274.16.10731](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.274.16.10731)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 16;274(16):10731-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.16.10731.

Dominant negative isoform of rat norepinephrine transporter produced by 
alternative RNA splicing.

Kitayama S(1), Ikeda T, Mitsuhata C, Sato T, Morita K, Dohi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Hiroshima University School of Dentistry, Kasumi 
1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734, Japan. shigeok@ipc.hiroshima-u.ac.jp

We have cloned from rat brain a family of alternatively spliced cDNAs from a 
single gene, which encodes a norepinephrine transporter (NET) having variations 
at the 3'-region including both coding and noncoding regions. This produces two 
transporter isoforms, rNETa and rNETb, which differ at their COOH termini. The 
rNETa isoform reveals a COOH terminus homologous to human NET and transports 
norepinephrine. In contrast, rNETb revealed no detectable transport function but 
reduced functional expression of rNETa when both isoforms were expressed in the 
same cell. Thus, rNETb potentially functions as a dominant negative inhibitor of 
rNETa activity. Co-expression of rNETb with a gamma-aminobutyric acid 
transporter (rGAT1), a serotonin transporter (rSERT), and a dopamine transporter 
(rDAT) reduced their transport activity. No reduction was found with the 
glutamate/aspartate transporter (rGLAST). Alternative RNA splicing of NET 
suggests a novel mechanism for the regulation of synaptic transmission.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.16.10731
PMID: 10196144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
