---
pmid: '10085243'
title: Mammalian PIG-L and its yeast homologue Gpi12p are N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol
  de-N-acetylases essential in glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis.
authors:
- Watanabe R
- Ohishi K
- Maeda Y
- Nakamura N
- Kinoshita T
journal: Biochem J
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC1220143
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mammalian PIG-L and its yeast homologue Gpi12p are N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol de-N-acetylases essential in glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis.
**Authors:** Watanabe R, Ohishi K, Maeda Y, Nakamura N, Kinoshita T
**Journal:** Biochem J (1999)
**PMC:** [PMC1220143](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1220143/)

## Abstract

1. Biochem J. 1999 Apr 1;339 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):185-92.

Mammalian PIG-L and its yeast homologue Gpi12p are 
N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol de-N-acetylases essential in 
glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis.

Watanabe R(1), Ohishi K, Maeda Y, Nakamura N, Kinoshita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunoregulation, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, 
Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is used as a membrane anchor by many 
eukaryotic cell-surface proteins. The second step of GPI biosynthesis is 
de-N-acetylation of N-acetylglucosaminylphosphatidylinositol (GlcNAc-PI). We 
have previously cloned the rat PIG-L gene by expression cloning that 
complemented a mutant Chinese hamster ovary cell line defective in this step. 
Here we show that recombinant rat PIG-L protein purified from Escherichia coli 
as a complex with GroEL has GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylase activity in vitro. The 
activity was not enhanced by GTP, which is known to enhance the de-N-acetylase 
activity of mammalian cell microsomes. As with other de-N-acetylases that act on 
the GlcNAc moiety, metal ions, in particular Mn2+ and Ni2+, enhanced the enzyme 
activity of PIG-L. The Saccharomyces cerevisiae YMR281W open reading frame 
encodes a protein (termed Gpi12p) with 24% amino acid identity with rat PIG-L. 
On transfection into mammalian PIG-L-deficient cells, this gene, GPI12, restored 
the cell-surface expression of GPI-anchored proteins and GlcNAc-PI 
de-N-acetylase activity. The disruption of the gene caused lethality in S. 
cerevisiae. These results indicate that GlcNAc-PI de-N-acetylase is conserved 
between mammals and yeasts and that the de-N-acetylation step is also 
indispensable in yeasts.

PMCID: PMC1220143
PMID: 10085243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
