---
pmid: '12764136'
title: 14-3-3 acts as an intramolecular bridge to regulate cdc25B localization and
  activity.
authors:
- Giles N
- Forrest A
- Gabrielli B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304027200
---

# 14-3-3 acts as an intramolecular bridge to regulate cdc25B localization and activity.
**Authors:** Giles N, Forrest A, Gabrielli B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304027200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304027200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 1;278(31):28580-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304027200. Epub
2003  May 22.

14-3-3 acts as an intramolecular bridge to regulate cdc25B localization and 
activity.

Giles N(1), Forrest A, Gabrielli B.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University 
of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4102, 
Australia.

One of the major regulators of mitosis in somatic cells is cdc25B. cdc25B is 
tightly regulated at multiple levels. The final activation step involves the 
regulated binding of 14-3-3 proteins. Previous studies have demonstrated that 
Ser-323 is a primary 14-3-3 binding site in cdc25B, which influences its 
activity and cellular localization. 14-3-3 binding to this site appeared to 
interact with the N-terminal domain of cdc25B to regulate its activity. The 
presence of consensus 14-3-3 binding sites in the N-terminal domain suggested 
that the interaction is through direct binding of the 14-3-3 dimer to sites in 
the N-terminal domain. We have identified Ser-151 and Ser-230 in the N-terminal 
domain as functional 14-3-3 binding sites utilized by cdc25B in vivo. These low 
affinity sites cooperate to bind the 14-3-3 dimer bound to the high affinity 
Ser-323 site, thus forming an intramolecular bridge that constrains cdc25B 
structure to prevent access of the catalytic site. Loss of 14-3-3 binding to 
either N-terminal site relaxes cdc25B structure sufficiently to permit access to 
the catalytic site, and the nuclear export sequence located in the N-terminal 
domain. Mutation of the Ser-323 site was functionally equivalent to the mutation 
of all three sites, resulting in the complete loss of 14-3-3 binding, increased 
access of the catalytic site, and access to nuclear localization sequence.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304027200
PMID: 12764136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
