---
pmid: '12433721'
title: 'Cysteine-rich secretory protein-3: a potential biomarker for prostate cancer.'
authors:
- Kosari F
- Asmann YW
- Cheville JC
- Vasmatzis G
journal: Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
---

# Cysteine-rich secretory protein-3: a potential biomarker for prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Kosari F, Asmann YW, Cheville JC, Vasmatzis G
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev (2002)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002 Nov;11(11):1419-26.

Cysteine-rich secretory protein-3: a potential biomarker for prostate cancer.

Kosari F(1), Asmann YW, Cheville JC, Vasmatzis G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Electronic profiling of publicly available expressed sequence tag databases 
identified a gene, cysteine-rich secretoryprotein-3 (CRISP-3), that is 
up-regulated in prostate cancer, and of which the expression is relatively 
prostate-specific. The objective of this study was to examine the potential of 
CRISP-3 as a biomarker for prostate cancer. In transient transfection studies, 
CRISP-3 was found to be a secretory protein. Using a multiple tissue dot blot 
experiment, CRISP-3 transcript was identified in a limited number of human 
tissues including the prostate. In situ hybridization experiments indicated that 
CRISP-3 mRNA is epithelial-specific and is up-regulated in prostate 
adenocarcinoma compared with benign prostate tissue. CRISP-3 mRNA overexpression 
in cancer was confirmed using quantitative real-time reverse-transcription-PCR 
using benign prostatic epithelia and adenocarcinoma (in 5 of 5 cases) isolated 
by laser capture microdissection, as well as bulk tissues (in 20 of 23 cases) 
from surgically resected human prostates. These findings suggest that CRISP-3 is 
a potential biomarker for prostate cancer.

PMID: 12433721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
