---
pmid: '15590694'
title: Suppressors of cytokine signaling 4 and 5 regulate epidermal growth factor
  receptor signaling.
authors:
- Kario E
- Marmor MD
- Adamsky K
- Citri A
- Amit I
- Amariglio N
- Rechavi G
- Yarden Y
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M408575200
---

# Suppressors of cytokine signaling 4 and 5 regulate epidermal growth factor receptor signaling.
**Authors:** Kario E, Marmor MD, Adamsky K, Citri A, Amit I, Amariglio N, Rechavi G, Yarden Y
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M408575200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M408575200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 25;280(8):7038-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M408575200. Epub
2004  Dec 7.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling 4 and 5 regulate epidermal growth factor 
receptor signaling.

Kario E(1), Marmor MD, Adamsky K, Citri A, Amit I, Amariglio N, Rechavi G, 
Yarden Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, The Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, 76100, Israel.

Suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) are Src homology-2-containing proteins 
originally identified as negative regulators of cytokine signaling. Accumulating 
evidence indicates a role for SOCS proteins in the regulation of additional 
signaling pathways including receptor tyrosine kinases. Notably, SOCS36E, the 
Drosophila ortholog of mammalian SOCS5, was recently implicated as a negative 
regulator of the Drosophila ortholog of EGFR. In this study, we aimed at 
characterizing the role of SOCS5 in the negative regulation of EGFR. Here we 
show that the expression of SOCS5 and its closest homolog SOCS4 is elevated in 
cells following treatment with EGF, similar to several negative feedback 
regulators of EGFR whose expression is up-regulated upon receptor activation. 
The expression of SOCS5 led to a marked reduction in EGFR expression levels by 
promoting EGFR degradation. The reduction in EGFR levels and EGF-induced 
signaling in SOCS5-expressing cells requires both the Src homology-2 and SOCS 
box domains of SOCS5. Interestingly, EGFR is degraded by SOCS5 prior to EGF 
treatment in a ligand- and c-Cbl-independent manner. SOCS5 can associate with 
EGFR and can also bind the ElonginBC protein complex via its SOCS box, which may 
recruit an E3 ubiquitin ligase to promote EGFR degradation. Thus, we have 
characterized a novel function for SOCS5 in regulating EGFR and discuss its 
potential role in controlling EGFR homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M408575200
PMID: 15590694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
