---
pmid: '9158739'
title: Affinity chromatography as a means to study multienzyme complexes involved
  in murein synthesis.
authors:
- von Rechenberg M
- Ursinus A
- Höltje JV
journal: Microb Drug Resist
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1089/mdr.1996.2.155
---

# Affinity chromatography as a means to study multienzyme complexes involved in murein synthesis.
**Authors:** von Rechenberg M, Ursinus A, Höltje JV
**Journal:** Microb Drug Resist (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1089/mdr.1996.2.155](https://doi.org/10.1089/mdr.1996.2.155)

## Abstract

1. Microb Drug Resist. 1996 Spring;2(1):155-7. doi: 10.1089/mdr.1996.2.155.

Affinity chromatography as a means to study multienzyme complexes involved in 
murein synthesis.

von Rechenberg M(1), Ursinus A, Höltje JV.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Tübingen, Germany.

The interaction of murein hydrolases and synthases was studied by affinity 
chromatography. The lytic transglycosylases Slt70 and MltB of E. coli were 
purified and covalently linked to CNBr-activated Sepharose. Membrane extracts 
were analyzed for proteins that interact with the immobilized murein hydrolases. 
Slt70-Sepharose was found to retain the PBPs 1b, 1c, 2, and 3. Likewise 
MltB-Sepharose enriched PBP 1b, 1c, and 3. Thus both lytic transglycosylases 
have an affinity for a transpeptidase, PBP2 and/or 3, as well as for the 
bifunctional transpeptidase/transglycosylase 1b. Interestingly, in addition, the 
poorly characterized PBP 1c interacts strongly with both Slt70 and MltB. It is 
speculated that the lytic transglycosylases assemble a multienzyme complex 
consisting of hydrolases and synthases, which is involved in growth of the 
stress-bearing murein sacculus.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.1996.2.155
PMID: 9158739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
