---
pmid: '10359772'
title: ZEB represses transcription through interaction with the corepressor CtBP.
authors:
- Postigo AA
- Dean DC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC21975
doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.12.6683
---

# ZEB represses transcription through interaction with the corepressor CtBP.
**Authors:** Postigo AA, Dean DC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.96.12.6683](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.12.6683)
**PMC:** [PMC21975](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC21975/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 8;96(12):6683-8. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.12.6683.

ZEB represses transcription through interaction with the corepressor CtBP.

Postigo AA(1), Dean DC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Departments of Medicine and Cell Biology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

ZEB is an active transcriptional repressor that regulates lymphocyte and muscle 
differentiation in vertebrates. Its homologue in Drosophila (zfh-1) is also 
essential for differentiation of somatic and cardiac muscle. Here, we 
demonstrate that ZEB and zfh-1 interact with the corepressor CtBP to repress 
transcription. ZEB and zfh-1, both contain the sequence PLDLS in the same region 
of the repressor domain, and we demonstrate that this sequence binds CtBP-1 and 
-2. In vertebrate species, ZEB contains two additional CtBP-like binding sites 
(variations of the PLDLS sequence) that also bind CtBP proteins and are required 
for full repressor activity. The three sites have an additive effect, and 
mutation of all three sites is necessary to abolish both binding to CtBP and 
repressor activity. Finally, we demonstrate that the interaction of CtBP with 
ZEB at the promoter is necessary for repressor activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.12.6683
PMCID: PMC21975
PMID: 10359772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
