---
pmid: '11884402'
title: Identification of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum lumenal protein, as a new
  member of the thyroglobulin folding complex.
authors:
- Sargsyan E
- Baryshev M
- Szekely L
- Sharipo A
- Mkrtchian S
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200539200
---

# Identification of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum lumenal protein, as a new member of the thyroglobulin folding complex.
**Authors:** Sargsyan E, Baryshev M, Szekely L, Sharipo A, Mkrtchian S
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M200539200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M200539200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):17009-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M200539200. Epub 
2002 Mar 7.

Identification of ERp29, an endoplasmic reticulum lumenal protein, as a new 
member of the thyroglobulin folding complex.

Sargsyan E(1), Baryshev M, Szekely L, Sharipo A, Mkrtchian S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Toxicology, Institute of Environmental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Folding and post-translational modification of the thyroid hormone precursor, 
thyroglobulin (Tg), in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of the thyroid epithelial 
cells is facilitated by several molecular chaperones and folding enzymes, such 
as BiP, GRP94, calnexin, protein disulfide isomerase, ERp72, and others. They 
have been shown to associate simultaneously and/or sequentially with Tg in the 
course of its maturation, thus forming large heterocomplexes in the ER of 
thyrocytes. Here we present evidence that such complexes include a novel member, 
an ER-resident lumenal protein, ERp29, which is present in all mammalian tissues 
with exceptionally high levels of expression in the secretory cells. ERp29 was 
induced upon treatment of FRTL-5 rat thyrocytes with the thyroid-stimulating 
hormone, which is essential for the maintenance of thyroid cells and Tg 
biosynthesis. Chemical cross-linking followed by the cell lysis and 
immunoprecipitation of ERp29 or Tg revealed association of these proteins and 
additionally, immunocomplexes that also included major ER chaperones, BiP and 
GRP94. Sucrose density gradient analysis indicated co-localization of ERp29 with 
Tg and BiP in the fractions containing large macromolecular complexes. This was 
supported by immunofluorescent microscopy showing co-localization of ERp29 with 
Tg in the putative transport vesicular structures. Affinity chromatography using 
Tg as an affinity ligand demonstrated that ERp29 might be selectively isolated 
from the FRTL-5 cell lysate or purified lumenal fraction of rat liver microsomes 
along with the other ER chaperones. Preferential association with the 
urea-denatured Tg-Sepharose was indicative of either direct or circuitous 
ERp29/Tg interactions in a chaperone-like manner. Despite the presence of the 
C-terminal ER-retrieval signal, significant amounts of ERp29 were also recovered 
from the culture medium of stimulated thyrocytes, indicating ERp29 secretion. 
Based on these data, we suggest that the function of ERp29 in thyroid cells is 
connected with folding and/or secretion of Tg.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M200539200
PMID: 11884402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
