---
pmid: '18469015'
title: A spatially restricted increase in receptor mobility is involved in directional
  sensing during Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis.
authors:
- de Keijzer S
- Sergé A
- van Hemert F
- Lommerse PH
- Lamers GE
- Spaink HP
- Schmidt T
- Snaar-Jagalska BE
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/jcs.030692
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A spatially restricted increase in receptor mobility is involved in directional sensing during Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis.
**Authors:** de Keijzer S, Sergé A, van Hemert F, Lommerse PH, Lamers GE, Spaink HP, Schmidt T, Snaar-Jagalska BE
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.030692](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.030692)

## Abstract

1. J Cell Sci. 2008 May 15;121(Pt 10):1750-7. doi: 10.1242/jcs.030692.

A spatially restricted increase in receptor mobility is involved in directional 
sensing during Dictyostelium discoideum chemotaxis.

de Keijzer S(1), Sergé A, van Hemert F, Lommerse PH, Lamers GE, Spaink HP, 
Schmidt T, Snaar-Jagalska BE.

Author information:
(1)Physics of Life Processes, Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University, 
Niels Bohrweg 2, 2333 CA Leiden, The Netherlands.

The directed cell migration towards a chemotactic source, chemotaxis, involves 
three complex and interrelated processes: directional sensing, cell polarization 
and motility. Directional sensing allows migrating eukaryotic cells to chemotax 
in extremely shallow gradients (<2% across the cell body) of the 
chemoattractant. Although directional sensing has been observed as spatially 
restricted responses along the plasma membrane, our understanding of the 
;compass' of the cell that controls the gradient-induced translocation of 
proteins during chemotactic movements is still largely lacking. Until now, the 
dynamical behaviour and mobility of the chemoattractant-receptor molecule has 
been neglected in models describing the directional sensing mechanisms. Here, we 
show by single-molecule microscopy an agonist-induced increase in the mobile 
fraction of cAMP-receptor at the leading edge of chemotacting Dictyostelium 
discoideum cells. The onset of receptor mobility was correlated to the 
uncoupling and activation of the Galpha2-protein. A finite-element simulation 
showed that the increase in mobile fraction of the activated receptor enabled 
the amplified generation of activated Gbetagamma-dimers at the leading edge of 
the cell, faithfully representing a primary linear amplification step in 
directional sensing. We propose here that modulation of the receptor mobility is 
directly involved in directional sensing and provides a new mechanistic basis 
for the primary amplification step in current theoretical models that describe 
directional sensing.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.030692
PMID: 18469015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
