---
pmid: '3418107'
title: 'Immunocytochemical localization of human hepatic alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase
  in control subjects and patients with primary hyperoxaluria type 1.'
authors:
- Cooper PJ
- Danpure CJ
- Wise PJ
- Guttridge KM
journal: J Histochem Cytochem
year: '1988'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1177/36.10.3418107
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Immunocytochemical localization of human hepatic alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase in control subjects and patients with primary hyperoxaluria type 1.
**Authors:** Cooper PJ, Danpure CJ, Wise PJ, Guttridge KM
**Journal:** J Histochem Cytochem (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1177/36.10.3418107](https://doi.org/10.1177/36.10.3418107)

## Abstract

1. J Histochem Cytochem. 1988 Oct;36(10):1285-94. doi: 10.1177/36.10.3418107.

Immunocytochemical localization of human hepatic alanine: glyoxylate 
aminotransferase in control subjects and patients with primary hyperoxaluria 
type 1.

Cooper PJ(1), Danpure CJ, Wise PJ, Guttridge KM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Cell Biology, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex, United Kingdom.

Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) is an inherited disorder of glyoxylate 
metabolism caused by a deficiency of the hepatic peroxisomal enzyme alanine: 
glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT; EC 2.6.1.44) [FEBS Lett (1986) 201:20]. The 
aim of the present study was to investigate the intracellular distribution of 
immunoreactive AGT protein, using protein A-gold immunocytochemistry, in normal 
human liver and in livers of PH1 patients with (CRM+) or without (CRM-) 
immunologically crossreacting enzyme protein. In all CRM+ individuals, which 
included three controls, a PH1 heterozygote and a PH1 homozygote immunoreactive 
AGT protein was confined to peroxisomes, where it was randomly dispersed 
throughout the peroxisomal matrix with no obvious association with the 
peroxisomal membrane. No AGT protein could be detected in the peroxisomes or 
other cytoplasmic compartments in the livers of CRM- PH1 patients (homozygotes). 
The peroxisomal labeling density in the CRM+ PH1 patient, who was completely 
deficient in AGT enzyme activity, was similar to that of the controls. In 
addition, in the PH1 heterozygote, who had one third normal AGT enzyme activity, 
peroxisomal labeling density was reduced to 50% of normal.

DOI: 10.1177/36.10.3418107
PMID: 3418107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
