---
pmid: '12049732'
title: The PHD domain of MEKK1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and mediates ubiquitination
  and degradation of ERK1/2.
authors:
- Lu Z
- Xu S
- Joazeiro C
- Cobb MH
- Hunter T
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00519-1
---

# The PHD domain of MEKK1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and mediates ubiquitination and degradation of ERK1/2.
**Authors:** Lu Z, Xu S, Joazeiro C, Cobb MH, Hunter T
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00519-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00519-1)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell. 2002 May;9(5):945-56. doi: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00519-1.

The PHD domain of MEKK1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and mediates 
ubiquitination and degradation of ERK1/2.

Lu Z(1), Xu S, Joazeiro C, Cobb MH, Hunter T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological 
Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

ERK1/2 MAP kinases are important regulators in cellular signaling, whose 
activity is normally reversibly regulated by threonine-tyrosine phosphorylation. 
In contrast, we have found that stress-induced ERK1/2 activity is downregulated 
by ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated degradation of ERK1/2. The PHD domain of MEKK1, 
a RING finger-like structure, exhibited E3 ubiquitin ligase activity toward ERK2 
in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, both MEKK1 kinase activity and the docking motif 
on ERK1/2 were involved in ERK1/2 ubiquitination. Significantly, cells 
expressing ERK2 with the docking motif mutation were resistant to 
sorbitol-induced apoptosis. Therefore, MEKK1 functions not only as an upstream 
activator of the ERK and JNK through its kinase domain, but also as an E3 ligase 
through its PHD domain, providing a negative regulatory mechanism for decreasing 
ERK1/2 activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s1097-2765(02)00519-1
PMID: 12049732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
