---
pmid: '20439756'
title: Ubiquitin vinyl methyl ester binding orients the misaligned active site of
  the ubiquitin hydrolase UCHL1 into productive conformation.
authors:
- Boudreaux DA
- Maiti TK
- Davies CW
- Das C
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2889082
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910870107
---

# Ubiquitin vinyl methyl ester binding orients the misaligned active site of the ubiquitin hydrolase UCHL1 into productive conformation.
**Authors:** Boudreaux DA, Maiti TK, Davies CW, Das C
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0910870107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910870107)
**PMC:** [PMC2889082](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2889082/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 18;107(20):9117-22. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0910870107. Epub 2010 May 3.

Ubiquitin vinyl methyl ester binding orients the misaligned active site of the 
ubiquitin hydrolase UCHL1 into productive conformation.

Boudreaux DA(1), Maiti TK, Davies CW, Das C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Purdue University, 560 Oval Drive, West Lafayette, 
IN 47907, USA.

Ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCHL1) is a Parkinson 
disease-associated, putative cysteine protease found abundantly and selectively 
expressed in neurons. The crystal structure of apo UCHL1 showed that the 
active-site residues are not aligned in a canonical form, with the nucleophilic 
cysteine being 7.7 A from the general base histidine, an arrangement consistent 
with an inactive form of the enzyme. Here we report the crystal structures of 
the wild type and two Parkinson disease-associated variants of the enzyme, S18Y 
and I93M, bound to a ubiquitin-based suicide substrate, ubiquitin vinyl methyl 
ester. These structures reveal that ubiquitin vinyl methyl ester binds primarily 
at two sites on the enzyme, with its carboxy terminus at the active site and 
with its amino-terminal beta-hairpin at the distal site-a surface-exposed 
hydrophobic crevice 17 A away from the active site. Binding at the distal site 
initiates a cascade of side-chain movements in the enzyme that starts at a 
highly conserved, surface-exposed phenylalanine and is relayed to the active 
site resulting in the reorientation and proximal placement of the general base 
within 4 A of the catalytic cysteine, an arrangement found in productive 
cysteine proteases. Mutation of the distal-site, surface-exposed phenylalanine 
to alanine reduces ubiquitin binding and severely impairs the catalytic activity 
of the enzyme. These results suggest that the activity of UCHL1 may be regulated 
by its own substrate.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0910870107
PMCID: PMC2889082
PMID: 20439756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
