---
pmid: '8647801'
title: A mammalian patched homolog is expressed in target tissues of sonic hedgehog
  and maps to a region associated with developmental abnormalities.
authors:
- Hahn H
- Christiansen J
- Wicking C
- Zaphiropoulos PG
- Chidambaram A
- Gerrard B
- Vorechovsky I
- Bale AE
- Toftgard R
- Dean M
- Wainwright B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1996'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.21.12125
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A mammalian patched homolog is expressed in target tissues of sonic hedgehog and maps to a region associated with developmental abnormalities.
**Authors:** Hahn H, Christiansen J, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG, Chidambaram A, Gerrard B, Vorechovsky I, Bale AE, Toftgard R, Dean M, Wainwright B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.271.21.12125](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.271.21.12125)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 24;271(21):12125-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.21.12125.

A mammalian patched homolog is expressed in target tissues of sonic hedgehog and 
maps to a region associated with developmental abnormalities.

Hahn H(1), Christiansen J, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG, Chidambaram A, Gerrard 
B, Vorechovsky I, Bale AE, Toftgard R, Dean M, Wainwright B.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Section, Scientific Applications International Corporation 
Frederick, National Cancer Institute-Frederick Cancer Research and Development 
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Drosophila patched is a segment polarity gene required for the correct 
patterning of larval segments and imaginal discs during fly development and has 
a close functional relationship with hedgehog. We have isolated a complete human 
PATCHED cDNA sequence, which encodes a putative protein of 1296 amino acids, and 
displays 39% identity and 60% similarity to the Drosophila PATCHED protein. 
Hydropathy analysis suggests that human PATCHED is an integral membrane protein 
with a pattern of hydrophobic and hydrophilic stretches nearly identical to that 
of Drosophila patched. In the developing mouse embryo, patched is initially 
detected within the ventral neural tube and later in the somites and limb buds. 
Expression in the limb buds is restricted to the posterior ectoderm surrounding 
the zone of polarizing activity. The results show that patched is expressed in 
target tissues of sonic hedgehog, a murine homolog of Drosophila hedgehog 
suggesting that patched/hedgehog interactions have been conserved during 
evolution. Human PATCHED maps to human chromosome 9q22.3, the candidate region 
for the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Patched expression is compatible 
with the congenital defects observed in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.21.12125
PMID: 8647801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
