---
pmid: '12642491'
title: Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the
  result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins and
  Fox transcription factors.
authors:
- Foucher I
- Montesinos ML
- Volovitch M
- Prochiantz A
- Trembleau A
journal: Development
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1242/dev.00414
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins and Fox transcription factors.
**Authors:** Foucher I, Montesinos ML, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Trembleau A
**Journal:** Development (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.00414](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00414)

## Abstract

1. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1867-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.00414.

Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the 
result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins 
and Fox transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Montesinos ML, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information:
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, 
France.

The MAP1B (Mtap1b) promoter presents two evolutionary conserved overlapping 
homeoproteins and Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta/Foxa2) cognate 
binding sites (defining putative homeoprotein/Fox sites, HF1 and HF2). 
Accordingly, the promoter domain containing HF1 and HF2 is recognized by 
cerebellum nuclear extracts containing Engrailed and Foxa2 and has regulatory 
functions in primary cultures of embryonic mesmetencephalic nerve cells. 
Transfection experiments further demonstrate that Engrailed and Foxa2 interact 
physiologically in a dose-dependent manner: Foxa2 antagonizes the 
Engrailed-driven regulation of the MAP1B promoter, and vice versa. This led us 
to investigate if Engrailed and Foxa2 interact directly. Direct interaction was 
confirmed by pull-down experiments, and the regions participating in this 
interaction were identified. In Foxa2 the interacting domain is the Forkhead box 
DNA-binding domain. In Engrailed, two independent interacting domains exist: the 
homeodomain and a region that includes the Pbx-binding domain. Finally, Foxa2 
not only binds Engrailed but also Lim1, Gsc and Hoxa5 homeoproteins and in the 
four cases Foxa2 binds at least the homeodomain. Based on the involvement of 
conserved domains in both classes of proteins, it is proposed that the 
interaction between Forkhead box transcription factors and homeoproteins is a 
general phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.00414
PMID: 12642491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
