---
pmid: '9630604'
title: Identification of holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) proteins in human placenta.
authors:
- Hiratsuka M
- Sakamoto O
- Li X
- Suzuki Y
- Aoki Y
- Narisawa K
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0167-4838(98)00032-6
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Identification of holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) proteins in human placenta.
**Authors:** Hiratsuka M, Sakamoto O, Li X, Suzuki Y, Aoki Y, Narisawa K
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0167-4838(98)00032-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-4838(98)00032-6)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jun 11;1385(1):165-71. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4838(98)00032-6.

Identification of holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) proteins in human placenta.

Hiratsuka M(1), Sakamoto O, Li X, Suzuki Y, Aoki Y, Narisawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 1-1 
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-77, Japan. mhiratsuka@ped.med.tohoku.ac.jp

Holocarboxylase synthetase (HCS) is a key enzyme in biotin utilization in 
eukaryotic cells. In a previous work from our laboratory, we described the 
cloning and sequencing of a full-length human HCS cDNA. Due to the presence of 
three candidate sites for initiation of translation, the identification of 
full-length HCS proteins remains uncertain. Using antibodies directed against 
human HCS sequences, we have identified, in human placenta, three cytosolic HCS 
proteins, of 86, 82 and 76 kDa. Similar results were observed in lysates of 
cells transfected with an HCS expression vector, as well as with human HCS cDNA 
transcribed and translated in a cell-free system. When anti-HCS antibodies were 
tested for their ability to inhibit HCS enzymatic activity, only the antibody 
directed against a region of HCS from Ile128 to Pro398, and not the antibodies 
against more proximal N-terminal regions inhibited HCS activity, suggesting that 
the sequence from Ile128 to Pro398 is essential for the catalytic activity of 
this enzyme. HCS synthesized in a cell-free system was not translocated into rat 
liver mitochondria. These results suggest that our human HCS cDNA encodes the 
cytosolic forms of the enzyme. These results also suggest that mRNA encoding 
cytosolic HCS can be translated from all three translation initiation codons, 
Met1, Met7 and Met58.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4838(98)00032-6
PMID: 9630604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
