---
pmid: '35429729'
title: New directions for the clathrin adaptor AP-1 in cell biology and human disease.
authors:
- Duncan MC
journal: Curr Opin Cell Biol
year: '2022'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC9187608
doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2022.102079
---

# New directions for the clathrin adaptor AP-1 in cell biology and human disease.
**Authors:** Duncan MC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Cell Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ceb.2022.102079](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2022.102079)
**PMC:** [PMC9187608](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9187608/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2022 Jun;76:102079. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2022.102079. Epub 
2022 Apr 13.

New directions for the clathrin adaptor AP-1 in cell biology and human disease.

Duncan MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA. Electronic address: mcduncan@umich.edu.

The clathrin adaptor protein complex-1 (AP-1) is a central player in cell 
physiology and human health. It is best known for its role in linking clathrin 
to its cargo at the trans-Golgi network and endosomes. It participates in 
traffic important for the correct function of a large number of organelles, 
including the trans-Golgi network, endosomes, lysosomes, lysosome-related 
organelles, and plasma membrane. Although it was one of the first clathrin 
adaptors identified, new discoveries about cargo and pathways that depend on 
AP-1 continue to emerge. This review summarizes new research into AP-1 that 
further illuminates its roles in the traffic of plasma membrane proteins, in 
maintaining TGN content, and in human disease.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceb.2022.102079
PMCID: PMC9187608
PMID: 35429729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Nothing declared.
