---
pmid: '14500721'
title: Stanniocalcin 1 is an autocrine modulator of endothelial angiogenic responses
  to hepatocyte growth factor.
authors:
- Zlot C
- Ingle G
- Hongo J
- Yang S
- Sheng Z
- Schwall R
- Paoni N
- Wang F
- Peale FV Jr
- Gerritsen ME
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M301353200
---

# Stanniocalcin 1 is an autocrine modulator of endothelial angiogenic responses to hepatocyte growth factor.
**Authors:** Zlot C, Ingle G, Hongo J, Yang S, Sheng Z, Schwall R, Paoni N, Wang F, Peale FV Jr, Gerritsen ME
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M301353200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M301353200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47654-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M301353200. Epub
2003  Sep 17.

Stanniocalcin 1 is an autocrine modulator of endothelial angiogenic responses to 
hepatocyte growth factor.

Zlot C(1), Ingle G, Hongo J, Yang S, Sheng Z, Schwall R, Paoni N, Wang F, Peale 
FV Jr, Gerritsen ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, 
California 94080, USA.

Stanniocalcin 1 (STC1) is a secreted glycoprotein originally described as a 
hormone involved in calcium and phosphate homeostasis in bony fishes. We 
recently identified the mammalian homolog of this molecule to be highly 
up-regulated in an in vitro model of angiogenesis, as well as focally and 
intensely expressed at sites of pathological angiogenesis (e.g. tumor 
vasculature). In the present study, we report that STC1 is a selective modulator 
of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced endothelial migration and 
morphogenesis, but not proliferation. STC1 did not inhibit proliferative or 
migratory responses to vascular endothelial growth factor or basic fibroblast 
growth factor. The mechanism of STC1 inhibitory effects on HGF-induced 
endothelial migration seem to occur secondary to receptor activation because 
STC1 did not inhibit HGF-induced c-met receptor phosphorylation, but did block 
HGF-induced focal adhesion kinase activation. In the mouse femoral artery 
ligation model of angiogenesis, STC1 expression closely paralleled that of the 
endothelial marker CD31, and the peak level of STC1 expression occurred after an 
increase in HGF expression. We propose that STC1 may play a selective modulatory 
role in angiogenesis, possibly serving as a "stop signal" or stabilizing factor 
contributing to the maturation of newly formed blood vessels. HGF is a 
mesenchyme-derived pleiotropic factor with mitogenic, motogenic, and morphogenic 
activities on a number of different cell types. HGF effects are mediated through 
a specific tyrosine kinase, c-met, and aberrant HGF and c-met expression are 
frequently observed in a variety of tumors. Recent studies have shown HGF to be 
a potent growth factor implicated in wound healing, tissue regeneration, and 
angiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M301353200
PMID: 14500721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
