---
pmid: '9062192'
title: Phosphorylation of RNA-binding protein controls cell cycle switch from mitotic
  to meiotic in fission yeast.
authors:
- Watanabe Y
- Shinozaki-Yabana S
- Chikashige Y
- Hiraoka Y
- Yamamoto M
journal: Nature
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/386187a0
---

# Phosphorylation of RNA-binding protein controls cell cycle switch from mitotic to meiotic in fission yeast.
**Authors:** Watanabe Y, Shinozaki-Yabana S, Chikashige Y, Hiraoka Y, Yamamoto M
**Journal:** Nature (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/386187a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/386187a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1997 Mar 13;386(6621):187-90. doi: 10.1038/386187a0.

Phosphorylation of RNA-binding protein controls cell cycle switch from mitotic 
to meiotic in fission yeast.

Watanabe Y(1), Shinozaki-Yabana S, Chikashige Y, Hiraoka Y, Yamamoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, 
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Meiosis generates haploid gametes from diploid cells and is an almost universal 
feature of eukaryotic organisms. But little is known about how the switch from 
mitotic to meiotic cell cycles is molecularly controlled. In the fission yeast 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, inactivation of the protein kinase Pat1(Ran1) upon 
nutrient deprivation triggers entry into the meiotic cell cycle. Here we show 
that the RNA-binding protein Mei2 is a substrate of Pat1 kinase and that 
dephosphorylation of Mei2 is sufficient to switch cells from the mitotic cell 
cycle into meiosis. Mei2 is localized mainly in the cytoplasm of proliferating 
cells but is seen as a single spot close to the microtubule organizing centre in 
prophase nuclei during meiosis. Our results, and others from a metazoan, 
emphasize the crucial role of RNA-binding proteins in the initiation and 
execution of meiosis.

DOI: 10.1038/386187a0
PMID: 9062192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
