---
pmid: '21285369'
title: Presenilin 2 modulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria interactions
  and Ca2+ cross-talk.
authors:
- Zampese E
- Fasolato C
- Kipanyula MJ
- Bortolozzi M
- Pozzan T
- Pizzo P
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3041131
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1100735108
---

# Presenilin 2 modulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria interactions and Ca2+ cross-talk.
**Authors:** Zampese E, Fasolato C, Kipanyula MJ, Bortolozzi M, Pozzan T, Pizzo P
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1100735108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1100735108)
**PMC:** [PMC3041131](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3041131/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Feb 15;108(7):2777-82. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1100735108. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Presenilin 2 modulates endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria interactions and 
Ca2+ cross-talk.

Zampese E(1), Fasolato C, Kipanyula MJ, Bortolozzi M, Pozzan T, Pizzo P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padua, 35121 Padua, Italy.

Presenilin mutations are the main cause of familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD). 
Presenilins also play a key role in Ca(2+) homeostasis, and their FAD-linked 
mutants affect cellular Ca(2+) handling in several ways. We previously have 
demonstrated that FAD-linked presenilin 2 (PS2) mutants decrease the Ca(2+) 
content of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by inhibiting sarcoendoplasmic 
reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA) activity and increasing ER Ca(2+) leak. Here we 
focus on the effect of presenilins on mitochondrial Ca(2+) dynamics. By using 
genetically encoded Ca(2+) indicators specifically targeted to mitochondria 
(aequorin- and GFP-based probes) in SH-SY5Y cells and primary neuronal cultures, 
we show that overexpression or down-regulation of PS2, but not of presenilin 1 
(PS1), modulates the Ca(2+) shuttling between ER and mitochondria, with its FAD 
mutants strongly favoring Ca(2+) transfer between the two organelles. This 
effect is not caused by a direct PS2 action on mitochondrial Ca(2+)-uptake 
machinery but rather by an increased physical interaction between ER and 
mitochondria that augments the frequency of Ca(2+) hot spots generated at the 
cytoplasmic surface of the outer mitochondrial membrane upon stimulation. This 
PS2 function adds further complexity to the multifaceted nature of presenilins 
and to their physiological role within the cell. We also discuss the importance 
of this additional effect of FAD-linked PS2 mutants for the understanding of FAD 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1100735108
PMCID: PMC3041131
PMID: 21285369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Presenilin mutations are the main cause of familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Presenilins also play a key role in Ca 2+ homeostasis, and their FAD-linked mutants affect cellular Ca 2+ handling in several ways. We previously have demonstrated that FAD-linked presenilin 2 (PS2) mutants decrease the Ca 2+ content of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by inhibiting sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -ATPase (SERCA) activity and increasing ER Ca 2+ leak. Here we focus on the effect of presenilins on mitochondrial Ca 2+ dynamics. By using genetically encoded Ca 2+ indicators specifically targeted to mitochondria (aequorin- and GFP-based probes) in SH-SY5Y cells and primary neuronal cultures, we show that overexpression or down-regulation of PS2, but not of presenilin 1 (PS1), modulates the Ca 2+ shuttling between ER and mitochondria, with its FAD mutants strongly favoring Ca 2+ transfer between the two organelles. This effect is not caused by a direct PS2 action on mitochondrial Ca 2+ -uptake machinery but rather by an increased physical interaction between ER and mitochondria that augments the frequency of Ca 2+ hot spots generated at the cytoplasmic surface of the outer mitochondrial membrane upon stimulation. This PS2 function adds further complexity to the multifaceted nature of presenilins and to their physiological role within the cell. We also discuss the importance of this additional effect of FAD-linked PS2 mutants for the understanding of FAD pathogenesis.

Discussion

Presenilins are multifunctional proteins involved in different cellular functions, from the control of Notch signaling to the production of Aβ ( 27 ). Mutations in presenilins are responsible for most cases of early-onset FAD, although the pathogenic mechanism remains largely unknown. Much interest has been generated by the finding that presenilins can modulate different components of the Ca 2+ signaling machinery, but contradictory results on this issue have been published by various groups ( 4 ).

Here we investigated the effects of transient expression or down-regulation of presenilins on ER–mitochondria interactions. The rationale for using transiently transfected cells, rather than cell clones or cells from transgenic animals, is twofold: Differences among clones may depend on intrinsic cell variability, and results in cells from transgenic animals may reflect adaptation phenomena and not the causal role of the protein of interest. We are aware of the limitations of experiments carried out in acutely transfected cells, and experiments in cells and tissues from transgenic mice expressing a FAD-linked PS2 mutant confirm and extend the results presented here.

The results appear clear-cut: Overexpression or down-regulation of WT or mutant PS1 has marginal effects on either the structural association or the efficacy of Ca 2+ transfer between the ER and mitochondria. In contrast, modification in the level of PS2 potently modulates both processes. In particular, PS2 overexpression results in an increased tethering of the two organelles, whereas the opposite effect occurs upon PS2 down-regulation. As predicted, increases in PS2 level augment the efficacy of Ca 2+ transfer from the ER to the mitochondria. Again, down-regulation of endogenous PS2 has the opposite effect.

Overexpression of PS2 WT has a smaller effect than overexpression of FAD-linked PS2 mutants on the association between the organelles (and therefore in favoring Ca 2+ transfer). However, the role of endogenous PS2 is highlighted more easily upon down-regulation of the protein, using specific siRNA, that results in a very substantial reduction of both tethering and mitochondrial Ca 2+ uptake. The effects of PS2 on ER–mitochondria interaction are observed not only in cell lines but also in primary cultures of rat cortical neurons.

For the hot spots generated at the OMM, we decided to use a more stringent criterion than applied previously ( SI Methods ), and, although the scattering of data is quite large, we observed an increased number of cells overexpressing PS2 (T122R in particular) presenting a large percentage of hot pixels, despite modest average ΔR/R 0 rises.

The question then arises as to the mechanism by which PS2 modifies the interaction between the two organelles. We can conclude that the modulation of the ER–mitochondria interaction ( i ) does not require the enzymatic activity of PS2, ( ii ) does not require the presenilin endoproteolytic cut [because the equally effective PS2-D366A mutant also is devoid of this activity ( 28 )], ( iii ) is not caused by ER Ca 2+ overload or depletion, ( iv ) does not result from an increase of the intrinsic Ca 2+ uptake capacity of mitochondria, and ( v ) does not correlate with modifications of Mfn2 levels.

The observation that the effects of PS2 overexpression (in WT or FAD-linked mutants) on SERCA, [Ca 2+ ] ER ( 6 ), and the mitochondria–ER connection are mimicked by a mutant devoid of catalytic activity suggests that all these effects depend on the level of full-length (FL) PS2. A similar conclusion was reached by Tu et al. ( 7 ). However, it should be mentioned that if FL PS2 WT formed Ca 2+ leak channels, as suggested previously ( 7 ), the leak rate should be increased dramatically in cells overexpressing the protein, but the ER Ca 2+ leak rate measured directly is increased only slightly (+15%) ( 6 ). Conversely, this latter finding is more compatible with the model of an exaggerated Ca 2+ release caused by PS2 modulation of the IP 3 R opening probability ( 11 , 12 ).

PS2 and PS1 are highly homologous, and their roles in cell functions often are considered to be largely overlapping. The present results, on the contrary, confirm and extend previous observations that, as far as Ca 2+ handling is concerned, PS1 and PS2 have both similar and different roles. For example, both PS1 and PS2 overexpression in WT and FAD-linked mutants decrease [Ca 2+ ] ER ( 6 ) and increase Ca 2+ leak across the ER (although to different extents), but only PS2 strongly inhibits SERCA activity ( 4 , 6 ) and increases ER–mitochondria tethering. Of interest, along these lines, Behbahani et al. ( 29 ) showed that mitochondrial functions are reduced significantly in cells from PS2 (but not PS1) knockout animals. This energetic deficit could depend on the reduction of ER–mitochondria Ca 2+ transfer, as elegantly demonstrated recently by Cárdenas et al. ( 30 ).

Although the present results provide information about the physiological role of PS2 in cellular Ca 2+ homeostasis, the extrapolation of these data to the pathogenesis of FAD appears premature. However, alterations in the distance or number of contacts between ER and mitochondria may have profound impact on energetic metabolism ( 23 , 31 ) as well as on the cellular response to Ca 2+ -mediated cell-death stimuli ( 32 ). As far as FAD is concerned, a favored interaction between the two organelles may result in a chronic, toxic, mitochondrial Ca 2+ overload that could contribute to neuronal metabolic dysfunction and ultimately cell death, thus being involved directly in the pathogenesis of the disease. Alternatively, an increase in ER–mitochondria tethering may mitigate the energetic defect linked to partial ER Ca 2+ depletion caused by PS2 mutants, thus contributing to the milder phenotype of FAD cases linked to PS2 mutations.

Methods

Additional details are given in SI Methods .
