---
pmid: '17698061'
title: Functional involvement of TMF/ARA160 in Rab6-dependent retrograde membrane
  traffic.
authors:
- Yamane J
- Kubo A
- Nakayama K
- Yuba-Kubo A
- Katsuno T
- Tsukita S
- Tsukita S
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.07.010
---

# Functional involvement of TMF/ARA160 in Rab6-dependent retrograde membrane traffic.
**Authors:** Yamane J, Kubo A, Nakayama K, Yuba-Kubo A, Katsuno T, Tsukita S, Tsukita S
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.07.010)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 2007 Oct 1;313(16):3472-85. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.07.010.
Epub  2007 Jul 19.

Functional involvement of TMF/ARA160 in Rab6-dependent retrograde membrane 
traffic.

Yamane J(1), Kubo A, Nakayama K, Yuba-Kubo A, Katsuno T, Tsukita S, Tsukita S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Japan.

The small GTPase Rab6 regulates retrograde membrane traffic from endosomes to 
the Golgi apparatus and from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We 
examined the role of a Rab6-binding protein, TMF/ARA160 (TATA element modulatory 
factor/androgen receptor-coactivator of 160 kDa), in this process. 
High-resolution immunofluorescence imaging revealed that TMF signal surrounded 
Rab6-positive Golgi structures and immunoelectron microscopy revealed that TMF 
is concentrated at the budding structures localized at the tips of cisternae. 
The knockdown of either TMF or Rab6 by RNA interference blocked retrograde 
transport of endocytosed Shiga toxin from early/recycling endosomes to the 
trans-Golgi network, causing missorting of the toxin to late 
endosomes/lysosomes. However, the TMF knockdown caused Rab6-dependent 
displacement of N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-2 (GalNAc-T2), but not 
beta1,4-galactosyltransferase (GalT), from the Golgi. Analyses using chimeric 
proteins, in which the cytoplasmic regions of GalNAc-T2 and GalT were exchanged, 
revealed that the cytoplasmic region of GalNAc-T2 plays a crucial role in its 
TMF-dependent Golgi retention. These observations suggest critical roles for TMF 
in two Rab6-dependent retrograde transport processes: one from endosomes to the 
Golgi and the other from the Golgi to the ER.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2007.07.010
PMID: 17698061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
