---
pmid: '9515723'
title: Cytochrome c in the apoptotic and antioxidant cascades.
authors:
- Skulachev VP
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00061-1
---

# Cytochrome c in the apoptotic and antioxidant cascades.
**Authors:** Skulachev VP
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00061-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00061-1)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 1998 Feb 27;423(3):275-80. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00061-1.

Cytochrome c in the apoptotic and antioxidant cascades.

Skulachev VP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioenergetics, A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical 
Biology, Moscow State University, Russia. skulach@head.genebee.msu.su

Recent progress in studies on apoptosis has revealed that cytochrome c is a 
pro-apoptotic factor. It is released from its places on the outer surface of the 
inner mitochondrial membrane at early steps of apoptosis and, combining with 
some cytosolic proteins, activates conversion of the latent apoptosis-promoting 
protease pro-caspase-9 to its active form. Cytochrome c release can be initiated 
by the pro-apoptotic protein Bax. This process is blocked by the anti-apoptotic 
proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. The role of cytochrome c in apoptosis may be 
understood within the framework of the concept assuming that the evolutionary 
primary function of apoptosis was to purify tissues from ROS-overproducing 
cells. In this context, the pro-apoptosis activity of cytochrome c might 
represent one of the anti-oxidant functions inherent in this cytochrome. Among 
other cytochrome c-linked antioxidant mechanisms, the following systems can be 
indicated. (1) Cytochrome c released from the inner mitochondrial membrane to 
the intermembrane space can operate as an enzyme oxidizing O2.- back to O2. The 
reduced cytochrome c is oxidized by cytochrome oxidase (or in yeasts and 
bacteria, by cytochrome c peroxidase). (2) The intermembrane cytochrome c can 
activate the electron transport chain in the outer mitochondrial membrane. This 
bypasses the initial and middle parts of the main respiratory chain, which 
produce, as a rule, the major portion of ROS in the cell. (3) The main 
respiratory chain losing its cytochrome c is inhibited in such a fashion that 
antimycin-like agents fail to stimulate ROS production.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)00061-1
PMID: 9515723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
