---
pmid: '25557666'
title: Neuronal serotonin release triggers the heat shock response in C. elegans in
  the absence of temperature increase.
authors:
- Tatum MC
- Ooi FK
- Chikka MR
- Chauve L
- Martinez-Velazquez LA
- Steinbusch HWM
- Morimoto RI
- Prahlad V
journal: Curr Biol
year: '2015'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4840938
doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040
---

# Neuronal serotonin release triggers the heat shock response in C. elegans in the absence of temperature increase.
**Authors:** Tatum MC, Ooi FK, Chikka MR, Chauve L, Martinez-Velazquez LA, Steinbusch HWM, Morimoto RI, Prahlad V
**Journal:** Curr Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040)
**PMC:** [PMC4840938](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4840938/)

## Abstract

1. Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):163-174. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040. Epub
2014  Dec 31.

Neuronal serotonin release triggers the heat shock response in C. elegans in the 
absence of temperature increase.

Tatum MC(1), Ooi FK(1), Chikka MR(1), Chauve L(2), Martinez-Velazquez LA(3), 
Steinbusch HWM(4), Morimoto RI(2), Prahlad V(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Aging Mind and Brain Initiative, University of Iowa, 
338 Biology Building East, 210 Iowa Avenue, Iowa City, IA 52242-1324, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Rice Institute for Biomedical Sciences, 
Northwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive, Hogan 2-100, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, 
USA.
(3)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, and Repair, Department 
of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 
208002, New Haven, CT 06520-8002, USA.
(4)Department Translational Neuroscience, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life 
Sciences, Maastricht University Medical Center, Universiteitssingel 40, Room 
2.578, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Biology, Aging Mind and Brain Initiative, University of Iowa, 
338 Biology Building East, 210 Iowa Avenue, Iowa City, IA 52242-1324, USA. 
Electronic address: veena-prahlad@uiowa.edu.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2015 Jan 19;25(2):R71-R73. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.055.

BACKGROUND: Cellular mechanisms aimed at repairing protein damage and 
maintaining homeostasis, widely understood to be triggered by the damage itself, 
have recently been shown to be under cell nonautonomous control in the metazoan 
C. elegans. The heat shock response (HSR) is one such conserved mechanism, 
activated by cells upon exposure to proteotoxic conditions such as heat. 
Previously, we had shown that this conserved cytoprotective response is 
regulated by the thermosensory neuronal circuitry of C. elegans. Here, we 
investigate the mechanisms and physiological relevance of neuronal control.
RESULTS: By combining optogenetic methods with live visualization of the 
dynamics of the heat shock transcription factor (HSF1), we show that excitation 
of the AFD thermosensory neurons is sufficient to activate HSF1 in another cell, 
even in the absence of temperature increase. Excitation of the AFD thermosensory 
neurons enhances serotonin release. Serotonin release elicited by direct 
optogenetic stimulation of serotonergic neurons activates HSF1 and upregulates 
molecular chaperones through the metabotropic serotonin receptor SER-1. 
Consequently, excitation of serotonergic neurons alone can suppress protein 
misfolding in C. elegans peripheral tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies imply that thermosensory activity coupled to 
serotonergic signaling is sufficient to activate the protective HSR prior to 
frank proteotoxic damage. The ability of neurosensory release of serotonin to 
control cellular stress responses and activate HSF1 has powerful implications 
for the treatment of protein conformation diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.11.040
PMCID: PMC4840938
PMID: 25557666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
