---
pmid: '1939645'
title: von Willebrand factor binding to platelet GpIb initiates signals for platelet
  activation.
authors:
- Kroll MH
- Harris TS
- Moake JL
- Handin RI
- Schafer AI
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC295673
doi: 10.1172/JCI115468
---

# von Willebrand factor binding to platelet GpIb initiates signals for platelet activation.
**Authors:** Kroll MH, Harris TS, Moake JL, Handin RI, Schafer AI
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI115468](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI115468)
**PMC:** [PMC295673](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC295673/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1991 Nov;88(5):1568-73. doi: 10.1172/JCI115468.

von Willebrand factor binding to platelet GpIb initiates signals for platelet 
activation.

Kroll MH(1), Harris TS, Moake JL, Handin RI, Schafer AI.

Author information:
(1)Houston Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas 
77030.

The hypothesis that von Willebrand factor (vWF) binding to platelet membrane 
glycoprotein Ib (GpIb) initiates intracellular pathways of platelet activation 
was studied. We measured the biochemical responses of intact human platelets 
treated with ristocetin plus vWF multimers purified from human cryoprecipitate. 
vWF plus ristocetin causes the breakdown of phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate, the production of phosphatidic acid (PA), the activation of 
protein kinase C (PKC), increase of ionized cytoplasmic calcium ([Ca2+]i), and 
the synthesis of thromboxane A2. PA production, PKC activation, and the rise of 
[Ca2+]i stimulated by the ristocetin-induced binding of vWF multimers to 
platelets are inhibited by an anti-GpIb monoclonal antibody, but are unaffected 
by anti-GpIIb-IIIa monoclonal antibodies. Indomethacin also inhibits these 
responses without impairing platelet aggregation induced by vWF plus ristocetin. 
These results indicate that vWF binding to platelets initiates specific 
intraplatelet signaling pathways. The mechanism by which this occurs involves an 
arachidonic acid metabolite-dependent activation of phospholipase C after vWF 
binding to platelet membrane GpIb. This signal then causes PKC activation and 
increases of [Ca2+]i, which promote platelet secretion and potentiate 
aggregation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI115468
PMCID: PMC295673
PMID: 1939645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
