---
pmid: '18272684'
title: Functional characterization of Rab7 mutant proteins associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth
  type 2B disease.
authors:
- Spinosa MR
- Progida C
- De Luca A
- Colucci AM
- Alifano P
- Bucci C
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6671532
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3677-07.2008
---

# Functional characterization of Rab7 mutant proteins associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2B disease.
**Authors:** Spinosa MR, Progida C, De Luca A, Colucci AM, Alifano P, Bucci C
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3677-07.2008](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3677-07.2008)
**PMC:** [PMC6671532](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6671532/)

## Abstract

1. J Neurosci. 2008 Feb 13;28(7):1640-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3677-07.2008.

Functional characterization of Rab7 mutant proteins associated with 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2B disease.

Spinosa MR(1), Progida C, De Luca A, Colucci AM, Alifano P, Bucci C.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche ed Ambientali, Università del 
Salento, 73100 Lecce, Italy.

Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) type 2 neuropathies are a group of autosomal-dominant 
axonal disorders genetically and clinically heterogeneous. In particular, CMT 
type 2B (CMT2B) neuropathies are characterized by severe sensory loss, often 
complicated by infections, arthropathy, and amputations. Recently, four missense 
mutations in the small GTPase Rab7 associated with the Charcot-Marie Tooth type 
2B phenotype have been identified. These mutations target highly conserved amino 
acid residues. However, nothing is known about whether and how these mutations 
affect Rab7 function. We investigated the biochemical and functional properties 
of three of the mutant proteins. Interestingly, all three proteins exhibited 
higher nucleotide exchange rates and hydrolyzed GTP slower than the wild-type 
protein. In addition, whereas 23% of overexpressed wild-type Rab7 was GTP bound 
in HeLa cells, the large majority of the mutant proteins (82-89%) were in the 
GTP-bound form, consistent with the data on GTP hydrolysis and exchange rates. 
The CMT2B-associated Rab7 proteins were also able to bind the Rab7 effector RILP 
(Rab-interacting lysosomal protein) and to rescue Rab7 function after silencing. 
Altogether, these data demonstrate that all tested CMT2B-associated Rab7 
mutations are mechanistically similar, suggesting that activated forms of the 
Rab7 are responsible for CMT2B disease.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3677-07.2008
PMCID: PMC6671532
PMID: 18272684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.
