---
pmid: '25490155'
title: Architecture and dynamics of the autophagic phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex.
authors:
- Baskaran S
- Carlson LA
- Stjepanovic G
- Young LN
- Kim DJ
- Grob P
- Stanley RE
- Nogales E
- Hurley JH
journal: Elife
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC4281882
doi: 10.7554/eLife.05115
---

# Architecture and dynamics of the autophagic phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex.
**Authors:** Baskaran S, Carlson LA, Stjepanovic G, Young LN, Kim DJ, Grob P, Stanley RE, Nogales E, Hurley JH
**Journal:** Elife (2014)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.05115](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05115)
**PMC:** [PMC4281882](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4281882/)

## Abstract

1. Elife. 2014 Dec 9;3:e05115. doi: 10.7554/eLife.05115.

Architecture and dynamics of the autophagic phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
complex.

Baskaran S(1), Carlson LA(1), Stjepanovic G(1), Young LN(1), Kim DJ(1), Grob 
P(1), Stanley RE(2), Nogales E(1), Hurley JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, United States.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States.

The class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PI3KC3-C1) that functions 
in early autophagy consists of the lipid kinase VPS34, the scaffolding protein 
VPS15, the tumor suppressor BECN1, and the autophagy-specific subunit ATG14. The 
structure of the ATG14-containing PI3KC3-C1 was determined by single-particle 
EM, revealing a V-shaped architecture. All of the ordered domains of VPS34, 
VPS15, and BECN1 were mapped by MBP tagging. The dynamics of the complex were 
defined using hydrogen-deuterium exchange, revealing a novel 20-residue ordered 
region C-terminal to the VPS34 C2 domain. VPS15 organizes the complex and serves 
as a bridge between VPS34 and the ATG14:BECN1 subcomplex. Dynamic transitions 
occur in which the lipid kinase domain is ejected from the complex and VPS15 
pivots at the base of the V. The N-terminus of BECN1, the target for signaling 
inputs, resides near the pivot point. These observations provide a framework for 
understanding the allosteric regulation of lipid kinase activity.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.05115
PMCID: PMC4281882
PMID: 25490155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.
