---
pmid: '24136472'
title: Genetic engineering of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for rapid and high-yield production
  of vanillin from ferulic acid.
authors:
- Graf N
- Altenbuchner J
journal: Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1007/s00253-013-5303-1
---

# Genetic engineering of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for rapid and high-yield production of vanillin from ferulic acid.
**Authors:** Graf N, Altenbuchner J
**Journal:** Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00253-013-5303-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-013-5303-1)

## Abstract

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Jan;98(1):137-49. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-013-5303-1. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Genetic engineering of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for rapid and high-yield 
production of vanillin from ferulic acid.

Graf N(1), Altenbuchner J.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Industrielle Genetik, Universität Stuttgart, Allmandring 31, 
70569, Stuttgart, Germany.

Vanillin is one of the most important flavoring agents used today. That is why 
many efforts have been made on biotechnological production from natural abundant 
substrates. In this work, the nonpathogenic Pseudomonas putida strain KT2440 was 
genetically optimized to convert ferulic acid to vanillin. Deletion of the 
vanillin dehydrogenase gene (vdh) was not sufficient to prevent vanillin 
degradation. Additional inactivation of a molybdate transporter, identified by 
transposon mutagenesis, led to a strain incapable to grow on vanillin as sole 
carbon source. The bioconversion was optimized by enhanced chromosomal 
expression of the structural genes for feruloyl-CoA synthetase (fcs) and 
enoyl-CoA hydratase/aldolase (ech) by introduction of the strong tac promoter 
system. Further genetic engineering led to high initial conversion rates and 
molar vanillin yields up to 86% within just 3 h accompanied with very low 
by-product levels. To our knowledge, this represents the highest productivity 
and molar vanillin yield gained with a Pseudomonas strain so far. Together with 
its high tolerance for ferulic acid, the developed, plasmid-free P. putida 
strain represents a promising candidate for the biotechnological production of 
vanillin.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-013-5303-1
PMID: 24136472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
