---
pmid: '16288202'
title: Nf1 haploinsufficiency augments angiogenesis.
authors:
- Wu M
- Wallace MR
- Muir D
journal: Oncogene
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209264
---

# Nf1 haploinsufficiency augments angiogenesis.
**Authors:** Wu M, Wallace MR, Muir D
**Journal:** Oncogene (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1209264](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1209264)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 13;25(16):2297-303. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209264.

Nf1 haploinsufficiency augments angiogenesis.

Wu M(1), Wallace MR, Muir D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neurology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. wumin@ufl.edu

Mutations in the NF1 tumor-suppressor gene underlie neurofibromatosis type 1 
(NF1), in which patients are predisposed to certain tumors such as neurofibromas 
and may associate with vascular disorder. Plexiform neurofibromas are slow 
growing benign tumors that are highly vascular and can progress to malignancy. 
The development of neurofibromas requires loss of both Nf1 alleles in Schwann 
cells destined to become neoplastic and may be exacerbated by Nf1 heterozygosity 
in other non-neoplastic cells. This study tested the hypothesis that Nf1 
heterozygosity exaggerates angiogenesis. We found that Nf1 heterozygous mice 
showed increased neovascularization in both the retina and cornea in response to 
hypoxia and bFGF, respectively, compared to their wild-type littermates. The 
increase in corneal neovascularization was associated with heightened 
endothelial cell proliferation and migration, and increased infiltration of 
inflammatory cells. In addition, Nf1 heterozygous endothelial cell cultures 
showed an exaggerated proliferative response to angiogenic factors, particularly 
to bFGF. These findings support the conclusion that Nf1 heterozygosity in 
endothelial cells and perhaps inflammatory cells augments angiogenesis, which 
may promote neurofibroma formation in NF1.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1209264
PMID: 16288202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
