---
pmid: '9065461'
title: Interleukin-4 (IL-4) induces phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85) dephosphorylation.
  Implications for the role of SHP-1 in the IL-4-induced signals in human B cells.
authors:
- Imani F
- Rager KJ
- Catipovic B
- Marsh DG
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.12.7927
---

# Interleukin-4 (IL-4) induces phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85) dephosphorylation. Implications for the role of SHP-1 in the IL-4-induced signals in human B cells.
**Authors:** Imani F, Rager KJ, Catipovic B, Marsh DG
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.272.12.7927](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.12.7927)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 21;272(12):7927-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.12.7927.

Interleukin-4 (IL-4) induces phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85) 
dephosphorylation. Implications for the role of SHP-1 in the IL-4-induced 
signals in human B cells.

Imani F(1), Rager KJ, Catipovic B, Marsh DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Asthma and Allergy Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

Interleukin 4 (IL-4) is a potent cytokine produced by T cells and to a lesser 
extent by tumor-associated natural killer cells, basophils, and mast cells. IL-4 
treatment of T cells and macrophages leads to augmentation of their cytotoxic 
activity. In human B cells, IL-4 is a potent stimulator of Ig class switching 
from IgM to IgE. The diverse biological responses induced by IL-4 are mediated 
through a high affinity receptor complex (IL-4R). Although a wealth of 
information has accumulated regarding IL-4R, the exact mechanisms of 
IL-4R-mediated signaling pathways in human B cells are not well defined. In an 
attempt to characterize the IL-4-induced signals in human B cells, we have found 
that IL-4 treatment induced rapid dephosphorylation of the 85-kDa regulatory 
subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. To identify the protein-tyrosine 
phosphatase involved in the IL-4-mediated dephosphorylation, we performed 
Western blot analysis using monoclonal antibodies specific to protein-tyrosine 
phosphatases. Upon IL-4 treatment, SHP-1 was specifically translocated to the 
cellular membrane fraction. Furthermore, immunoprecipitation studies revealed 
that SHP-1 could be specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the IL-4R as well as 
with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85). Collectively, our observations suggest 
that in addition to protein phosphorylation, protein tyrosine dephosphorylation 
may play a role in the IL-4-induced signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.12.7927
PMID: 9065461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
