---
pmid: '17544522'
title: Targeted disruption of the murine large nuclear KIAA1440/Ints1 protein causes
  growth arrest in early blastocyst stage embryos and eventual apoptotic cell death.
authors:
- Hata T
- Nakayama M
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.04.010
---

# Targeted disruption of the murine large nuclear KIAA1440/Ints1 protein causes growth arrest in early blastocyst stage embryos and eventual apoptotic cell death.
**Authors:** Hata T, Nakayama M
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.04.010)

## Abstract

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jul;1773(7):1039-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.04.010. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

Targeted disruption of the murine large nuclear KIAA1440/Ints1 protein causes 
growth arrest in early blastocyst stage embryos and eventual apoptotic cell 
death.

Hata T(1), Nakayama M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Chiba University, 2-6-7 Kazusa-Kamatari, Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818, Japan.

The KIAA1440 protein contains no significant domains that allow for a prediction 
of its function, despite the fact that it is an extremely large protein 
comprising 2222 amino acids. In our current study, we show that the developing 
KIAA1440(-/-) mouse embryo in a pure ICR background arrests its growth at the 
early blastocyst stage, whereas the majority of the KIAA1440(-/-) embryos of 
mixed genetic backgrounds do not progress beyond the morula stage, approximately 
0.5 days earlier. KIAA1440(-/-) embryos exhibited no abnormal localization of 
E-cadherin or beta-catenin and no obvious compaction abnormalities at the morula 
stage. In addition, E3.5 KIAA1440(-/-) embryos are not viable even in in vitro 
cultures. Both TUNEL and FAM-caspase-3/7 assays performed on these embryos 
consistently showed that E3.5 KIAA1440(-/-) embryos had activated caspase-3/7, 
which then induced an apoptotic response predominantly within the inner cell 
mass of the blastocyst. Moreover, qRT-PCR analysis showed that KIAA1440(-/-) 
embryos had increased levels of the unprocessed, primary U2 snRNA transcript but 
decreased levels of the mature U2 snRNA transcript compared to heterozygotes. 
The impaired processing of U2 snRNA and the predominantly nuclear localization 
of KIAA1440 protein is also very consistent with recently reported data showing 
that it is the largest subunit of the integrator complex, which mediates U1 and 
U2 snRNA 3'-end processing. Large nuclear KIAA1440/Ints1 is thus suggested to 
play non-redundant roles in the cell such as the formation of a scaffold for the 
assembly of the integrator complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2007.04.010
PMID: 17544522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
