---
pmid: '15657896'
title: Implications of galactocerebrosidase and galactosylcerebroside metabolism in
  cancer cells.
authors:
- Beier UH
- Görögh T
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/ijc.20851
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Review
publication_type: REVIEW
---

# Implications of galactocerebrosidase and galactosylcerebroside metabolism in cancer cells.
**Authors:** Beier UH, Görögh T
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.20851](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.20851)

## Abstract

1. Int J Cancer. 2005 May 20;115(1):6-10. doi: 10.1002/ijc.20851.

Implications of galactocerebrosidase and galactosylcerebroside metabolism in 
cancer cells.

Beier UH(1), Görögh T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and 
Neck Surgery,Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Galactosylcerebroside is known to be overexpressed upon the cellular surface of 
a variety of cancers. In squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck, one 
explanation for galactosylcerebroside accumulation has been identified as a 
transcriptional repression of the galactocerebrosidase gene. 
Galactocerebrosidase is the enzyme responsible for degrading 
galactosylcerebroside to ceramide. Ceramide is an important apoptosis activator, 
whereas galactosylcerebroside functions as an inhibitor. A shift of the ceramide 
metabolism balance in favor of glycosylated forms has been identified as a 
mechanism of drug resistance for several antineoplastic agents. Our review 
elaborates on possible explanations for galactocerebrosidase suppression and on 
other explanations for increased glycosphingolipid concentration within cancer 
cell membranes. Furthermore, conjecturable influences of a repressed 
galactocerebrosidase expression on tumor biology are to be explained. The 
inhibiting transcription factors YY1 and AP2 have been identified as potential 
galactocerebrosidase gene suppressors. The resulting accumulation of 
galactosylcerebroside promotes a reduction of cellular adhesion and inhibits 
apoptosis, leading to increased cellular growth, migration and prolonged cell 
survival contributing to carcinogenesis.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.20851
PMID: 15657896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
