---
pmid: '15257298'
title: RNAi knockdown of hPrp31 leads to an accumulation of U4/U6 di-snRNPs in Cajal
  bodies.
authors:
- Schaffert N
- Hossbach M
- Heintzmann R
- Achsel T
- Lührmann R
journal: EMBO J
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC514917
doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600296
---

# RNAi knockdown of hPrp31 leads to an accumulation of U4/U6 di-snRNPs in Cajal bodies.
**Authors:** Schaffert N, Hossbach M, Heintzmann R, Achsel T, Lührmann R
**Journal:** EMBO J (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.emboj.7600296](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.emboj.7600296)
**PMC:** [PMC514917](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC514917/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2004 Aug 4;23(15):3000-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600296. Epub 2004 Jul
 15.

RNAi knockdown of hPrp31 leads to an accumulation of U4/U6 di-snRNPs in Cajal 
bodies.

Schaffert N(1), Hossbach M, Heintzmann R, Achsel T, Lührmann R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical 
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Cajal bodies (CBs) are subnuclear organelles of animal and plant cells. A role 
of CBs in the assembly and maturation of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins 
(snRNP) has been proposed but is poorly understood. Here we have addressed the 
question where U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP assembly occurs in the nucleus. The U4/U6.U5 
tri-snRNP is a central unit of the spliceosome and must be re-formed from its 
components after each round of splicing. By combining RNAi and biochemical 
methods, we demonstrate that, after knockdown of the U4/U6-specific hPrp31 (61 
K) or the U5-specific hPrp6 (102 K) protein in HeLa cells, tri-snRNP formation 
is inhibited and stable U5 mono-snRNPs and U4/U6 di-snRNPs containing U4/U6 
proteins and the U4/U6 recycling factor p110 accumulate. Thus, hPrp31 and hPrp6 
form an essential connection between the U4/U6 and U5 snRNPs in vivo. Using 
fluorescence microscopy, we show that, in the absence of either hPrp31 or hPrp6, 
U4/U6 di-snRNPs as well as p110 accumulate in Cajal bodies. In contrast, U5 
snRNPs largely remain in nucleoplasmic speckles. Our data support the idea that 
CBs may play a role in tri-snRNP recycling.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7600296
PMCID: PMC514917
PMID: 15257298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
