---
pmid: '11790793'
title: 'Structural model of a malonyl-CoA-binding site of carnitine octanoyltransferase
  and carnitine palmitoyltransferase I: mutational analysis of a malonyl-CoA affinity
  domain.'
authors:
- Morillas M
- Gómez-Puertas P
- Rubí B
- Clotet J
- Ariño J
- Valencia A
- Hegardt FG
- Serra D
- Asins G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111628200
---

# Structural model of a malonyl-CoA-binding site of carnitine octanoyltransferase and carnitine palmitoyltransferase I: mutational analysis of a malonyl-CoA affinity domain.
**Authors:** Morillas M, Gómez-Puertas P, Rubí B, Clotet J, Ariño J, Valencia A, Hegardt FG, Serra D, Asins G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111628200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111628200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 29;277(13):11473-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111628200. Epub 
2002 Jan 14.

Structural model of a malonyl-CoA-binding site of carnitine octanoyltransferase 
and carnitine palmitoyltransferase I: mutational analysis of a malonyl-CoA 
affinity domain.

Morillas M(1), Gómez-Puertas P, Rubí B, Clotet J, Ariño J, Valencia A, Hegardt 
FG, Serra D, Asins G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy, 
University of Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Carnitine octanoyltransferase (COT) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) I, 
which facilitate the transport of medium- and long-chain fatty acids through the 
peroxisomal and mitochondrial membranes, are physiologically inhibited by 
malonyl-CoA. Using an "in silico" macromolecular docking approach, we built a 
model in which malonyl-CoA could be attached near the catalytic core. This 
disrupts the positioning of the acyl-CoA substrate in the channel in the model 
reported for both proteins (Morillas, M., Gómez-Puertas, P., Roca, R., Serra, 
D., Asins, G., Valencia, A., and Hegardt, F. G. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 
45001-45008). The putative malonyl-CoA domain contained His(340), implicated 
together with His(131) in COT malonyl-CoA sensitivity (Morillas, M., Clotet, J., 
Rubi, B., Serra, D., Asins, G., Ariño, J., and Hegardt F. G. (2000) FEBS Lett. 
466, 183-186). When we mutated COT His(131) the IC(50) increased, and 
malonyl-CoA competed with the substrate decanoyl-CoA. Mutation of COT Ala(332), 
present in the domain 8 amino acids away from His(340), decreased the 
malonyl-CoA sensitivity of COT. The homologous histidine and alanine residues of 
L-CPT I, His(277), His(483), and Ala(478) were also mutated, which decreased 
malonyl-CoA sensitivity. Natural mutation of Pro(479), which is also located in 
the malonyl-CoA predicted site, to Leu in a patient with human L-CPT I 
hereditary deficiency, modified malonyl-CoA sensitivity. We conclude that this 
malonyl-CoA domain is present in both COT and L-CPT I proteins and might be the 
site at which malonyl-CoA interacts with the substrate acyl-CoA. Other 
malonyl-CoA non-inhibitable members of the family, CPT II and carnitine 
acetyltransferase, do not contain this domain.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111628200
PMID: 11790793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
