---
pmid: '26555376'
title: Impaired primary mouse myotube formation on crosslinked type I collagen films
  is enhanced by laminin and entactin.
authors:
- Grefte S
- Adjobo-Hermans MJW
- Versteeg EMM
- Koopman WJH
- Daamen WF
journal: Acta Biomater
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.009
---

# Impaired primary mouse myotube formation on crosslinked type I collagen films is enhanced by laminin and entactin.
**Authors:** Grefte S, Adjobo-Hermans MJW, Versteeg EMM, Koopman WJH, Daamen WF
**Journal:** Acta Biomater (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.009)

## Abstract

1. Acta Biomater. 2016 Jan;30:265-276. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.009. Epub
2015  Nov 7.

Impaired primary mouse myotube formation on crosslinked type I collagen films is 
enhanced by laminin and entactin.

Grefte S(1), Adjobo-Hermans MJW(2), Versteeg EMM(3), Koopman WJH(4), Daamen 
WF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: sander.grefte@wur.nl.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: Merel.Adjobo-Hermans@radboudumc.nl.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: Elly.Versteeg@radboudumc.nl.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: Werner.Koopman@radboudumc.nl.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, 
Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: Willeke.Daamen@radboudumc.nl.

In skeletal muscle, the stem cell niche is important for controlling the 
quiescent, proliferation and differentiation states of satellite cells, which 
are key for skeletal muscle regeneration after wounding. It has been shown that 
type I collagen, often used as 3D-scaffolds for regenerative medicine purposes, 
impairs myoblast differentiation. This is most likely due to the absence of 
specific extracellular matrix proteins providing attachment sites for myoblasts 
and/or myotubes. In this study we investigated the differentiation capacity of 
primary murine myoblasts on type I collagen films either untreated or modified 
with elastin, laminin, type IV collagen, laminin/entactin complex, combinations 
thereof, and Matrigel as a positive control. Additionally, increased reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and ROCK signaling might also be involved. To measure ROS 
levels with live-cell microscopy, fibronectin-coated glass coverslips were 
additionally coated with type I collagen and Matrigel onto which myoblasts were 
differentiated. On type I collagen-coated coverslips, myotube formation was 
impaired while ROS levels were increased. However, anti-oxidant treatment did 
not enhance myotube formation. ROCK inhibition, which generally improve cellular 
attachment to uncoated surfaces or type I collagen, enhanced myoblast attachment 
to type I collagen-coated coverslips and -films, but slightly enhanced myotube 
formation. Only modification of type I collagen films by Matrigel and a 
combination of laminin/entactin significantly improved myotube formation. Our 
results indicate that type I collagen scaffolds can be modified by satellite 
cell niche factors of which specifically laminin and entactin enhanced myotube 
formation. This offers a promising approach for regenerative medicine purposes 
to heal skeletal muscle wounds.
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: In this manuscript we show for the first time that 
impaired myotube formation on type I collagen scaffolds can be completely 
restored by modification with laminin and entactin, two extracellular proteins 
from the satellite cell niche. This offers a promising approach for regenerative 
medicine approaches to heal skeletal muscle wounds.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.11.009
PMID: 26555376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
