---
pmid: '24990881'
title: TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface transport
  and phagocytosis.
authors:
- Kleinberger G
- Yamanishi Y
- Suárez-Calvet M
- Czirr E
- Lohmann E
- Cuyvers E
- Struyfs H
- Pettkus N
- Wenninger-Weinzierl A
- Mazaheri F
- Tahirovic S
- Lleó A
- Alcolea D
- Fortea J
- Willem M
- Lammich S
- Molinuevo JL
- Sánchez-Valle R
- Antonell A
- Ramirez A
- Heneka MT
- Sleegers K
- van der Zee J
- Martin JJ
- Engelborghs S
- Demirtas-Tatlidede A
- Zetterberg H
- Van Broeckhoven C
- Gurvit H
- Wyss-Coray T
- Hardy J
- Colonna M
- Haass C
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface transport and phagocytosis.
**Authors:** Kleinberger G, Yamanishi Y, Suárez-Calvet M, Czirr E, Lohmann E, Cuyvers E, Struyfs H, Pettkus N, Wenninger-Weinzierl A, Mazaheri F, Tahirovic S, Lleó A, Alcolea D, Fortea J, Willem M, Lammich S, Molinuevo JL, Sánchez-Valle R, Antonell A, Ramirez A, Heneka MT, Sleegers K, van der Zee J, Martin JJ, Engelborghs S, Demirtas-Tatlidede A, Zetterberg H, Van Broeckhoven C, Gurvit H, Wyss-Coray T, Hardy J, Colonna M, Haass C
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093)

## Abstract

1. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jul 2;6(243):243ra86. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093.

TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface transport 
and phagocytosis.

Kleinberger G(1), Yamanishi Y(2), Suárez-Calvet M(3), Czirr E(4), Lohmann E(5), 
Cuyvers E(6), Struyfs H(7), Pettkus N(8), Wenninger-Weinzierl A(9), Mazaheri 
F(9), Tahirovic S(9), Lleó A(10), Alcolea D(10), Fortea J(10), Willem M(8), 
Lammich S(8), Molinuevo JL(11), Sánchez-Valle R(11), Antonell A(11), Ramirez 
A(12), Heneka MT(13), Sleegers K(6), van der Zee J(6), Martin JJ(14), 
Engelborghs S(15), Demirtas-Tatlidede A(16), Zetterberg H(17), Van Broeckhoven 
C(6), Gurvit H(16), Wyss-Coray T(18), Hardy J(19), Colonna M(2), Haass C(20).

Author information:
(1)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), 
80336 Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Department of Neurology, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, Spain. Center for Networked Biomedical 
Research for Neurodegenerative Diseases, CIBERNED, 28031 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Center for Tissue Regeneration, Repair and 
Restoration, Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 
94304, USA.
(5)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey. 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
VIB, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium. Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, 
University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Reference Center for Biological Markers of Dementia, Laboratory of 
Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(8)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany.
(9)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, 80336 Munich, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques, Hospital de 
la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, 
Spain. Center for Networked Biomedical Research for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
CIBERNED, 28031 Madrid, Spain.
(11)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, 
ICN Hospital Clinic i Universitari, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, 
Germany. Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(13)Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Neurology, 53127 Bonn, Germany. German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(14)Antwerp Biobank, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(15)Reference Center for Biological Markers of Dementia, Laboratory of 
Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 
Antwerp, Belgium. Department of Neurology and Memory Clinic, Hospital Network 
Antwerp (ZNA), Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium.
(16)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey.
(17)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, S-431 
80 Mölndal, Sweden. Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular 
Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(18)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Center for Tissue Regeneration, 
Repair and Restoration, Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care System, 
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. Neuroscience IDP Program, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(19)Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(20)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), 
80336 Munich, Germany. German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. christian.haass@dzne.lmu.de.

Genetic variants in the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) 
have been linked to Nasu-Hakola disease, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and 
FTD-like syndrome without bone involvement. TREM2 is an innate immune receptor 
preferentially expressed by microglia and is involved in inflammation and 
phagocytosis. Whether and how TREM2 missense mutations affect TREM2 function is 
unclear. We report that missense mutations associated with FTD and FTD-like 
syndrome reduce TREM2 maturation, abolish shedding by ADAM proteases, and impair 
the phagocytic activity of TREM2-expressing cells. As a consequence of reduced 
shedding, TREM2 is virtually absent in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma 
of a patient with FTD-like syndrome. A decrease in soluble TREM2 was also 
observed in the CSF of patients with AD and FTD, further suggesting that reduced 
TREM2 function may contribute to increased risk for two neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093
PMID: 24990881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
