---
reference_id: PMID:10876237
title: Crystal structure of human homogentisate dioxygenase.
authors:
- Titus GP
- Mueller HA
- Burgner J
- Rodríguez De Córdoba S
- Peñalva MA
- Timm DE
journal: Nat Struct Biol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/76756
keywords:
- "Alkaptonuria/enzymology, genetics"
- "Apoenzymes/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Binding Sites
- Catalysis
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Dimerization
- Dioxygenases
- "Homogentisate 1,2-Dioxygenase"
- Humans
- Iron/metabolism
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Oxygenases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
full_text_attempted: true
---

# Crystal structure of human homogentisate dioxygenase.
**Authors:** Titus GP, Mueller HA, Burgner J, Rodríguez De Córdoba S, Peñalva MA, Timm DE
**Journal:** Nat Struct Biol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/76756](https://doi.org/10.1038/76756)

## Content

1. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Jul;7(7):542-6. doi: 10.1038/76756.

Crystal structure of human homogentisate dioxygenase.

Titus GP(1), Mueller HA, Burgner J, Rodríguez De Córdoba S, Peñalva MA, Timm DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Jul;7(7):535-6. doi: 10.1038/76739.

Homogentisate dioxygenase (HGO) cleaves the aromatic ring during the metabolic 
degradation of Phe and Tyr. HGO deficiency causes alkaptonuria (AKU), the first 
human disease shown to be inherited as a recessive Mendelian trait. Crystal 
structures of apo-HGO and HGO containing an iron ion have been determined at 1.9 
and 2.3 A resolution, respectively. The HGO protomer, which contains a 
280-residue N-terminal domain and a 140-residue C-terminal domain, associates as 
a hexamer arranged as a dimer of trimers. The active site iron ion is 
coordinated near the interface between subunits in the HGO trimer by a Glu and 
two His side chains. HGO represents a new structural class of dioxygenases. The 
largest group of AKU associated missense mutations affect residues located in 
regions of contact between subunits.

DOI: 10.1038/76756
PMID: 10876237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]