---
pmid: '30220461'
title: Aster Proteins Facilitate Nonvesicular Plasma Membrane to ER Cholesterol Transport
  in Mammalian Cells.
authors:
- Sandhu J
- Li S
- Fairall L
- Pfisterer SG
- Gurnett JE
- Xiao X
- Weston TA
- Vashi D
- Ferrari A
- Orozco JL
- Hartman CL
- Strugatsky D
- Lee SD
- He C
- Hong C
- Jiang H
- Bentolila LA
- Gatta AT
- Levine TP
- Ferng A
- Lee R
- Ford DA
- Young SG
- Ikonen E
- Schwabe JWR
- Tontonoz P
journal: Cell
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6469685
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.033
---

# Aster Proteins Facilitate Nonvesicular Plasma Membrane to ER Cholesterol Transport in Mammalian Cells.
**Authors:** Sandhu J, Li S, Fairall L, Pfisterer SG, Gurnett JE, Xiao X, Weston TA, Vashi D, Ferrari A, Orozco JL, Hartman CL, Strugatsky D, Lee SD, He C, Hong C, Jiang H, Bentolila LA, Gatta AT, Levine TP, Ferng A, Lee R, Ford DA, Young SG, Ikonen E, Schwabe JWR, Tontonoz P
**Journal:** Cell (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.033)
**PMC:** [PMC6469685](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6469685/)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 2018 Oct 4;175(2):514-529.e20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.033. Epub
2018  Sep 13.

Aster Proteins Facilitate Nonvesicular Plasma Membrane to ER Cholesterol 
Transport in Mammalian Cells.

Sandhu J(1), Li S(2), Fairall L(3), Pfisterer SG(2), Gurnett JE(3), Xiao X(4), 
Weston TA(5), Vashi D(3), Ferrari A(4), Orozco JL(4), Hartman CL(6), Strugatsky 
D(7), Lee SD(4), He C(8), Hong C(4), Jiang H(9), Bentolila LA(10), Gatta AT(11), 
Levine TP(11), Ferng A(12), Lee R(12), Ford DA(6), Young SG(13), Ikonen E(2), 
Schwabe JWR(3), Tontonoz P(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Research Programs Unit, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00290, Finland; Minerva Foundation Institute 
for Medical Research, Helsinki 00290, Finland.
(3)Institute of Structural and Chemical Biology, Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, University of Leicester, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(6)Edward A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Center 
for Cardiovascular Research, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63104, USA.
(7)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(9)Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation and Analysis, University of Western 
Australia, Perth 6009, Australia.
(10)California NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA.
(11)Department of Cell Biology, UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(12)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA.
(13)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Human Genetics, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(14)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address: 
ptontonoz@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    Cell. 2018 Oct 4;175(2):307-309. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.025.

The mechanisms underlying sterol transport in mammalian cells are poorly 
understood. In particular, how cholesterol internalized from HDL is made 
available to the cell for storage or modification is unknown. Here, we describe 
three ER-resident proteins (Aster-A, -B, -C) that bind cholesterol and 
facilitate its removal from the plasma membrane. The crystal structure of the 
central domain of Aster-A broadly resembles the sterol-binding fold of mammalian 
StARD proteins, but sequence differences in the Aster pocket result in a 
distinct mode of ligand binding. The Aster N-terminal GRAM domain binds 
phosphatidylserine and mediates Aster recruitment to plasma membrane-ER contact 
sites in response to cholesterol accumulation in the plasma membrane. Mice 
lacking Aster-B are deficient in adrenal cholesterol ester storage and 
steroidogenesis because of an inability to transport cholesterol from SR-BI to 
the ER. These findings identify a nonvesicular pathway for plasma membrane to ER 
sterol trafficking in mammals.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.08.033
PMCID: PMC6469685
PMID: 30220461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.
