---
pmid: '19065153'
title: Cell adhesion molecules regulate contractile ring-independent cytokinesis in
  Dictyostelium discoideum.
authors:
- Nagasaki A
- Kanada M
- Uyeda TQ
journal: Cell Res
year: '2009'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.318
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cell adhesion molecules regulate contractile ring-independent cytokinesis in Dictyostelium discoideum.
**Authors:** Nagasaki A, Kanada M, Uyeda TQ
**Journal:** Cell Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/cr.2008.318](https://doi.org/10.1038/cr.2008.318)

## Abstract

1. Cell Res. 2009 Feb;19(2):236-46. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.318.

Cell adhesion molecules regulate contractile ring-independent cytokinesis in 
Dictyostelium discoideum.

Nagasaki A(1), Kanada M, Uyeda TQ.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Cell Engineering, National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8562, Japan. 
a-nagasaki@aist.go.jp

To investigate the roles of substrate adhesion in cytokinesis, we established 
cell lines lacking paxillin (PAXB) or vinculin (VINA), and those expressing the 
respective GFP fusion proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum. As in mammalian 
cells, GFP-PAXB and GFP-VINA formed focal adhesion-like complexes on the cell 
bottom. paxB(-) cells in suspension grew normally, but on substrates, often 
failed to divide after regression of the furrow. The efficient cytokinesis of 
paxB(-) cells in suspension is not because of shear forces to assist abscission, 
as they divided normally in static suspension culture as well. Double knockout 
strains lacking mhcA, which codes for myosin II, and paxB or vinA displayed more 
severe cytokinetic defects than each single knockout strain. In mitotic 
wild-type cells, GFP-PAXB was diffusely distributed on the basal membrane, but 
was strikingly condensed along the polar edges in mitotic mhcA(-) cells. These 
results are consistent with our idea that Dictyostelium displays two forms of 
cytokinesis, one that is contractile ring-dependent and adhesion-independent, 
and the other that is contractile ring-independent and adhesion-dependent, and 
that the latter requires PAXB and VINA. Furthermore, that paxB(-) cells fail to 
divide normally in the presence of substrate adhesion suggests that this 
adhesion molecule may play additional signaling roles.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2008.318
PMID: 19065153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
