---
pmid: '18337510'
title: Auxin transport inhibitors impair vesicle motility and actin cytoskeleton dynamics
  in diverse eukaryotes.
authors:
- Dhonukshe P
- Grigoriev I
- Fischer R
- Tominaga M
- Robinson DG
- Hasek J
- Paciorek T
- Petrásek J
- Seifertová D
- Tejos R
- Meisel LA
- Zazímalová E
- Gadella TW Jr
- Stierhof YD
- Ueda T
- Oiwa K
- Akhmanova A
- Brock R
- Spang A
- Friml J
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC2393819
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0711414105
---

# Auxin transport inhibitors impair vesicle motility and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in diverse eukaryotes.
**Authors:** Dhonukshe P, Grigoriev I, Fischer R, Tominaga M, Robinson DG, Hasek J, Paciorek T, Petrásek J, Seifertová D, Tejos R, Meisel LA, Zazímalová E, Gadella TW Jr, Stierhof YD, Ueda T, Oiwa K, Akhmanova A, Brock R, Spang A, Friml J
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0711414105](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0711414105)
**PMC:** [PMC2393819](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2393819/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 18;105(11):4489-94. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0711414105. Epub 2008 Mar 12.

Auxin transport inhibitors impair vesicle motility and actin cytoskeleton 
dynamics in diverse eukaryotes.

Dhonukshe P(1), Grigoriev I, Fischer R, Tominaga M, Robinson DG, Hasek J, 
Paciorek T, Petrásek J, Seifertová D, Tejos R, Meisel LA, Zazímalová E, Gadella 
TW Jr, Stierhof YD, Ueda T, Oiwa K, Akhmanova A, Brock R, Spang A, Friml J.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum für Molekularbiologie der Pflanzen (ZMBP), Universität Tübingen, Auf 
der Morgenstelle 3, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

Many aspects of plant development, including patterning and tropisms, are 
largely dependent on the asymmetric distribution of the plant signaling molecule 
auxin. Auxin transport inhibitors (ATIs), which interfere with directional auxin 
transport, have been essential tools in formulating this concept. However, 
despite the use of ATIs in plant research for many decades, the mechanism of ATI 
action has remained largely elusive. Using real-time live-cell microscopy, we 
show here that prominent ATIs such as 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) and 
2-(1-pyrenoyl) benzoic acid (PBA) inhibit vesicle trafficking in plant, yeast, 
and mammalian cells. Effects on micropinocytosis, rab5-labeled endosomal 
motility at the periphery of HeLa cells and on fibroblast mobility indicate that 
ATIs influence actin cytoskeleton. Visualization of actin cytoskeleton dynamics 
in plants, yeast, and mammalian cells show that ATIs stabilize actin. 
Conversely, stabilizing actin by chemical or genetic means interferes with 
endocytosis, vesicle motility, auxin transport, and plant development, including 
auxin transport-dependent processes. Our results show that a class of ATIs act 
as actin stabilizers and advocate that actin-dependent trafficking of auxin 
transport components participates in the mechanism of auxin transport. These 
studies also provide an example of how the common eukaryotic process of 
actin-based vesicle motility can fulfill a plant-specific physiological role.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0711414105
PMCID: PMC2393819
PMID: 18337510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Many aspects of plant development, including patterning and tropisms, are largely dependent on the asymmetric distribution of the plant signaling molecule auxin. Auxin transport inhibitors (ATIs), which interfere with directional auxin transport, have been essential tools in formulating this concept. However, despite the use of ATIs in plant research for many decades, the mechanism of ATI action has remained largely elusive. Using real-time live-cell microscopy, we show here that prominent ATIs such as 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) and 2-(1-pyrenoyl) benzoic acid (PBA) inhibit vesicle trafficking in plant, yeast, and mammalian cells. Effects on micropinocytosis, rab5-labeled endosomal motility at the periphery of HeLa cells and on fibroblast mobility indicate that ATIs influence actin cytoskeleton. Visualization of actin cytoskeleton dynamics in plants, yeast, and mammalian cells show that ATIs stabilize actin. Conversely, stabilizing actin by chemical or genetic means interferes with endocytosis, vesicle motility, auxin transport, and plant development, including auxin transport-dependent processes. Our results show that a class of ATIs act as actin stabilizers and advocate that actin-dependent trafficking of auxin transport components participates in the mechanism of auxin transport. These studies also provide an example of how the common eukaryotic process of actin-based vesicle motility can fulfill a plant-specific physiological role.

Discussion

The transport-dependent asymmetric distribution of the plant hormone auxin represents a unique and widely operational mechanism by which plants integrate multiple signals and translate them into various developmental responses ( 1 ). For decades, various inhibitors of polar auxin transport have been essential tools in the formulation of these concepts ( 8 ). However, only little insight into the mechanism of their action has been gained. In this regard, our observations provide three important outcomes. ( i ) They show that ATIs, by affecting actin dynamics, inhibit subcellular vesicle trafficking processes. ( ii ) They demonstrate that ATIs are effective not only in plant cells but also in yeast and mammals, thus suggesting an evolutionary conserved target. ( iii ) They extend our knowledge about the cellular mechanism of polar auxin transport in plants, highlighting the importance of actin-based dynamics for this process.
