---
pmid: '9168116'
title: Ataxia telangiectasia mutant protein activates c-Abl tyrosine kinase in response
  to ionizing radiation.
authors:
- Baskaran R
- Wood LD
- Whitaker LL
- Canman CE
- Morgan SE
- Xu Y
- Barlow C
- Baltimore D
- Wynshaw-Boris A
- Kastan MB
- Wang JY
journal: Nature
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/387516a0
---

# Ataxia telangiectasia mutant protein activates c-Abl tyrosine kinase in response to ionizing radiation.
**Authors:** Baskaran R, Wood LD, Whitaker LL, Canman CE, Morgan SE, Xu Y, Barlow C, Baltimore D, Wynshaw-Boris A, Kastan MB, Wang JY
**Journal:** Nature (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/387516a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/387516a0)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 1997 May 29;387(6632):516-9. doi: 10.1038/387516a0.

Ataxia telangiectasia mutant protein activates c-Abl tyrosine kinase in response 
to ionizing radiation.

Baskaran R(1), Wood LD, Whitaker LL, Canman CE, Morgan SE, Xu Y, Barlow C, 
Baltimore D, Wynshaw-Boris A, Kastan MB, Wang JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of 
California at San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0322, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1997 May 29;387(6632):450-1. doi: 10.1038/387450a0.

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human autosomal recessive disorder with 
pleiotropic phenotypes, including neuronal degeneration, immune dysfunction, 
premature ageing and increased cancer risk. The gene mutated in AT, ATM, encodes 
a putative lipid or protein kinase. Most of the human AT patient phenotypes are 
recapitulated in Atm-deficient mice. Cells derived from Atm-/- mice, like those 
from AT patients, exhibit abnormal response to ionizing radiation. One of the 
known responses to ionizing radiation is the activation of a nuclear tyrosine 
kinase encoded by the c-abl proto-oncogene. Ionizing radiation does not activate 
c-Abl in cells from AT patients or in thymocytes or fibroblasts from the 
Atm-deficient mice. Ectopic expression of a functional ATM kinase domain 
corrects this defect, as it phosphorylates the c-Abl tyrosine kinase in vitro at 
Ser 465, leading to the activation of c-Abl. A mutant c-Abl with Ser 465 changed 
to Ala 465 is not activated by ionizing radiation or ATM kinase in vivo. These 
findings identify the c-Abl tyrosine kinase as a downstream target of 
phosphorylation and activation by the ATM kinase in the cellular response to 
ionizing radiation.

DOI: 10.1038/387516a0
PMID: 9168116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
