---
pmid: '12167537'
title: Several regions of the repeat domain of the Staphylococcus caprae autolysin,
  AtlC, are involved in fibronectin binding.
authors:
- Allignet J
- England P
- Old I
- El Solh N
journal: FEMS Microbiol Lett
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2002.tb11305.x
---

# Several regions of the repeat domain of the Staphylococcus caprae autolysin, AtlC, are involved in fibronectin binding.
**Authors:** Allignet J, England P, Old I, El Solh N
**Journal:** FEMS Microbiol Lett (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1574-6968.2002.tb11305.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2002.tb11305.x)

## Abstract

1. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2002 Aug 6;213(2):193-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2002.tb11305.x.

Several regions of the repeat domain of the Staphylococcus caprae autolysin, 
AtlC, are involved in fibronectin binding.

Allignet J(1), England P, Old I, El Solh N.

Author information:
(1)Staphylococci Unit, National Reference Center for Staphylococci, Institut 
Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The autolysin AtlC is the only known fibronectin-binding protein in 
Staphylococcus caprae strain 96007. The fibronectin-binding domain of AtlC 
consists of three repeats (AtlCR(1)R(2)R(3)), which are located between the two 
enzymatic domains. The AtlCR(1)R(2)R(3) domain and the AtlCR(1)R(2) and AtlCR(3) 
subdomains were expressed separately as His(6)-tagged proteins. In Western 
affinity blots, only AtlCR(1)R(2)R(3) and AtlCR(3) but not AtlCR(1)R(2) appeared 
to recognise fibronectin; however, in ELISA and Biacore experiments, all three 
bound fibronectin. The interaction between AtlCR(1)R(2)R(3) and fibronectin is 
multivalent and involves high- and low-affinity sites that are present in a 2:1 
ratio. These distinct classes of binding sites may be situated on either or on 
both ligands.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2002.tb11305.x
PMID: 12167537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
