---
pmid: '14676191'
title: Comprehensive proteomic analysis of human Par protein complexes reveals an
  interconnected protein network.
authors:
- Brajenovic M
- Joberty G
- Küster B
- Bouwmeester T
- Drewes G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312171200
---

# Comprehensive proteomic analysis of human Par protein complexes reveals an interconnected protein network.
**Authors:** Brajenovic M, Joberty G, Küster B, Bouwmeester T, Drewes G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M312171200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M312171200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12804-11. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M312171200. Epub 
2003 Dec 15.

Comprehensive proteomic analysis of human Par protein complexes reveals an 
interconnected protein network.

Brajenovic M(1), Joberty G, Küster B, Bouwmeester T, Drewes G.

Author information:
(1)Cellzome AG, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

The polarization of eukaryotic cells is controlled by the concerted activities 
of asymmetrically localized proteins. The PAR proteins, first identified in 
Caenorhabditis elegans, are common regulators of cell polarity conserved from 
nematode and flies to man. However, little is known about the molecular 
mechanisms by which these proteins and protein complexes establish cell polarity 
in mammals. We have mapped multiprotein complexes formed around the putative 
human Par orthologs MARK4 (microtubule-associated protein/microtubule 
affinity-regulating kinase 4) (Par-1), Par-3, LKB1 (Par-4), 14-3-3zeta and eta 
(Par-5), Par-6a, -b, -c, and PKClambda (PKC3). We employed a proteomic approach 
comprising tandem affinity purification (TAP) of protein complexes from cultured 
cells and protein sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry. From these data we 
constructed a highly interconnected protein network consisting of three core 
complex "modules" formed around MARK4 (Par-1), Par-3.Par-6, and LKB1 (Par-4). 
The network confirms most previously reported interactions. In addition we 
identified more than 50 novel interactors, some of which, like the 14-3-3 
phospho-protein scaffolds, occur in more than one distinct complex. We 
demonstrate that the complex formation between LKB1.Par-4, PAPK, and Mo25 
results in the translocation of LKB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and to 
tight junctions and show that the LKB1 complex may activate MARKs, which are 
known to introduce 14-3-3 binding sites into several substrates. Our findings 
suggest co-regulation and/or signaling events between the distinct Par complexes 
and provide a basis for further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms that 
govern cell polarity.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M312171200
PMID: 14676191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
