---
pmid: '10490601'
title: The ADA complex is a distinct histone acetyltransferase complex in Saccharomyces
  cerevisiae.
authors:
- Eberharter A
- Sterner DE
- Schieltz D
- Hassan A
- Yates JR 3rd
- Berger SL
- Workman JL
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC84637
doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.10.6621
---

# The ADA complex is a distinct histone acetyltransferase complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Eberharter A, Sterner DE, Schieltz D, Hassan A, Yates JR 3rd, Berger SL, Workman JL
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.19.10.6621](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.19.10.6621)
**PMC:** [PMC84637](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC84637/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Oct;19(10):6621-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.19.10.6621.

The ADA complex is a distinct histone acetyltransferase complex in Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Eberharter A(1), Sterner DE, Schieltz D, Hassan A, Yates JR 3rd, Berger SL, 
Workman JL.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 
16802-4500, USA.

We have identified two Gcn5-dependent histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes 
from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the 0.8-MDa ADA complex and the 1.8-MDa SAGA 
complex. The SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5-acetyltransferase) complex contains several 
subunits which also function as part of other protein complexes, including a 
subset of TATA box binding protein-associated factors (TAFIIs) and Tra1. These 
observations raise the question of whether the 0.8-MDa ADA complex is a 
subcomplex of SAGA or whether it is a distinct HAT complex that also shares 
subunits with SAGA. To address this issue, we sought to determine if the ADA 
complex contained subunits that are not present in the SAGA complex. In this 
study, we report the purification of the ADA complex over 10 chromatographic 
steps. By a combination of mass spectrometry analysis and immunoblotting, we 
demonstrate that the adapter proteins Ada2, Ada3, and Gcn5 are indeed integral 
components of ADA. Furthermore, we identify the product of the S. cerevisiae 
gene YOR023C as a novel subunit of the ADA complex and name it Ahc1 for ADA HAT 
complex component 1. Biochemical functions of YOR023C have not been reported. 
However, AHC1 in high copy numbers suppresses the cold sensitivity caused by 
particular mutations in HTA1 (I. Pinto and F. Winston, personal communication), 
which encodes histone H2A (J. N. Hirschhorn et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 
15:1999-2009, 1995). Deletion of AHC1 disrupted the integrity of the ADA complex 
but did not affect SAGA or give rise to classic Ada(-) phenotypes. These results 
indicate that Gcn5, Ada2, and Ada3 function as part of a unique HAT complex 
(ADA) and represent shared subunits between this complex and SAGA.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.19.10.6621
PMCID: PMC84637
PMID: 10490601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
