---
pmid: '15542849'
title: Stage-specific repression by the EKLF transcriptional activator.
authors:
- Chen X
- Bieker JJ
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC529052
doi: 10.1128/MCB.24.23.10416-10424.2004
---

# Stage-specific repression by the EKLF transcriptional activator.
**Authors:** Chen X, Bieker JJ
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.24.23.10416-10424.2004](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.23.10416-10424.2004)
**PMC:** [PMC529052](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC529052/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10416-24. doi: 
10.1128/MCB.24.23.10416-10424.2004.

Stage-specific repression by the EKLF transcriptional activator.

Chen X(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell and 
Developmental Biology, Box 1020, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

Dynamic changes in transcription factor function can be mediated by switching 
its interaction with coactivators and corepressors. Erythroid Kruppel-like 
factor (EKLF) is an erythroid cell-specific transcription factor that plays a 
critical role in beta-globin gene activation via its interactions with CBP/p300 
and SWI/SNF proteins. Unexpectedly, it also interacts with Sin3A and histone 
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) corepressors via its zinc finger domain. We now find that 
selected point mutants can uncouple activation and repression and that an intact 
finger structure is not required for interactions with Sin3A/HDAC1 or for 
transrepression. Most intriguingly, EKLF repression exhibits stage specificity, 
with reversible EKLF-Sin3A interactions playing a key role in this process. 
Finally, we have located a key lysine residue that is both a substrate for CBP 
acetylation and required for Sin3A interaction. These data suggest a model 
whereby the stage of the erythroid cell alters the acetylation status of EKLF 
and plays a critical role in directing its coactivator-corepressor interactions 
and downstream transcriptional effects.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.24.23.10416-10424.2004
PMCID: PMC529052
PMID: 15542849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
