---
pmid: '11171977'
title: Jac1, a mitochondrial J-type chaperone, is involved in the biogenesis of Fe/S
  clusters in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
authors:
- Voisine C
- Cheng YC
- Ohlson M
- Schilke B
- Hoff K
- Beinert H
- Marszalek J
- Craig EA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC29283
doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.4.1483
---

# Jac1, a mitochondrial J-type chaperone, is involved in the biogenesis of Fe/S clusters in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
**Authors:** Voisine C, Cheng YC, Ohlson M, Schilke B, Hoff K, Beinert H, Marszalek J, Craig EA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.98.4.1483](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.98.4.1483)
**PMC:** [PMC29283](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC29283/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1483-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.98.4.1483.

Jac1, a mitochondrial J-type chaperone, is involved in the biogenesis of Fe/S 
clusters in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Voisine C(1), Cheng YC, Ohlson M, Schilke B, Hoff K, Beinert H, Marszalek J, 
Craig EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
53706, USA.

A minor Hsp70 chaperone of the mitochondrial matrix of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
Ssq1, is involved in the formation or repair of Fe/S clusters and/or 
mitochondrial iron metabolism. Here, we report evidence that Jac1, a J-type 
chaperone of the mitochondrial matrix, is the partner of Ssq1 in this process. 
Reduced activity of Jac1 results in a decrease in activity of Fe/S containing 
mitochondrial proteins and an accumulation of iron in mitochondria. Fe/S enzyme 
activities remain low in both jac1 and ssq1 mutant mitochondria even if normal 
mitochondrial iron levels are maintained. Therefore, the low activities observed 
are not solely due to oxidative damage caused by excess iron. Rather, these 
molecular chaperones likely play a direct role in the normal assembly process of 
Fe/S clusters.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.98.4.1483
PMCID: PMC29283
PMID: 11171977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
