---
pmid: '27167370'
title: Molecular Genetic Characterization of 151 Mut-Type Methylmalonic Aciduria Patients
  and Identification of 41 Novel Mutations in MUT.
authors:
- Forny P
- Schnellmann AS
- Buerer C
- Lutz S
- Fowler B
- Froese DS
- Baumgartner MR
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2016'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/humu.23013
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Molecular Genetic Characterization of 151 Mut-Type Methylmalonic Aciduria Patients and Identification of 41 Novel Mutations in MUT.
**Authors:** Forny P, Schnellmann AS, Buerer C, Lutz S, Fowler B, Froese DS, Baumgartner MR
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23013](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23013)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mutat. 2016 Aug;37(8):745-54. doi: 10.1002/humu.23013. Epub 2016 May 23.

Molecular Genetic Characterization of 151 Mut-Type Methylmalonic Aciduria 
Patients and Identification of 41 Novel Mutations in MUT.

Forny P(1)(2)(3), Schnellmann AS(1), Buerer C(1), Lutz S(1), Fowler B(1), Froese 
DS(1)(2), Baumgartner MR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Children's 
Hospital, Zurich, CH-8032, Switzerland.
(2)radiz - Rare Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical Research Priority Program 
for Rare Diseases, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Isolated methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is an autosomal-recessive disorder of 
propionate metabolism that is most commonly caused by mutations in the 
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT) gene (mut-type MMA). We investigated a cohort of 
151 patients, classifying 114 patients as mut(0) and 32 as mut(-) (five not 
defined). As per the definition, mut(-) patients showed a higher propionate 
incorporation ratio in vitro, which was correlated to a considerably later age 
of onset compared with mut(0) patients. In all patients, we found a total of 110 
different mutations, of which 41 were novel. While the missense alleles 
p.Asn219Tyr, p.Arg369His, and p.Arg694Trp recurred in >10 alleles, 47 mutations 
were identified only once, suggesting many patients carry private mutations. 
Deficient alleles in the mut(-) subclass were almost exclusively caused by 
missense mutations, found disproportionately in the C-terminal cofactor binding 
domain. On the contrary, only half of the mut(0) mutations were of the missense 
type. Western blot analysis revealed reduced MUT protein for all 34 cell lines 
(27 mut(0) , seven mut(-) ) tested, suggesting protein instability as a major 
mechanism of deficiency in mut-type MMA. This large-scale evaluation helps to 
characterize the landscape of MUT mutations and their relationship to 
dysfunction and disease.

© 2016 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23013
PMID: 27167370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
