---
pmid: '16935699'
title: Apolipoprotein E enrichment of immuno-separated chylomicron and chylomicron
  remnants following saturated fatty acids.
authors:
- Jackson KG
- Wolstencroft EJ
- Bateman PA
- Yaqoob P
- Williams CM
journal: Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2005.07.001
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Apolipoprotein E enrichment of immuno-separated chylomicron and chylomicron remnants following saturated fatty acids.
**Authors:** Jackson KG, Wolstencroft EJ, Bateman PA, Yaqoob P, Williams CM
**Journal:** Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.numecd.2005.07.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2005.07.001)

## Abstract

1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2006 Sep;16(6):405-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2005.07.001. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Apolipoprotein E enrichment of immuno-separated chylomicron and chylomicron 
remnants following saturated fatty acids.

Jackson KG(1), Wolstencroft EJ, Bateman PA, Yaqoob P, Williams CM.

Author information:
(1)Hugh Sinclair Unit of Human Nutrition, School of Food Biosciences, The 
University of Reading, Reading, Berkshire RG6 6AP, UK. k.g.jackson@reading.ac.uk

AIM: We examined the effect of meal fatty acids on lipid and apolipoprotein 
concentrations of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and 
chylomicron/chylomicron remnants in lipid fractions with a Svedberg flotation 
rate (Sf) 60-400 and Sf 20-60.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Six healthy middle-aged men received in random order mixed 
meals enriched with saturated (SFA), polyunsaturated (PUFA) or monounsaturated 
(MUFA) fatty acids on 3 occasions. VLDL and chylomicron/chylomicron remnants in 
the lipid fractions were separated by immunoaffinity chromatography against apo 
B-100. In the Sf 60-400 chylomicron/chylomicron remnants, triacylglycerol and 
cholesterol concentrations were significantly lower following PUFA compared with 
SFA and MUFA (P < or = 0.05). Apolipoprotein (apo) E responses were 
significantly higher after SFA in chylomicron/chylomicron remnants and VLDL 
compared with PUFA and MUFA (P < 0.007). However, apo B responses (particle 
number) were higher following MUFA than SFA (P = 0.039 for 
chylomicron/chylomicron remnants). Composition of the chylomicron/chylomicron 
remnants (expressed per particle) revealed differences in their triacylglycerol 
and apo E contents; in the Sf 60-400 fraction, SFA-rich chylomicron/chylomicron 
remnants contained significantly more triacylglycerol than MUFA (P = 0.028), 
more apo E than PUFA- and MUFA-rich particles (P < 0.05) and in the Sf 20-60 
fraction, more apo E than MUFA (P = 0.009).
CONCLUSION: There are specific differences in the composition of 
chylomicron/chylomicron remnants formed after saturated compared with 
unsaturated fatty acid-rich meals which could determine their metabolic fate in 
the circulation and subsequent atherogenicity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2005.07.001
PMID: 16935699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
