---
pmid: '9403064'
title: Characterization of human homologs of the Drosophila seven in absentia (sina)
  gene.
authors:
- Hu G
- Chung YL
- Glover T
- Valentine V
- Look AT
- Fearon ER
journal: Genomics
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4997
---

# Characterization of human homologs of the Drosophila seven in absentia (sina) gene.
**Authors:** Hu G, Chung YL, Glover T, Valentine V, Look AT, Fearon ER
**Journal:** Genomics (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.1997.4997](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.1997.4997)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 1997 Nov 15;46(1):103-11. doi: 10.1006/geno.1997.4997.

Characterization of human homologs of the Drosophila seven in absentia (sina) 
gene.

Hu G(1), Chung YL, Glover T, Valentine V, Look AT, Fearon ER.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor 48109, USA.

Studies of Drosophila photoreceptor development have illustrated the means by 
which signal transduction events regulate cell fate decisions in a multicellular 
organization. Development of the R7 photoreceptor is best understood, and its 
formation is dependent on the seven in absentia (sina) gene. We have 
characterized two highly conserved human homologs of sina, termed SIAH1 and 
SIAH2. SIAH1 maps to chromosome 16q12 and encodes a 282-amino-acid protein with 
76% amino acid identity to the Drosophila SINA protein. SIAH2 maps to chromosome 
3q25 and encodes a 324-amino-acid protein that shares 68% identity with 
Drosophila SINA and 77% identity with human SIAH1. SIAH1 and SIAH2 were 
expressed in many normal and neoplastic tissues, and only subtle differences in 
their expression were noted. However, one of three murine homologs, Siah1B, was 
strongly induced in fibroblasts undergoing apoptotic cell death. While a 
previous study suggested that SINA was a nuclear protein, epitope-tagged SINA 
and SIAH1 proteins were found in the cytoplasm of Drosophila and mammalian 
cells. Their substantial evolutionary conservation, role in specifying cell 
fate, and activation in apoptotic cells suggest the SIAH proteins have important 
roles in vertebrate development. Furthermore, given the role of sina in 
Drosophila photoreceptor development, SIAH2 is a candidate for the Usher 
syndrome type 3 gene at chromosome 3q21-q25.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.1997.4997
PMID: 9403064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
