---
pmid: '21464307'
title: IkappaB kinase epsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1 activate AKT by direct phosphorylation.
authors:
- Xie X
- Zhang D
- Zhao B
- Lu MK
- You M
- Condorelli G
- Wang CY
- Guan KL
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC3081021
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016132108
---

# IkappaB kinase epsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1 activate AKT by direct phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Xie X, Zhang D, Zhao B, Lu MK, You M, Condorelli G, Wang CY, Guan KL
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1016132108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1016132108)
**PMC:** [PMC3081021](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3081021/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 19;108(16):6474-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1016132108. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

IkappaB kinase epsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1 activate AKT by direct 
phosphorylation.

Xie X(1), Zhang D, Zhao B, Lu MK, You M, Condorelli G, Wang CY, Guan KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

AKT activation requires phosphorylation of the activation loop (T308) by 
3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) and the hydrophobic motif 
(S473) by the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). We recently 
observed that phosphorylation of the AKT hydrophobic motif was dramatically 
elevated, rather than decreased, in mTOR knockout heart tissues, indicating the 
existence of other kinase(s) contributing to AKT phosphorylation. Here we show 
that the atypical IκB kinase ε and TANK-binding kinase 1 (IKKε/TBK1) 
phosphorylate AKT on both the hydrophobic motif and the activation loop in a 
manner dependent on PI3K signaling. This dual phosphorylation results in a 
robust AKT activation in vitro. Consistently, we found that growth factors can 
induce AKT (S473) phosphorylation in Rictor(-/-) cells, and this effect is 
insensitive to mTOR inhibitor Torin1. In IKKε/TBK1 double-knockout cells, AKT 
activation by growth factors is compromised. We also observed that TBK1 
expression is elevated in the mTOR knockout heart tissues, and that TBK1 is 
required for Ras-induced mouse embryonic fibroblast transformation. Our 
observations suggest a physiological function of IKKε/TBK1 in AKT regulation and 
a possible mechanism of IKKε/TBK1 in oncogenesis by activating AKT.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1016132108
PMCID: PMC3081021
PMID: 21464307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

AKT activation requires phosphorylation of the activation loop (T308) by 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) and the hydrophobic motif (S473) by the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2). We recently observed that phosphorylation of the AKT hydrophobic motif was dramatically elevated, rather than decreased, in mTOR knockout heart tissues, indicating the existence of other kinase(s) contributing to AKT phosphorylation. Here we show that the atypical IκB kinase ε and TANK-binding kinase 1 (IKKε/TBK1) phosphorylate AKT on both the hydrophobic motif and the activation loop in a manner dependent on PI3K signaling. This dual phosphorylation results in a robust AKT activation in vitro. Consistently, we found that growth factors can induce AKT (S473) phosphorylation in Rictor −/− cells, and this effect is insensitive to mTOR inhibitor Torin1. In IKKε/TBK1 double-knockout cells, AKT activation by growth factors is compromised. We also observed that TBK1 expression is elevated in the mTOR knockout heart tissues, and that TBK1 is required for Ras-induced mouse embryonic fibroblast transformation. Our observations suggest a physiological function of IKKε/TBK1 in AKT regulation and a possible mechanism of IKKε/TBK1 in oncogenesis by activating AKT.
