---
pmid: '21670284'
title: Near-UV cyanobacteriochrome signaling system elicits negative phototaxis in
  the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.
authors:
- Song JY
- Cho HS
- Cho JI
- Jeon JS
- Lagarias JC
- Park YI
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3127908
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1104242108
---

# Near-UV cyanobacteriochrome signaling system elicits negative phototaxis in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.
**Authors:** Song JY, Cho HS, Cho JI, Jeon JS, Lagarias JC, Park YI
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1104242108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1104242108)
**PMC:** [PMC3127908](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3127908/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 28;108(26):10780-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1104242108. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Near-UV cyanobacteriochrome signaling system elicits negative phototaxis in the 
cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

Song JY(1), Cho HS, Cho JI, Jeon JS, Lagarias JC, Park YI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Graduate School of Analytical Science 
and Technology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea.

Positive phototaxis systems have been well studied in bacteria; however, the 
photoreceptor(s) and their downstream signaling components that are responsible 
for negative phototaxis are poorly understood. Negative phototaxis sensory 
systems are important for cyanobacteria, oxygenic photosynthetic organisms that 
must contend with reactive oxygen species generated by an abundance of pigment 
photosensitizers. The unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 
exhibits type IV pilus-dependent negative phototaxis in response to 
unidirectional UV-A illumination. Using a reverse genetic approach, together 
with biochemical, molecular genetic, and RNA expression profiling analyses, we 
show that the cyanobacteriochrome locus (slr1212/uirS) of Synechocystis and two 
adjacent response regulator loci (slr1213/uirR and the PatA-type regulator 
slr1214/lsiR) encode a UV-A-activated signaling system that is required for 
negative phototaxis. We propose that UirS, which is membrane-associated via its 
ETR1 domain, functions as a UV-A photosensor directing expression of lsiR via 
release of bound UirR, which targets the lsiR promoter. Constitutive expression 
of LsiR induces negative phototaxis under conditions that normally promote 
positive phototaxis. Also induced by other stresses, LsiR thus integrates light 
inputs from multiple photosensors to determine the direction of movement.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1104242108
PMCID: PMC3127908
PMID: 21670284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

Positive phototaxis systems have been well studied in bacteria; however, the photoreceptor(s) and their downstream signaling components that are responsible for negative phototaxis are poorly understood. Negative phototaxis sensory systems are important for cyanobacteria, oxygenic photosynthetic organisms that must contend with reactive oxygen species generated by an abundance of pigment photosensitizers. The unicellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 exhibits type IV pilus-dependent negative phototaxis in response to unidirectional UV-A illumination. Using a reverse genetic approach, together with biochemical, molecular genetic, and RNA expression profiling analyses, we show that the cyanobacteriochrome locus ( slr1212/uirS ) of Synechocystis and two adjacent response regulator loci ( slr1213/uirR and the PatA-type regulator slr1214/lsiR ) encode a UV-A–activated signaling system that is required for negative phototaxis. We propose that UirS, which is membrane-associated via its ETR1 domain, functions as a UV-A photosensor directing expression of lsiR via release of bound UirR, which targets the lsiR promoter. Constitutive expression of LsiR induces negative phototaxis under conditions that normally promote positive phototaxis. Also induced by other stresses, LsiR thus integrates light inputs from multiple photosensors to determine the direction of movement.

Discussion

Our studies establish that the membrane-bound CBCR HiK UirS and its cognate AraC-family response regulator UirR function as a UV-sensing two-component signaling system in Synechocystis . Interestingly, AraC subfamily members in E . coli often act as activators of stress responses ( 21 ). UirR binds to the promoter of the adjacent gene slr1214 that encodes the PatA-family response regulator LsiR. Among other PatA-related proteins encoded by the Synechocystis genome are TaxP1 (PixG/Sll0038) and PixE (Slr1693), both of which are located within phototaxis operons ( 5 , 6 ), and thus may share the same regulatory target(s) as LsiR. Similar to the CBCRs SyPixJ1, TePixJ, and Tlr0924 ( 15 – 18 ), UirS possesses a dual-Cys–linked PVB chromophore whose photoactivation triggers conversion between UV (Puv) and green (Pg) light-absorbing states. Physiological analyses indicate that LsiR functions as a signal output regulator of avoidance movement of Synechocystis cells under unidirectional UV illumination.

Our studies also show that constitutive lsiR expression is sufficient for phototaxis reversal under unidirectional light. Because LsiR is induced by multiple cellular stresses ( 23 – 26 ), this response regulator would appear to integrate unidirectional light stress with general stress signaling systems. Based on our interaction data, we propose a model in which UV activation of UirS induces lsiR expression via Pg-dependent release of UirS-bound UirR ( Fig. 6 ). This model is based on the observation that UirS and UirR are constitutively expressed, regardless of light quality, and the knowledge that UirS is an integral plasma membrane protein ( 37 ). UirR thus functions as a mobile signal carrier that ultimately must locate the lsiR promoter ( plsiR ). Although we have been unable to detect phosphotransfer from UirS to UirR, we show that the conserved Asp residue of UirR is required for function. It is thus possible that phosphorylation is required for UirR to function as an activator of lsiR transcription, possibly by promoting UirR homodimerization ( 20 ). The identity of the phosphorylating agent(s) responsible, if any, remains unknown at present. The regulatory activity of LsiR also requires the equivalent Asp; however, UirS is clearly not required for LsiR function.

How might LsiR reverse the direction of Synechocystis cell movement? Phototactic motility of Synechocystis uses a type IV pilus motor to drive pilus extension, tethering to the surface or to neighboring cells and then retracting to move toward the direction of extension ( 1 ). To achieve negative phototaxis, differential LsiR activation on the irradiated “proximal” and shaded “distal” sides of the cell could be used either to activate the distal motor or to inactivate the proximal motor. This could be accomplished by differential activation of a kinase or inactivation of a phosphatase (or vice versa), which alters LsiR stability and/or localization. Alternatively, a second-messenger gradient could be used to alter the activity of LsiR differentially. Both hypotheses require that the light gradient sensed by a photoreceptor trigger a differential response on the proximal and distal sides of the cell. In a second-messenger model, it is interesting to note that cph2 − mutants exhibit a phenotype very similar to loss-of-function mutants in the UirS signaling system shown here ( Fig. 3 A ). Cph2 possesses GGDEF and EAL regulatory output domains, which could generate a UV-dependent gradient of di-cGMP to affect the activities of LsiR and/or the pilus motor differentially. However, expression of LsiR results in negative phototaxis under red light, indicating that multiple photoreceptor pathways support negative phototaxis when the LsiR protein is present.

It is well established that the blue/green CBCR SyPixJ/TaxD1/Sll0041, which possesses a methyl-accepting chemotaxis signaling domain, functions to promote positive phototaxis under visible light ( 1 ). For this reason, SyPixJ is probably antagonized by LsiR action, particularly under unidirectional blue or green light. Because SypixJ − mutants exhibit negative phototaxis under all wavelengths of visible light, Synechocystis cells must contain other visible light sensors responsible for perceiving visible light gradients, and these may also involve a role for LsiR. Like those present in other cyanobacteria, multiple photosensors that could serve this function are representatives of the cyanobacterial phytochrome, CBCR, BLUF, and CRY families. Of particular note, the blue-absorbing CRY-related cyanopterin Sll1629 ( 9 ), the BLUF protein SyPixD/Slr1694 ( 8 ), the red/green CBCR Slr1393 ( 38 ), and the red/far-red light sensor Cph1 ( 39 ) all could contribute to sustaining the signaling gradient necessary for LsiR-dependent (and potentially LsiR-independent) negative phototaxis at elevated fluence rates of visible light. This work also illuminates the exquisite complexity with which cyanobacteria tune not only their metabolism but their behavior in response to light and other environmental cues.
