---
pmid: '24769233'
title: 'Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid extracellular vesicles: a comprehensive
  dataset.'
authors:
- Chiasserini D
- van Weering JR
- Piersma SR
- Pham TV
- Malekzadeh A
- Teunissen CE
- de Wit H
- Jiménez CR
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2014'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.028
---

# Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid extracellular vesicles: a comprehensive dataset.
**Authors:** Chiasserini D, van Weering JR, Piersma SR, Pham TV, Malekzadeh A, Teunissen CE, de Wit H, Jiménez CR
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.028)

## Abstract

1. J Proteomics. 2014 Jun 25;106:191-204. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.028. Epub 
2014 Apr 24.

Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid extracellular vesicles: a 
comprehensive dataset.

Chiasserini D(1), van Weering JR(2), Piersma SR(1), Pham TV(1), Malekzadeh A(3), 
Teunissen CE(3), de Wit H(2), Jiménez CR(4).

Author information:
(1)OncoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Oncology, VU University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Functional Genomics and Clinical Genetics, Center for 
Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU 
University Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Neurochemistry Laboratory and Biobank, VU 
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)OncoProteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Oncology, VU University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
c.jimenez@vumc.nl.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are present in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), yet 
little is known about their protein composition. The aim of this study is to 
provide a comprehensive analysis of the proteome of CSF EVs by electron 
microscopy and high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in conjunction 
with bioinformatics. We report an extensive catalog of 1315 proteins identified 
in EVs isolated from two different CSF pools by ultracentrifugation, including 
230 novel EV proteins. Out of 1315 proteins, 760 were identified in both CSF 
pools and about 30% of those were also quantitatively enriched in the EV 
fraction versus the soluble CSF fraction. The proteome of CSF EVs was enriched 
in exosomal markers such as alix and syntenin-1, heat shock proteins and 
tetraspanins and contained a high proportion of brain-derived proteins (n=373). 
Interestingly, several known biomarkers for neurodegenerative diseases such as 
the amyloid precursor protein, the prion protein and DJ-1 were identified in the 
EV fractions. Our dataset represents the first comprehensive inventory of the EV 
proteome in CSF, underscoring the biomarker potential of this organelle. Further 
comparative studies on CSF EVs isolated from patients diagnosed with 
neurological disorders are warranted. Data are available via ProteomeXchange 
with identifier PXD000608. Biological significance In this study we analyzed the 
protein composition of extracellular vesicles isolated from pooled samples of 
human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF is a colorless fluid surrounding the brain 
and the spinal cord, important for the physiology of the central nervous system, 
ensuing mechanical protection, regulation of brain blood flow and elimination of 
byproducts of the brain. Since brain (patho)physiology is reflected in CSF, this 
biological fluid represents an ideal source of soluble and vesicle-based 
biomarkers for neurological diseases. Here we confirm the presence of 
exosome-like extracellular vesicles in CSF, underscoring a potential role in the 
physiology of the brain. These extracellular vesicles provide a rich source of 
candidate biomarkers, representing a brain "fluid biopsy". Most interestingly, 
the involvement of extracellular vesicles in transferring toxic proteins such as 
α-synuclein and β-amyloid has been postulated as one of the mechanisms involved 
in the spreading of neurodegeneration to different brain areas. In line with 
this, we show that human CSF extracellular vesicles contain prionogenic proteins 
such as the amyloid precursor protein and the prion protein. Delineating the 
protein composition of extracellular vesicles in CSF is a first and crucial step 
to comprehend their origin and their function in the central nervous system and 
to establish their biomarker potential.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.028
PMID: 24769233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
