---
pmid: '15778706'
title: Wnt signalling induces maturation of Paneth cells in intestinal crypts.
authors:
- van Es JH
- Jay P
- Gregorieff A
- van Gijn ME
- Jonkheer S
- Hatzis P
- Thiele A
- van den Born M
- Begthel H
- Brabletz T
- Taketo MM
- Clevers H
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/ncb1240
---

# Wnt signalling induces maturation of Paneth cells in intestinal crypts.
**Authors:** van Es JH, Jay P, Gregorieff A, van Gijn ME, Jonkheer S, Hatzis P, Thiele A, van den Born M, Begthel H, Brabletz T, Taketo MM, Clevers H
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ncb1240](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb1240)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;7(4):381-6. doi: 10.1038/ncb1240. Epub 2005 Mar 20.

Wnt signalling induces maturation of Paneth cells in intestinal crypts.

van Es JH(1), Jay P, Gregorieff A, van Gijn ME, Jonkheer S, Hatzis P, Thiele A, 
van den Born M, Begthel H, Brabletz T, Taketo MM, Clevers H.

Author information:
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, 
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signalling, which is transduced through beta-catenin/TCF4, maintains the 
undifferentiated state of intestinal crypt progenitor cells. Mutational 
activation of the pathway initiates the adenomacarcinoma sequence. Whereas all 
other differentiated epithelial cells migrate from the crypt onto the villus, 
Paneth cells home towards the source of Wnt signals--that is, the crypt bottom. 
Here, we show that expression of a Paneth gene programme is critically dependent 
on TCF4 in embryonic intestine. Moreover, conditional deletion of the Wnt 
receptor Frizzled-5 abrogates expression of these genes in Paneth cells in the 
adult intestine. Conversely, adenomas in Apc-mutant mice and colorectal cancers 
in humans inappropriately express these Paneth-cell genes. These observations 
imply that Wnt signals in the crypt can separately drive a stem-cell/progenitor 
gene programme and a Paneth-cell maturation programme. In intestinal cancer, 
both gene programmes are activated simultaneously.

DOI: 10.1038/ncb1240
PMID: 15778706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
