---
pmid: '17957153'
title: Milk intake and feeding behavior in the first week of life and its relationship
  to cord blood ghrelin, leptin, and insulin concentrations.
authors:
- James RJ
- James A
- Drewett RF
- Cheetham TD
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2007'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318159a28c
---

# Milk intake and feeding behavior in the first week of life and its relationship to cord blood ghrelin, leptin, and insulin concentrations.
**Authors:** James RJ, James A, Drewett RF, Cheetham TD
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1203/PDR.0b013e318159a28c](https://doi.org/10.1203/PDR.0b013e318159a28c)

## Abstract

1. Pediatr Res. 2007 Dec;62(6):695-9. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318159a28c.

Milk intake and feeding behavior in the first week of life and its relationship 
to cord blood ghrelin, leptin, and insulin concentrations.

James RJ(1), James A, Drewett RF, Cheetham TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Durham, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.

Our aim was to study the feeding behavior of healthy term infants in the first 
week of life and determine whether this was related to cord blood leptin, 
ghrelin, and insulin. A total of 100 healthy bottle-fed infants were studied by 
weighing bottles of milk before and after feeds. Leptin, total ghrelin, and 
insulin concentrations were measured in cord blood. Mean (SD) birth weight was 
3.46 (0.43) kg. Mean milk intake increased from 196.7 (83.0) g on d 1 to 585.0 
(128.4) g on d 7. Milk intake over the first 6 d was significantly associated 
with weight gain to d 7. There was no relationship between cord ghrelin or 
leptin and milk intake or feed frequency. Cord blood insulin was inversely 
related to the mean daily number of feeds over the first 6 d (r = -0.21, p < 
0.05). Birth weight and milk intake are the major determinants of weight gain in 
the first week of life in healthy bottle-fed infants. Total cord ghrelin and 
leptin are not directly related to milk intake or feed frequency in the first 
week of life. Circulating insulin concentrations may have a role in the 
initiation of feeding behavior.

DOI: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e318159a28c
PMID: 17957153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
