---
pmid: '12872135'
title: Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling.
authors:
- Hoebe K
- Du X
- Georgel P
- Janssen E
- Tabeta K
- Kim SO
- Goode J
- Lin P
- Mann N
- Mudd S
- Crozat K
- Sovath S
- Han J
- Beutler B
journal: Nature
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/nature01889
---

# Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling.
**Authors:** Hoebe K, Du X, Georgel P, Janssen E, Tabeta K, Kim SO, Goode J, Lin P, Mann N, Mudd S, Crozat K, Sovath S, Han J, Beutler B
**Journal:** Nature (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature01889](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01889)

## Abstract

1. Nature. 2003 Aug 14;424(6950):743-8. doi: 10.1038/nature01889. Epub 2003 Jul
20.

Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling.

Hoebe K(1), Du X, Georgel P, Janssen E, Tabeta K, Kim SO, Goode J, Lin P, Mann 
N, Mudd S, Crozat K, Sovath S, Han J, Beutler B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, IMM-31, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North 
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2003 Aug 14;424(6950):736-7. doi: 10.1038/424736a.

In humans, ten Toll-like receptor (TLR) paralogues sense molecular components of 
microbes, initiating the production of cytokine mediators that create the 
inflammatory response. Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea, we induced a germline 
mutation called Lps2, which abolishes cytokine responses to double-stranded RNA 
and severely impairs responses to the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
indicating that TLR3 and TLR4 might share a specific, proximal transducer. Here 
we identify the Lps2 mutation: a distal frameshift error in a Toll/interleukin-1 
receptor/resistance (TIR) adaptor protein known as Trif or Ticam-1. Trif(Lps2) 
homozygotes are markedly resistant to the toxic effects of LPS, and are 
hypersusceptible to mouse cytomegalovirus, failing to produce type I interferons 
when infected. Compound homozygosity for mutations at Trif and MyD88 (a 
cytoplasmic TIR-domain-containing adaptor protein) loci ablates all responses to 
LPS, indicating that only two signalling pathways emanate from the LPS receptor. 
However, a Trif-independent cell population is detectable when Trif(Lps2) mutant 
macrophages are stimulated with LPS. This reveals that an alternative 
MyD88-dependent 'adaptor X' pathway is present in some, but not all, 
macrophages, and implies afferent immune specialization.

DOI: 10.1038/nature01889
PMID: 12872135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
