---
pmid: '12812986'
title: 'DISC1 (Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1) is a centrosome-associated protein that
  interacts with MAP1A, MIPT3, ATF4/5 and NUDEL: regulation and loss of interaction
  with mutation.'
authors:
- Morris JA
- Kandpal G
- Ma L
- Austin CP
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg162
---

# DISC1 (Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1) is a centrosome-associated protein that interacts with MAP1A, MIPT3, ATF4/5 and NUDEL: regulation and loss of interaction with mutation.
**Authors:** Morris JA, Kandpal G, Ma L, Austin CP
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddg162](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddg162)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Jul 1;12(13):1591-608. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddg162.

DISC1 (Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1) is a centrosome-associated protein that 
interacts with MAP1A, MIPT3, ATF4/5 and NUDEL: regulation and loss of 
interaction with mutation.

Morris JA(1), Kandpal G, Ma L, Austin CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA 
19486, USA.

Disrupted-In-Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a novel gene associated with 
schizophrenia by multiple genetic studies. In order to determine how mutations 
in DISC1 might cause susceptibility to schizophrenia, we undertook a 
comprehensive study of the cellular biology of DISC1 in its full-length and 
disease-associated mutant forms. DISC1 interacts by yeast two-hybrid, mammalian 
two-hybrid, and co-immunoprecipitation assays with multiple proteins of the 
centrosome and cytoskeletal system, including MIPT3, MAP1A and NUDEL; proteins 
which localize receptors to membranes, including alpha-actinin2 and 
beta4-spectrin; and proteins which transduce signals from membrane receptors, 
including ATF4 and ATF5. Truncated mutant DISC1 fails to interact with ATF4, 
ATF5 or NUDEL. Deletion mapping demonstrated that DISC1 has distinct interaction 
domains: MAP1A interacts via its LC2 domain with the N-terminus of DISC1, 
whereas MIPT3 and NUDEL bind via their C-terminal domains to the central 
coiled-coil domain of DISC1, and ATF4/5 bind via their C-terminal domains to the 
C-terminus of DISC1. In its full-length form, DISC1 protein localizes to 
predominantly perinuclear punctate structures which extend into neurites in some 
cells; mutant truncated DISC1, by contrast, is seen in a diffuse pattern 
throughout the cytoplasm and abundantly in neurites. Both forms co-localize with 
the centrosomal complex, although truncated less abundantly than full-length 
DISC1. Although both full-length and mutant DISC1 are found in microtubule 
fractions, neither form of DISC1 appears to bind directly to microtubules, but 
rather do so in a MIPT3-dependent fashion that is stabilized by taxol. Based on 
these data, we propose that DISC1 is a multifunctional protein whose truncation 
contributes to schizophrenia susceptibility by disrupting intracellular 
transport, neurite architecture and/or neuronal migration, all of which have 
been hypothesized to be pathogenic in the schizophrenic brain.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddg162
PMID: 12812986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
