---
pmid: '14662653'
title: Expression and molecular characterization of alternative transcripts of the
  ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene specific for human breast cancer.
authors:
- Debily MA
- Camarca A
- Ciullo M
- Mayer C
- El Marhomy S
- Ba I
- Jalil A
- Anzisi A
- Guardiola J
- Piatier-Tonneau D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh024
---

# Expression and molecular characterization of alternative transcripts of the ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene specific for human breast cancer.
**Authors:** Debily MA, Camarca A, Ciullo M, Mayer C, El Marhomy S, Ba I, Jalil A, Anzisi A, Guardiola J, Piatier-Tonneau D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddh024](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddh024)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Feb 1;13(3):323-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh024. Epub 2003 Dec
 8.

Expression and molecular characterization of alternative transcripts of the 
ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene specific for human breast cancer.

Debily MA(1), Camarca A, Ciullo M, Mayer C, El Marhomy S, Ba I, Jalil A, Anzisi 
A, Guardiola J, Piatier-Tonneau D.

Author information:
(1)Génomique Fonctionnelle et Biologie Systémique en Santé, FRE 2571, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, 7 rue Guy Moquet, BP 8, 94801 Villejuif 
Cedex, France.

The ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene belongs to the Dbl family of guanine nucleotide 
exchange factors (GEFs) for Rho GTPases. It is well established that Rho-GEFs 
play an important role in tumorigenesis and metastasis through the activation of 
their substrates, the Rho GTPases. Little is known about ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene 
expression and cellular functions. Because of its localization close to the 
common fragile site FRA7I, which has been shown to be responsible for an 
inverted duplication of the 7q34-q35 region in breast carcinoma cells, we 
examined the expression of the ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene in normal and tumoral breast 
tissue. We report here the identification of five novel ARHGEF5/TIM alternative 
transcripts specifically expressed in breast tumors. These variant transcripts 
were characterized by the absence of one or several exons, all coding for the 
catalytic Dbl-homology domain and generating modified or truncated predicted 
variant proteins. The variant transcripts were predominantly expressed in breast 
carcinoma cell lines and in the most aggressive primary breast carcinomas, 
suggesting they may play a role in breast tumor progression. Moreover, we 
demonstrate that the expression of recombinant ARHGEF5/TIM protein in 
transfected COS-7 and NIH-3T3 cells generated a loss of actin stress fibers and 
the formation of membrane ruffles and filopodia. This pattern suggests that 
ARHGEF5/TIM activates Rac1, Cdc42 or RhoG rather than RhoA, as previously 
demonstrated in in vitro guanine nucleotide exchange assays. We anticipate that 
the activation of the ARHGEF5/TIM oncogene, possibly by the variant isoforms 
detected here, may play an important role in proliferative breast disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh024
PMID: 14662653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
