---
pmid: '29858230'
title: Secretory kinase Fam20C tunes endoplasmic reticulum redox state via phosphorylation
  of Ero1α.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Zhu Q
- Wang X
- Yu J
- Chen X
- Wang J
- Wang X
- Xiao J
- Wang CC
- Wang L
journal: EMBO J
year: '2018'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC6043849
doi: 10.15252/embj.201798699
---

# Secretory kinase Fam20C tunes endoplasmic reticulum redox state via phosphorylation of Ero1α.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Zhu Q, Wang X, Yu J, Chen X, Wang J, Wang X, Xiao J, Wang CC, Wang L
**Journal:** EMBO J (2018)
**DOI:** [10.15252/embj.201798699](https://doi.org/10.15252/embj.201798699)
**PMC:** [PMC6043849](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6043849/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2018 Jul 13;37(14):e98699. doi: 10.15252/embj.201798699. Epub 2018 Jun
 1.

Secretory kinase Fam20C tunes endoplasmic reticulum redox state via 
phosphorylation of Ero1α.

Zhang J(1)(2), Zhu Q(3)(4), Wang X(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2), Chen X(1)(2), Wang J(5), 
Wang X(1)(2), Xiao J(3)(4), Wang CC(1)(2), Wang L(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life 
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(4)Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking-Tsinghua Center for 
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(5)Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China wanglei@moon.ibp.ac.cn.

Family with sequence similarity 20C (Fam20C), the physiological Golgi casein 
kinase, phosphorylates numerous secreted proteins that are involved in a wide 
variety of biological processes. However, the role of Fam20C in regulating 
proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen is largely unknown. Here, we 
report that Fam20C interacts with various luminal proteins and that its 
depletion results in a more reduced ER lumen. We further show that ER 
oxidoreductin 1α (Ero1α), the pivotal sulfhydryl oxidase that catalyzes 
disulfide formation in the ER, is phosphorylated by Fam20C in the Golgi 
apparatus and retrograde-transported to the ER mediated by ERp44. The 
phosphorylation of Ser145 greatly enhances Ero1α oxidase activity and is 
critical for maintaining ER redox homeostasis and promoting oxidative protein 
folding. Notably, phosphorylation of Ero1α is induced under hypoxia, reductive 
stress, and secretion-demanding conditions such as mammalian lactation. 
Collectively, our findings open a door to uncover how oxidative protein folding 
is regulated by phosphorylation in the secretory pathway.

© 2018 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embj.201798699
PMCID: PMC6043849
PMID: 29858230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Family with sequence similarity 20C (Fam20C), the physiological Golgi casein kinase, phosphorylates numerous secreted proteins that are involved in a wide variety of biological processes. However, the role of Fam20C in regulating proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen is largely unknown. Here, we report that Fam20C interacts with various luminal proteins and that its depletion results in a more reduced ER lumen. We further show that ER oxidoreductin 1α (Ero1α), the pivotal sulfhydryl oxidase that catalyzes disulfide formation in the ER, is phosphorylated by Fam20C in the Golgi apparatus and retrograde‐transported to the ER mediated by ERp44. The phosphorylation of Ser145 greatly enhances Ero1α oxidase activity and is critical for maintaining ER redox homeostasis and promoting oxidative protein folding. Notably, phosphorylation of Ero1α is induced under hypoxia, reductive stress, and secretion‐demanding conditions such as mammalian lactation. Collectively, our findings open a door to uncover how oxidative protein folding is regulated by phosphorylation in the secretory pathway.

Introduction

Protein phosphorylation regulates almost every aspect of cell life, including the cell cycle, growth, differentiation, migration, and death, due to its simplicity, flexibility, and reversibility (Cohen, 2002 ). It is estimated that around 30% of human proteins are phosphoproteins. The first phosphoprotein, casein, was reported in 1883 (Hammarsten, 1883 ) and has been widely used as a model substrate to evaluate protein kinase activity, yet family with sequence similarity 20C (Fam20C), the bona fide kinase catalyzing the phosphorylation of secreted protein casein, was not identified until 2012 (Ishikawa et al , 2012 ; Tagliabracci et al , 2012 ). Fam20C is a unique protein kinase that phosphorylates proteins within the S‐x‐E/pS motif, preferentially uses Mn 2+ over Mg 2+ as a metal ion cofactor and displays insensitivity to the broad‐spectrum protein kinase inhibitor staurosporine (Tagliabracci et al , 2012 ).

Loss‐of‐function mutations in Fam20C cause a rare and often lethal osteosclerotic bone dysplasia called Raine syndrome (Raine et al , 1989 ). Indeed, Fam20C has been found to phosphorylate proteins important to biomineralization, including osteopontin, dentin matrix protein‐1, and dentin sialophosphoprotein (Ishikawa et al , 2012 ; Tagliabracci et al , 2012 ). Recently, Dixon laboratory reported that Fam20C is the kinase responsible for generating the majority of the secreted phosphoproteome (more than 100 secreted proteins) implicated in a broad‐spectrum of biological processes, such as wound healing, regeneration, and cell migration (Tagliabracci et al , 2015 ). This implies that Fam20C participates in a wide variety of regulations in human physiology and disease. However, little is known about the role of protein phosphorylation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen.

More than 30% of the proteins encoded by the human genome are predicted to enter the secretory pathway (Fass & Thorpe, 2018 ). Most secreted and membrane proteins (e.g., cytokines, immunoglobulins, and receptors) contain disulfide bonds that stabilize their structures and regulates their functions (Hogg, 2003 ). The folding of nascent peptides accompanied by disulfide bond formation is called oxidative protein folding. The ER is the central organelle for secreted and membrane protein synthesis, folding, and assembly. The pivotal pathway for catalyzing oxidative protein folding in the ER is composed of sulfhydryl oxidase ER oxidoreductin 1α (Ero1α) and protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) (Wang et al , 2015 ; Fass & Thorpe, 2018 ). Ero1α utilizes oxygen as the final electron acceptor for de novo disulfide bond formation and transfers disulfides to PDI, which directly catalyzes disulfide formation in reduced substrates (Mezghrani et al , 2001 ; Tu & Weissman, 2002 ; Sevier & Kaiser, 2008 ). Ero1α is upregulated under hypoxic conditions (May et al , 2005 ), highly expressed in many cancers (Battle et al , 2013 ; Kukita et al , 2015 ), and involved in calcium flux and cell apoptosis (Li et al , 2009 ; Chin et al , 2011 ).

The byproduct of Ero1α oxidase activity is hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) (Gross et al , 2006 ; Wang et al , 2009 ), which is estimated to account for up to 25% of the cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced during protein synthesis (Tu & Weissman, 2004 ). Therefore, Ero1α oxidase activity must be tightly controlled to prevent excess ROS accumulation in resting states and it needs to be activated promptly once robust oxidative protein folding capacity is required. The activity of Ero1α is feedback regulated by PDI and its homologues to maintain redox balance in the ER (Sevier et al , 2007 ; Kim et al , 2012 ; Zhang et al , 2014 ). Excessive reduction of PDI in the ER induces Ero1α to undergo regulatory disulfides breakage. Conversely, if the ER is excessively oxidized, the regulatory disulfides will be formed by oxidized PDI to suppress Ero1α activity (Wang et al , 2015 ; Delaunay‐Moisan et al , 2017 ). Besides this “regulatory disulfide switch”, whether any other post‐translational modification can regulate Ero1α activity remains unclear.

Here, we report that Fam20C interacts with a wide range of proteins localized within the secretory pathway and that its deletion disrupts the ER redox poise. We further show that Fam20C phosphorylates Ero1α at Ser145 in the Golgi apparatus and that ERp44/KDEL receptor (KDELR) mediates the retrograde transport of phosphorylated Ero1α to the ER. Importantly, phosphorylated Ero1α displays enhanced oxidase activity and promotes oxidative protein folding. Phosphorylation of Ero1α at Ser145 by Fam20C is critical for maintaining ER redox homeostasis, and it is induced under hypoxia, reductive stress, and physiological conditions with increased secretory demands such as mammalian lactation. Our study expands Fam20C's biological roles in the ER lumen and establishes the first link between secretory protein phosphorylation and oxidative protein folding.

Discussion

In this study, we report Fam20C, the Golgi‐localized secretory kinase, has a previously unidentified function of fine‐tuning ER redox homeostasis and oxidative protein folding. Ero1α, an ER sulfhydryl oxidase, can be transported to the Golgi apparatus and effectively phosphorylated by Fam20C at Ser145. Phosphorylation of Ero1α largely enhances its oxidase activity. Similar to non‐phosphorylated Ero1α, phosphorylated Ero1α is relocated to the ER lumen, also mediated by the ERp44/KDELR system, to promote disulfide bond formation and maintain ER redox homeostasis (Fig 8 G). This model also provides an answer to the long‐unsolved question of why Ero1α functions in the ER but does not contain an ER retention motif. Indeed, engineered Ero1α‐KDEL protein is more resistant to phosphorylation by Fam20C (Fig 4 C). Although it is possible that Fam20C is active during its transit route across the ER, we propose that a rather unique milieu in the Golgi is appropriate for Fam20C activity. Besides Ero1α and the recently reported sarcoplasmic reticulum histidine‐rich calcium‐binding protein (HRC) (Pollak et al , 2017 ), we identify several ER/Golgi‐localized enzymes and chaperones that also interact with Fam20C (Fig 1 and Dataset EV1 ). Future studies are required to determine whether these proteins can be phosphorylated by Fam20C and can therefore participate in certain biological processes.

Professional secretory cells and tissues have extremely high demands for oxidative protein folding in the ER. For example, lactating mammary glands produce milk, which contains a large amount of disulfide‐rich proteins (e.g., immunoglobulins, α‐lactalbumin, and serum albumin). Indeed, the expression of both Fam20C and Ero1α is dramatically elevated in lactating mouse mammary glands. Notably, we have detected strong p‐Ero1α signals in the mammary glands of lactating mice, suggesting that Ero1α phosphorylation by Fam20C plays an important role in lactation. Interestingly, we find that p‐Ero1α is not induced under ER stress caused by calcium depletion or aberrant glycosylation; instead, it is rapidly induced once the protein disulfides in the ER are disrupted by the reducing agent DTT. Since oxygen is the ultimate source of oxidizing power for disulfide formation, it is also reasonable that p‐Ero1α is induced under hypoxic condition to increase the bioavailability of oxygen. Previous studies showed that exposure of cells to reductive stress or hypoxia leads to the relocation of Ero1α from the early secretory pathway to the late secretory pathway (Gilady et al , 2010 ), which is in line with our conclusion that Ero1α is phosphorylated by Fam20C in the Golgi. Altogether, our study highlights the importance of phosphorylation of Ero1α by Fam20C as a novel regulatory mechanism to counteract cellular reductive stress at post‐translational level. Whether Ero1α phosphorylation is also enhanced in other secretory cells, such as plasma cells secreting immunoglobulins and β‐cells secreting insulin, and is important for efficient oxidative protein folding in those cells are still open questions.

Ero1 oxidase catalyzes one disulfide bond formation and produces one molecule of H 2 O 2 as a byproduct; therefore, its activity should be tightly controlled to prevent excess ROS production (Gross et al , 2006 ; Wang et al , 2009 , 2011 ). Ero1 activity can be allosterically controlled by “regulatory disulfides”, which were first studied in yeast (Gross et al , 2004 ; Sevier et al , 2007 ; Vitu et al , 2010 ; Kim et al , 2012 ) and later dissected in mammals (Appenzeller‐Herzog et al , 2008 ; Baker et al , 2008 ; Inaba et al , 2010 ; Wang et al , 2011 ; Zhang et al , 2014 ). Interestingly, Ser145 in Ero1α is highly conserved in multicellular organisms but missing in yeast Ero1p (Fig 2 D), and Fam20C homologue is not present in yeast, implying that Ero1p is lack of phosphorylation regulation. Instead, yeast Ero1p harbors Cys150 in the same position, and disruption of the Cys150‐Cys295 allosteric disulfide is known to enhance the movement of outer active site‐containing loop and increase Ero1p activity (Sevier et al , 2007 ), though physiological reduction in the Cys150‐Cys295 disulfide requires extremely reducing condition (Niu et al , 2016 ). The homology between Cys150 in Ero1p and Ser145 in Ero1α further suggests that modification of Ser145 is likely to cause a similar conformational change and enzymatic enhancement. Besides previous reports on the regulatory disulfides of Ero1α, our observation that Ero1α can be phosphor‐regulated via Ser145 adds an additional layer to the regulation of Ero1α activity. These findings suggest that human Ero1α has undergone extensive evolution to optimize the folding efficiency of large, complicated disulfide‐containing secretory proteomes and to simultaneously minimize the risks of overoxidation in the ER. Whether Ero1α possesses other phosphorylation sites besides Ser145, the manner by which these phosphorylation sites orchestrate to regulate ER redox, and the identity of the protein phosphatase for dephosphorylating Ero1α remain open questions.

Apart from the introduction of disulfide bonds, Ero1α has also been reported to regulate ER Ca 2+ influx and efflux. A fraction of Ero1α is localized in mitochondrial‐associated ER membranes (Gilady et al , 2010 ; Ramming & Appenzeller‐Herzog, 2012 ). Ero1α can inhibit SERCA calcium pump activity (Marino et al , 2015 ) and activate inositol 1,4,5‐triphosphate receptor 1 (IP 3 R1) to induce Ca 2+ release into the mitochondria and trigger apoptosis (Li et al , 2009 ; Anelli et al , 2012 ), doing both in a redox‐dependent manner. Thus, it would be interesting to investigate whether p‐Ero1α with high oxidase activity participates in the regulation of ER calcium homeostasis. Although Ero1α predominantly localizes and functions in the ER lumen under normal conditions, it can be secreted into the extracellular space at an upregulated level of expression (Cabibbo et al , 2000 ; Anelli et al , 2003 ). However, the role of secreted Ero1α is largely unknown. In this study, we observe that p‐Ero1α is present in both cell extracts and culture medium (Figs 2 E and 3 C and D), implying that secreted p‐Ero1α with high activity also functions to regulate extracellular redox homeostasis.

Ero1α is recognized as a cancer‐associated oxidase because its expression is significantly elevated in many cancers such as breast (Kutomi et al , 2013 ), gastrointestinal (Battle et al , 2013 ), and pancreatic (Kukita et al , 2015 ) cancers. Moreover, Ero1α enhances the expression of major histocompatibility complex class I antigen (Kukita et al , 2015 ), vascular endothelial growth factor (Tanaka et al , 2016 ), and programmed death‐ligand 1 (Tanaka et al , 2017 ) via oxidative folding to promote tumor growth. Notably, Fam20C‐dependent phosphorylation of secreted proteins is necessary for the proper adhesion, migration, and invasion of cancer cells (Tagliabracci et al , 2015 ). Therefore, future efforts to validate whether the p‐Ero1α levels are elevated in cancers and are correlated with a poor prognosis will greatly benefit the use of p‐Ero1α as a potential biomarker and a novel therapeutic target for various types of cancer.
