---
pmid: '31048766'
title: Cellular functions of long noncoding RNAs.
authors:
- Yao RW
- Wang Y
- Chen LL
journal: Nat Cell Biol
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0311-8
---

# Cellular functions of long noncoding RNAs.
**Authors:** Yao RW, Wang Y, Chen LL
**Journal:** Nat Cell Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41556-019-0311-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-019-0311-8)

## Abstract

1. Nat Cell Biol. 2019 May;21(5):542-551. doi: 10.1038/s41556-019-0311-8. Epub
2019  May 2.

Cellular functions of long noncoding RNAs.

Yao RW(#)(1), Wang Y(#)(1), Chen LL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Andrology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, 
Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. 
linglingchen@sibcb.ac.cn.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
China. linglingchen@sibcb.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

A diverse catalog of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which lack protein-coding 
potential, are transcribed from the mammalian genome. They are emerging as 
important regulators in gene expression networks by controlling nuclear 
architecture and transcription in the nucleus and by modulating mRNA stability, 
translation and post-translational modifications in the cytoplasm. In this 
Review, we highlight recent progress in cellular functions of lncRNAs at the 
molecular level in mammalian cells.

DOI: 10.1038/s41556-019-0311-8
PMID: 31048766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
