---
pmid: '14555658'
title: Evaluation by mutagenesis of the importance of 3 arginines in alpha, beta,
  and gamma subunits of human NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Soundar S
- Park JH
- Huh TL
- Colman RF
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306178200
---

# Evaluation by mutagenesis of the importance of 3 arginines in alpha, beta, and gamma subunits of human NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Soundar S, Park JH, Huh TL, Colman RF
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M306178200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M306178200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 26;278(52):52146-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306178200. Epub 
2003 Oct 10.

Evaluation by mutagenesis of the importance of 3 arginines in alpha, beta, and 
gamma subunits of human NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase.

Soundar S(1), Park JH, Huh TL, Colman RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, 
Delaware 19716, USA.

Mammalian NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase is an allosteric enzyme, 
activated by ADP and composed of 3 distinct subunits in the ratio 
2alpha:1beta:1gamma. Based on the crystal structure of NADP-dependent isocitrate 
dehydrogenases from Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and pig heart, and a 
comparison of their amino acid sequences, alpha-Arg88, beta-Arg99, and 
gamma-Arg97 of human NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase were chosen as 
candidates for mutagenesis to test their roles in catalytic activity and ADP 
activation. A plasmid harboring cDNA that encodes alpha, beta, and gamma 
subunits of the human isocitrate dehydrogenase (Kim, Y. O., Koh, H. J., Kim, S. 
H., Jo, S. H., Huh, J. W., Jeong, K. S., Lee, I. J., Song, B. J., and Huh, T. L. 
(1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 36866-36875) was used to express the enzyme in 
isocitrate dehydrogenase-deficient E. coli. Wild type (WT) and mutant enzymes 
(each containing 2 normal subunits plus a mutant subunit with alpha-R88Q, 
beta-R99Q, or gamma-R97Q) were purified to homogeneity yielding enzymes with 
2alpha:1beta:1gamma subunit composition and a native molecular mass of 315 kDa. 
Specific activities of 22, 14, and 2 micromol of NADH/min/mg were measured, 
respectively, for WT, beta-R99Q, and gamma-R97Q enzymes. In contrast, mutant 
enzymes with normal beta and gamma subunits and alpha-R88Q mutant subunit has no 
detectable activity, demonstrating that, although beta-Arg99 and gamma-Arg97 
contribute to activity, alpha-Arg88 is essential for catalysis. For WT enzyme, 
the Km for isocitrate is 2.2 mm, decreasing to 0.3 mm with added ADP. In 
contrast, for beta-R99Q and gamma-R97Q enzymes, the Km for isocitrate is the 
same in the absence or presence of ADP, although all the enzymes bind ADP. These 
results suggest that beta-Arg99 and gamma-Arg97 are needed for normal ADP 
activation. In addition, the gamma-R97Q enzyme has a Km for NAD 10 times that of 
WT enzyme. This study indicates that a normal alpha subunit is required for 
catalytic activity and alpha-Arg88 likely participates in the isocitrate site, 
whereas the beta and gamma subunits have roles in the nucleotide functions of 
this allosteric enzyme.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M306178200
PMID: 14555658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
