---
pmid: '12738762'
title: Fer is a downstream effector of insulin and mediates the activation of signal
  transducer and activator of transcription 3 in myogenic cells.
authors:
- Taler M
- Shpungin S
- Salem Y
- Malovani H
- Pasder O
- Nir U
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1210/me.2002-0328
---

# Fer is a downstream effector of insulin and mediates the activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 in myogenic cells.
**Authors:** Taler M, Shpungin S, Salem Y, Malovani H, Pasder O, Nir U
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2002-0328](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2002-0328)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Aug;17(8):1580-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2002-0328. Epub 2003
May  8.

Fer is a downstream effector of insulin and mediates the activation of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 in myogenic cells.

Taler M(1), Shpungin S, Salem Y, Malovani H, Pasder O, Nir U.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.

Fer is an intracellular tyrosine kinase that associates with signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) in mammalian cells. However, the 
signaling pathways in which this interaction plays a functional role have not 
been revealed. Herein, we show that insulin up-regulates the levels of the fer 
mRNA and Fer protein in myoblasts that undergo insulin-induced myogenic 
differentiation. Moreover, insulin directs the interaction of Fer with members 
of the Janus family of tyrosine kinases (Jak)-Stat3 signaling pathway. Although 
in untreated cells Fer binds Jak1 and its tyrosine phosphorylation level is low, 
insulin treatment induced the phosphorylation of Fer and its dissociation from 
Jak1. The up-regulation of Fer and its dissociation from Jak1 were accompanied 
by an augmented association of activated Fer with Stat3 and by a concomitant 
increase in the tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat3. Dissociation of Fer and Jak1, 
as well as elevation in the level of Fer and in the tyrosine phosphorylation of 
Stat3, depended on the activity of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and was 
abolished by a PI3K inhibitor. However, Fer and Stat3 were only mildly affected 
by low concentrations of IGF-I, another activator of the PI3K pathway that can 
also induce myogenic differentiation. RNA interference directed toward the fer 
mRNA did not affect the cellular levels of Stat3 but led to a dramatic reduction 
in the tyrosine phosphorylation level of this transcription factor. Thus, Fer is 
a downstream effector of insulin and mediates the activation of Stat3 in 
myogenic cells.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2002-0328
PMID: 12738762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
