---
pmid: '28218735'
title: Aurora kinase A regulates Survivin stability through targeting FBXL7 in gastric
  cancer drug resistance and prognosis.
authors:
- Kamran M
- Long ZJ
- Xu D
- Lv SS
- Liu B
- Wang CL
- Xu J
- Lam EW
- Liu Q
journal: Oncogenesis
year: '2017'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC5337621
doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.80
---

# Aurora kinase A regulates Survivin stability through targeting FBXL7 in gastric cancer drug resistance and prognosis.
**Authors:** Kamran M, Long ZJ, Xu D, Lv SS, Liu B, Wang CL, Xu J, Lam EW, Liu Q
**Journal:** Oncogenesis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/oncsis.2016.80](https://doi.org/10.1038/oncsis.2016.80)
**PMC:** [PMC5337621](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5337621/)

## Abstract

1. Oncogenesis. 2017 Feb 20;6(2):e298. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.80.

Aurora kinase A regulates Survivin stability through targeting FBXL7 in gastric 
cancer drug resistance and prognosis.

Kamran M(1), Long ZJ(2), Xu D(3), Lv SS(1), Liu B(1), Wang CL(1), Xu J(1), Lam 
EW(4), Liu Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University, 
Dalian/State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Hematology, The Third Affiliated Hospital; Institute of 
Hematology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)State key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine/Department of Gastric Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Aurora kinase A (AURKA) has been implicated in the regulation of cell cycle 
progression, mitosis and a key number of oncogenic signaling pathways in various 
malignancies. However, little is known about its role in gastric cancer 
prognosis and genotoxic resistance. Here we found that AURKA was highly 
overexpressed in gastric cancer and inversely correlated with disease prognosis. 
Overexpression of AURKA exacerbated gastric cancer drug resistance through 
upregulating the expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Survivin. Conversely, 
we demonstrated that AURKA depletion caused a decrease in Survivin protein 
levels by increasing its ubiquitylation and degradation. Mass spectrometric 
analysis revealed that upon AURKA depletion, Survivin bound to the FBXL7 E3 
ubiquitin ligase, which induced ubiquitin-proteasome degradation of Survivin. In 
addition, we showed that AURKA regulated FBXL7 both at the levels of 
transcription and translation. Moreover, proteomic analysis of nuclear 
AURKA-interacting proteins identified Forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1). We next 
showed that AURKA was required for FBXL7 transcription and that AURKA negatively 
regulated FOXP1-mediated FBXL7 expression. The physiological relevance of the 
regulation of Survivin by AURKA through the FOXP1-FBXL7 axis was further 
underscored by the significant positive correlations between AURKA and Survivin 
expression in gastric cancer patient samples. Moreover, the AURKA depletion or 
kinase inhibition-induced apoptotic cell death could be reversed by Survivin 
ectopic overexpression, further supporting that AURKA regulated Survivin to 
enhance drug resistance. In agreement, inhibition of AURKA synergistically 
enhanced the cytotoxic effect of DNA-damaging agents in cancer cells by 
suppressing Survivin expression. Taken together, our data suggest that AURKA 
restricts Survivin ubiquitylation and degradation in gastric cancer to promote 
drug resistance and hence the AURKA-Survivin axis can be targeted to promote the 
efficacy of DNA-damaging agents in gastric cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/oncsis.2016.80
PMCID: PMC5337621
PMID: 28218735

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest
