---
pmid: '10391218'
title: Mutations in a delta 8-delta 7 sterol isomerase in the tattered mouse and X-linked
  dominant chondrodysplasia punctata. jderry@immunex.com.
authors:
- Derry JM
- Gormally E
- Means GD
- Zhao W
- Meindl A
- Kelley RI
- Boyd Y
- Herman GE
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/10350
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Mutations in a delta 8-delta 7 sterol isomerase in the tattered mouse and X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata. jderry@immunex.com.
**Authors:** Derry JM, Gormally E, Means GD, Zhao W, Meindl A, Kelley RI, Boyd Y, Herman GE
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/10350](https://doi.org/10.1038/10350)

## Abstract

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Jul;22(3):286-90. doi: 10.1038/10350.

Mutations in a delta 8-delta 7 sterol isomerase in the tattered mouse and 
X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata. jderry@immunex.com.

Derry JM(1), Gormally E, Means GD, Zhao W, Meindl A, Kelley RI, Boyd Y, Herman 
GE.

Author information:
(1)Immunex Corporation, Seattle, Washington 98101-2936, USA. jderry@immunex.com

Tattered (Td) is an X-linked, semi-dominant mouse mutation associated with 
prenatal male lethality. Heterozygous females are small and at 4-5 days of age 
develop patches of hyperkeratotic skin where no hair grows, resulting in a 
striping of the coat in adults. Craniofacial anomalies and twisted toes have 
also been observed in some affected females. A potential second allele of Td has 
also been described. The phenotype of Td is similar to that seen in heterozygous 
females with human X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX2, 
alternatively known as X-linked dominant Conradi-Hünermann-Happle syndrome) as 
well as another X-linked, semi-dominant mouse mutation, bare patches (Bpa). The 
Bpa gene has recently been identified and encodes a protein with homology to 
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases that functions in one of the later steps of 
cholesterol biosynthesis. CDPX2 patients display skin defects including linear 
or whorled atrophic and pigmentary lesions, striated hyperkeratosis, coarse 
lusterless hair and alopecia, cataracts and skeletal abnormalities including 
short stature, rhizomelic shortening of the limbs, epiphyseal stippling and 
craniofacial defects (MIM 302960). We have now identified the defect in Td mice 
as a single amino acid substitution in the delta8-delta7 sterol isomerase 
emopamil binding protein (Ebp; encoded by Ebp in mouse) and identified 
alterations in human EBP in seven unrelated CDPX2 patients.

DOI: 10.1038/10350
PMID: 10391218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
