---
pmid: '10066377'
title: VEGF prevents apoptosis of human microvascular endothelial cells via opposing
  effects on MAPK/ERK and SAPK/JNK signaling.
authors:
- Gupta K
- Kshirsagar S
- Li W
- Gui L
- Ramakrishnan S
- Gupta P
- Law PY
- Hebbel RP
journal: Exp Cell Res
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/excr.1998.4359
---

# VEGF prevents apoptosis of human microvascular endothelial cells via opposing effects on MAPK/ERK and SAPK/JNK signaling.
**Authors:** Gupta K, Kshirsagar S, Li W, Gui L, Ramakrishnan S, Gupta P, Law PY, Hebbel RP
**Journal:** Exp Cell Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1006/excr.1998.4359](https://doi.org/10.1006/excr.1998.4359)

## Abstract

1. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Mar 15;247(2):495-504. doi: 10.1006/excr.1998.4359.

VEGF prevents apoptosis of human microvascular endothelial cells via opposing 
effects on MAPK/ERK and SAPK/JNK signaling.

Gupta K(1), Kshirsagar S, Li W, Gui L, Ramakrishnan S, Gupta P, Law PY, Hebbel 
RP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, 55455, USA. gupta014@gold.tc.umn.edu

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), an endothelial cell-specific mitogen, 
promotes endothelial cell survival and angiogenesis. We recently showed that 
VEGF can support the growth of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells 
(HDMEC) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells in serum-free medium. 
Reasoning that VEGF might be modulating apoptotic signal transduction pathways, 
we examined mechanisms involved in the anti-apoptotic effect of VEGF on 
starvation- and ceramide-induced apoptosis in HDMEC. We observed that VEGF 
ameliorated the time-dependent increase in apoptosis, as demonstrated by 
morphologic observations, TUNEL assay, and DNA fragmentation. On the other hand, 
basic fibroblast growth factor only partially prevented apoptosis in 
serum-starved HDMEC; platelet-derived growth factor-BB was completely 
ineffective. VEGF activated the phosphorylation of extracellular signal 
regulated kinase (ERK)1 (p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase; MAPK) and ERK2 
(p42 MAPK) in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Both the VEGF-induced 
activation and its anti-apoptotic effect were prevented by the specific MAPK/ERK 
inhibitor PD98059. The presence of VEGF also inhibited the sustained activation 
of stress-activated protein kinase/c-jun-NH2-kinase (SAPK/JNK) caused by serum 
starvation and ceramide treatment. Activation of the MAPK pathway together with 
inhibition of SAPK/JNK activity by VEGF appears to be a key event in determining 
whether an endothelial cell survives or undergoes programmed cell death.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/excr.1998.4359
PMID: 10066377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
