---
pmid: '8167223'
title: Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human sperm antigen (HE2)
  specifically expressed in the proximal epididymis.
authors:
- Osterhoff C
- Kirchhoff C
- Krull N
- Ivell R
journal: Biol Reprod
year: '1994'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1095/biolreprod50.3.516
---

# Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human sperm antigen (HE2) specifically expressed in the proximal epididymis.
**Authors:** Osterhoff C, Kirchhoff C, Krull N, Ivell R
**Journal:** Biol Reprod (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1095/biolreprod50.3.516](https://doi.org/10.1095/biolreprod50.3.516)

## Abstract

1. Biol Reprod. 1994 Mar;50(3):516-25. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod50.3.516.

Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human sperm antigen (HE2) 
specifically expressed in the proximal epididymis.

Osterhoff C(1), Kirchhoff C, Krull N, Ivell R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Hamburg, Germany.

A novel human cDNA encoding a small secretory glycopeptide specifically 
expressed within the caput and proximal corpus regions of the human epididymis, 
HE2, has been cloned and sequenced. Southern hybridization analysis showed it to 
be derived from a single-copy gene. A subclone containing the coding region of 
the mature peptide was used to generate the putatively encoded peptide as a 
10,000 M(r) recombinant fusion protein in a bacterial expression system. This 
recombinant HE2 protein, as well as an oligopeptide deduced from the 
open-reading frame, was used to raise polyclonal antisera. Immunohistochemistry 
and immunofluorescence showed that the predicted HE2 peptide is present in the 
epididymal epithelium and on the sperm surface, where it adopts a typical 
antigenic pattern with a subacrosomal equatorial distribution on the sperm head.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod50.3.516
PMID: 8167223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
