---
pmid: '12604243'
title: Effect of antisense oligodeoxynucleotide for sepiapterin reductase on the viability
  of PC12 cells in the presence of exogenous carbonyl compounds.
authors:
- Fujimoto K
- Sakurai M
- Kawase M
- Katoh S
journal: Chem Biol Interact
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00220-x
---

# Effect of antisense oligodeoxynucleotide for sepiapterin reductase on the viability of PC12 cells in the presence of exogenous carbonyl compounds.
**Authors:** Fujimoto K, Sakurai M, Kawase M, Katoh S
**Journal:** Chem Biol Interact (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00220-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00220-x)

## Abstract

1. Chem Biol Interact. 2003 Feb 1;143-144:583-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00220-x.

Effect of antisense oligodeoxynucleotide for sepiapterin reductase on the 
viability of PC12 cells in the presence of exogenous carbonyl compounds.

Fujimoto K(1), Sakurai M, Kawase M, Katoh S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Meikai University School of Dentistry, Sakado, 
350-0283, Saitama, Japan.

Sepiapterin reductase (SPR) is known as an essential enzyme for the biosynthesis 
of tetrahydrobiopterin. SPR belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase 
(SDR) family and also reduces various exogenous carbonyl compounds including 
phenylpropanedione. We found in the present study that phenylpropanedione 
decreased the rate of proliferation of PC12 cells and that this rate was further 
diminished by the transfection of the cells with antisense oligodeoxynucleotide 
for SPR mRNA. When the cells were treated with N-acetylserotonin, a specific 
inhibitor of SPR, in the presence of phenylpropanedione, the cell number 
decreased to almost the same level as when the cells were transfected with the 
antisense oligodeoxynucleotide. Thus, the SDR activity of SPR in PC12 cells may 
serve for detoxification of exogenous carbonyl compounds besides functioning as 
a specific enzyme for the formation of tetrahydrobiopterin.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-2797(02)00220-x
PMID: 12604243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
