---
pmid: '31607477'
title: The role of selenium-mediated redox signaling by selenophosphate synthetase
  1 (SEPHS1) in hESCs.
authors:
- Lee MO
- Cho YS
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.09.123
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The role of selenium-mediated redox signaling by selenophosphate synthetase 1 (SEPHS1) in hESCs.
**Authors:** Lee MO, Cho YS
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.09.123](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.09.123)

## Abstract

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019 Dec 3;520(2):406-412. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.09.123. Epub 2019 Oct 11.

The role of selenium-mediated redox signaling by selenophosphate synthetase 1 
(SEPHS1) in hESCs.

Lee MO(1), Cho YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Stem Cell Convergence Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
molee@kribb.re.kr.
(2)Immunotherapy Convergence Research Center, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon, Republic of Korea; Department of 
Bioscience, KRIBB School, University of Science & Technology (UST), Daejeon, 
Republic of Korea.

Selenium (Se) plays a vital role in reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis 
and redox regulation in intracellular signaling via selenocysteine (Sec), known 
as the 21st proteinogenic amino acid, but its specific biological functions in 
development and disease remain undiscovered. In this study, we explored the role 
of selenophosphate synthetase 1 (SEPHS1) in the pluripotency maintenance and 
reprogramming. We found that high level of SEPHS1 is retained in 
undifferentiated embryonic stem cells (ESCs), which is decreased during their 
differentiation. SEPHS1 knockdown significantly reduced reprogramming 
efficiency, proving that SEPHS1 is required for acquisition of pluripotency. 
However, SEPHS1 knockdown did not affect the expression of significant 
pluripotency genes, suggesting that SEPHS1 may be involved in the survival of 
pluripotent stem cells rather than in the regulation of pluripotency genes. 
Transcriptome analysis revealed altered expression of the gene set related to 
the ROS pathway and apoptosis in SEPHS1-knockdown cells. We also demonstrated 
the role of SEPHS1 in human ESC clonogenicity, and we found improved single-cell 
survival of hESCs by selenium treatment in a concentration-dependent manner. Our 
study implies that hSEPHS1 is a regulator of selenium-mediated redox-signaling 
in human pluripotent stem cells and plays a role in their survival.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.09.123
PMID: 31607477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
