---
pmid: '9700193'
title: Mutations in PEX10 is the cause of Zellweger peroxisome deficiency syndrome
  of complementation group B.
authors:
- Okumoto K
- Itoh R
- Shimozawa N
- Suzuki Y
- Tamura S
- Kondo N
- Fujiki Y
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1998'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1399
---

# Mutations in PEX10 is the cause of Zellweger peroxisome deficiency syndrome of complementation group B.
**Authors:** Okumoto K, Itoh R, Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Tamura S, Kondo N, Fujiki Y
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/7.9.1399](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/7.9.1399)

## Abstract

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Sep;7(9):1399-405. doi: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1399.

Mutations in PEX10 is the cause of Zellweger peroxisome deficiency syndrome of 
complementation group B.

Okumoto K(1), Itoh R, Shimozawa N, Suzuki Y, Tamura S, Kondo N, Fujiki Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, 6-10-1 
Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD), such as Zellweger syndrome, are autosomal 
recessive diseases caused by a deficiency in peroxisome assembly as well as a 
malfunction of the peroxisomes, where at least 10 genotypes have been reported. 
We have isolated a human PEX10 cDNA (HsPEX10) by an expressed sequence tag 
homology search on a human DNA database using yeast PEX10 from Hansenula 
polymorpha, followed by screening of a human liver cDNA library. This cDNA 
encodes a peroxisomal protein (a peroxin Pex10p) comprising 326 amino acids, 
with two putative transmembrane segments and a C3HC4zinc finger RING motif. Both 
the N- and C-terminal regions of Pex10p are exposed to the cytosol, as assessed 
by an expression study of epitope-tagged Pex10p. HsPEX10 expression 
morphologically and biochemically restored peroxisome biogenesis in fibroblasts 
from Zellweger patients of complementation group B in Japan (complementation 
group VII in the USA). One patient (PBDB-01) possessed a homozygous, 
inactivating mutation, a 2 bp deletion immediately upstream of the RING motif, 
which resulted in a frameshift, altering 65 amino acids from the normal. This 
implies that the C-terminal part, including the RING finger, is required for 
biological function of Pex10p. PEX10 cDNA derived from patient PBDB-01 was 
defective in peroxisome-restoring activity when expressed in patient 
fibroblasts. These results demonstrate that mutation in PEX10 is the genetic 
cause of complementation group B PBD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/7.9.1399
PMID: 9700193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
