---
pmid: '24270572'
title: USP10 inhibits genotoxic NF-κB activation by MCPIP1-facilitated deubiquitination
  of NEMO.
authors:
- Niu J
- Shi Y
- Xue J
- Miao R
- Huang S
- Wang T
- Wu J
- Fu M
- Wu ZH
journal: EMBO J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC3981146
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.247
---

# USP10 inhibits genotoxic NF-κB activation by MCPIP1-facilitated deubiquitination of NEMO.
**Authors:** Niu J, Shi Y, Xue J, Miao R, Huang S, Wang T, Wu J, Fu M, Wu ZH
**Journal:** EMBO J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2013.247](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2013.247)
**PMC:** [PMC3981146](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3981146/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2013 Dec 11;32(24):3206-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.247. Epub 2013 Nov
 22.

USP10 inhibits genotoxic NF-κB activation by MCPIP1-facilitated deubiquitination 
of NEMO.

Niu J(1), Shi Y, Xue J, Miao R, Huang S, Wang T, Wu J, Fu M, Wu ZH.

Author information:
(1)1] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA [2] Center for Cancer Research, 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.

DNA damage-induced activation of the transcription factor NF-κB plays an 
important role in the cellular response to genotoxic stress. However, 
uncontrolled NF-κB activation upon DNA damage may lead to deleterious 
consequences. Although the mechanisms mediating genotoxic NF-κB activation have 
been elucidated, how this signalling is terminated remains poorly understood. 
Here, we show that the CCCH-type zinc finger-containing protein MCPIP1 (monocyte 
chemotactic protein-1-induced protein-1; also known as ZC3H12A) is induced upon 
genotoxic treatment in an NF-κB-dependent manner. MCPIP1 upregulation reduces 
NEMO linear ubiquitylation, resulting in decreased activation of IKK and NF-κB. 
NEMO ubiquitylation is decreased through the deubiquitinase USP10, which 
interacts with NEMO via MCPIP1 upon genotoxic stress. USP10 association with 
NEMO leads to removal of NEMO-attached linear polyubiquitin chains and 
subsequent inhibition of the genotoxic NF-κB signalling cascade. Consistently, 
USP10 is required for MCPIP1-mediated inhibition of genotoxic NF-κB activation 
and promotion of apoptosis. Thus, by mediating USP10-dependent deubiquitination 
of NEMO, MCPIP1 induction serves as a negative feedback mechanism for 
attenuating genotoxic NF-κB activation.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2013.247
PMCID: PMC3981146
PMID: 24270572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
