---
pmid: '16289477'
title: The cell cycle regulator p27Kip1 interacts with MCM7, a DNA replication licensing
  factor, to inhibit initiation of DNA replication.
authors:
- Nallamshetty S
- Crook M
- Boehm M
- Yoshimoto T
- Olive M
- Nabel EG
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.10.028
---

# The cell cycle regulator p27Kip1 interacts with MCM7, a DNA replication licensing factor, to inhibit initiation of DNA replication.
**Authors:** Nallamshetty S, Crook M, Boehm M, Yoshimoto T, Olive M, Nabel EG
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2005.10.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.10.028)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2005 Dec 5;579(29):6529-36. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.10.028.
Epub  2005 Nov 2.

The cell cycle regulator p27Kip1 interacts with MCM7, a DNA replication 
licensing factor, to inhibit initiation of DNA replication.

Nallamshetty S(1), Crook M, Boehm M, Yoshimoto T, Olive M, Nabel EG.

Author information:
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Building 50, Room 4523, 50 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The G1/S phase restriction point is a critical checkpoint that interfaces 
between the cell cycle regulatory machinery and DNA replicator proteins. Here, 
we report a novel function for the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27Kip1 in 
inhibiting DNA replication through its interaction with MCM7, a DNA replication 
protein that is essential for initiation of DNA replication and maintenance of 
genomic integrity. We find that p27Kip1 binds the conserved minichromosome 
maintenance (MCM) domain of MCM7. The proteins interact endogenously in vivo in 
a growth factor-dependent manner, such that the carboxyl terminal domain of 
p27Kip1 inhibits DNA replication independent of its function as a 
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. This novel function of p27Kip1 may prevent 
inappropriate initiation of DNA replication prior to S phase.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.10.028
PMID: 16289477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
