---
pmid: '1651918'
title: Molecular cloning of the DNA and expression and characterization of rat testes
  fructose-6-phosphate,2-kinase:fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase.
authors:
- Sakata J
- Abe Y
- Uyeda K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
---

# Molecular cloning of the DNA and expression and characterization of rat testes fructose-6-phosphate,2-kinase:fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase.
**Authors:** Sakata J, Abe Y, Uyeda K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1991)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 25;266(24):15764-70.

Molecular cloning of the DNA and expression and characterization of rat testes 
fructose-6-phosphate,2-kinase:fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase.

Sakata J(1), Abe Y, Uyeda K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.

We have isolated and sequenced two overlapping cDNA fragments which could encode 
the complete amino acid sequence of rat testis 
fructose-6-phosphate,2-kinase:fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase. Northern blot 
analysis revealed that the major 2-kilobase mRNA isolated from rat testis 
hybridized with a cDNA fragment. A full length cDNA, which encoded a protein of 
468 amino acids, was constructed and expressed in Escherichia coli. The 
expressed protein, purified to homogeneity, showed a Mr of 55,000 by gel 
electrophoresis under denaturing conditions, compared to the deduced Mr of 
54,023. Fru-6-P,2-kinase:Fru-2,6-bisphosphatase with the same Mr 55,000 was also 
present in rat testis extract. The active enzyme was a dimer as judged by 
molecular sieve filtration. The expressed enzyme was bifunctional with specific 
activities of 90 and 22 milliunits/mg of the kinase and the phosphatase 
activities, respectively. Various kinetic constants of the expressed fructose 
6-P,2-kinase were KmFru 6-P = 85 microM and KmATP = 270 microM, and those of 
fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase were KmFru 2,6-P2 = 21 microM and KiFru 6-P = 3.4 
microM. The enzyme was phosphorylated by Fru-2,6[2-32P]P2 and also by protein 
kinase C, but not by cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which is in contrast to the 
liver and heart isozymes.

PMID: 1651918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
