---
pmid: '20357208'
title: Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 modulates the transcriptional activity of the mineralocorticoid
  receptor and regulates expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
authors:
- Kino T
- Jaffe H
- Amin ND
- Chakrabarti M
- Zheng YL
- Chrousos GP
- Pant HC
journal: Mol Endocrinol
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2870940
doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0395
---

# Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 modulates the transcriptional activity of the mineralocorticoid receptor and regulates expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
**Authors:** Kino T, Jaffe H, Amin ND, Chakrabarti M, Zheng YL, Chrousos GP, Pant HC
**Journal:** Mol Endocrinol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1210/me.2009-0395](https://doi.org/10.1210/me.2009-0395)
**PMC:** [PMC2870940](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2870940/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):941-52. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0395. Epub 2010
Mar  31.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 modulates the transcriptional activity of the 
mineralocorticoid receptor and regulates expression of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor.

Kino T(1), Jaffe H, Amin ND, Chakrabarti M, Zheng YL, Chrousos GP, Pant HC.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Molecular Hormone Action, Program in Reproductive and Adult 
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1109, 
USA. kinot@mail.nih.gov

Glucocorticoids, major end effectors of the stress response, play an essential 
role in the homeostasis of the central nervous system (CNS) and contribute to 
memory consolidation and emotional control through their intracellular 
receptors, the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors. Cyclin-dependent 
kinase 5 (CDK5), on the other hand, plays important roles in the morphogenesis 
and functions of the central nervous system, and its aberrant activation has 
been associated with development of neurodegenerative disorders. We previously 
reported that CDK5 phosphorylated the glucocorticoid receptor and modulated its 
transcriptional activity. Here we found that CDK5 also regulated 
mineralocorticoid receptor-induced transcriptional activity by phosphorylating 
multiple serine and threonine residues located in its N-terminal domain through 
physical interaction. Aldosterone and dexamethasone, respectively, increased and 
suppressed mRNA/protein expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
in rat cortical neuronal cells, whereas the endogenous glucocorticoid 
corticosterone showed a biphasic effect. CDK5 enhanced the effect of aldosterone 
and dexamethasone on BDNF expression. Because this neurotrophic factor plays 
critical roles in neuronal viability, synaptic plasticity, consolidation of 
memory, and emotional changes, we suggest that aberrant activation of CDK5 might 
influence these functions through corticosteroid receptors/BDNF.

DOI: 10.1210/me.2009-0395
PMCID: PMC2870940
PMID: 20357208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
