---
pmid: '20969868'
title: LIM domain protein FHL1B interacts with PP2A catalytic β subunit--a novel cell
  cycle regulatory pathway.
authors:
- Wong CH
- Fung YW
- Ng EK
- Lee SM
- Waye MM
- Tsui SK
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.10.022
---

# LIM domain protein FHL1B interacts with PP2A catalytic β subunit--a novel cell cycle regulatory pathway.
**Authors:** Wong CH, Fung YW, Ng EK, Lee SM, Waye MM, Tsui SK
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2010.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2010.10.022)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2010 Nov 19;584(22):4511-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.10.022.
Epub  2010 Oct 20.

LIM domain protein FHL1B interacts with PP2A catalytic β subunit--a novel cell 
cycle regulatory pathway.

Wong CH(1), Fung YW, Ng EK, Lee SM, Waye MM, Tsui SK.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, 
N.T., Hong Kong.

Four-and-a-half LIM domain protein 1B (FHL1B) is an alternatively-spliced 
isoform of FHL1. In this study, FHL1B was demonstrated to interact with the β 
catalytic subunit (Cβ) of a type 2A protein phosphatase (PP2A) by yeast 
two-hybrid screening. Domain studies using a small-scale yeast two-hybrid 
interaction assay revealed the mediation of protein-protein interaction by 
FHL1B's C-terminus. Interaction between FHL1B and PP2A was further verified by 
co-immunoprecipitation. FHL1B was also shown to shuttle between nucleus and 
cytoplasm at different phases of the cell cycle. These data suggest that the 
FHL1B/PP2A(Cβ) interaction may illustrate a novel cell-cycle regulatory pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.10.022
PMID: 20969868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
