---
pmid: '9303310'
title: p25rum1 promotes proteolysis of the mitotic B-cyclin p56cdc13 during G1 of
  the fission yeast cell cycle.
authors:
- Correa-Bordes J
- Gulli MP
- Nurse P
journal: EMBO J
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1170092
doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.15.4657
---

# p25rum1 promotes proteolysis of the mitotic B-cyclin p56cdc13 during G1 of the fission yeast cell cycle.
**Authors:** Correa-Bordes J, Gulli MP, Nurse P
**Journal:** EMBO J (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/emboj/16.15.4657](https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.15.4657)
**PMC:** [PMC1170092](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1170092/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 1997 Aug 1;16(15):4657-64. doi: 10.1093/emboj/16.15.4657.

p25rum1 promotes proteolysis of the mitotic B-cyclin p56cdc13 during G1 of the 
fission yeast cell cycle.

Correa-Bordes J(1), Gulli MP, Nurse P.

Author information:
(1)Cell Cycle Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe CDK inhibitor p25rum1 plays a major 
role in regulating cell cycle progression during G1. Here we show that p25rum1 
associates with the CDK p34cdc2/p56cdc13 during G1 in normally cycling cells and 
is required for the rapid proteolysis of p56cdc13. In vitro binding data 
indicate that p25rum1 has specificity for the B-cyclin p56cdc13 component of the 
CDK and can bind the cyclin even in the absence of the cyclin destruction box. 
At the G1-S-phase transition, p25rum1 levels decrease and p56cd13 levels 
increase. We also show that on release from a G1 block, the rapid disappearance 
of p25rum1 requires the activity of the CDK p34cdc2/cig1p and that this same CDK 
phosphorylates p25rum1 in vitro. We propose that the binding of p25rum1 to 
p56cdc13 promotes cyclin proteolysis during G1, with p25rum1 possibly acting as 
an adaptor protein, promoting transfer of p56cdc13 to the proteolytic machinery. 
At the G1-S-phase transition, p25rum1 becomes targeted for proteolysis by a 
mechanism which may involve p34cdc2/cig1p phosphorylation. As a consequence, at 
this point in the cell cycle p56cdc13 proteolysis is inhibited, leading to a 
rise of p56cdc13 levels in preparation for mitosis.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/16.15.4657
PMCID: PMC1170092
PMID: 9303310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

The fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe CDK inhibitor p25rum1 plays a major role in regulating cell cycle progression during G1. Here we show that p25rum1 associates with the CDK p34cdc2/p56cdc13 during G1 in normally cycling cells and is required for the rapid proteolysis of p56cdc13. In vitro binding data indicate that p25rum1 has specificity for the B-cyclin p56cdc13 component of the CDK and can bind the cyclin even in the absence of the cyclin destruction box. At the G1-S-phase transition, p25rum1 levels decrease and p56cd13 levels increase. We also show that on release from a G1 block, the rapid disappearance of p25rum1 requires the activity of the CDK p34cdc2/cig1p and that this same CDK phosphorylates p25rum1 in vitro. We propose that the binding of p25rum1 to p56cdc13 promotes cyclin proteolysis during G1, with p25rum1 possibly acting as an adaptor protein, promoting transfer of p56cdc13 to the proteolytic machinery. At the G1-S-phase transition, p25rum1 becomes targeted for proteolysis by a mechanism which may involve p34cdc2/cig1p phosphorylation. As a consequence, at this point in the cell cycle p56cdc13 proteolysis is inhibited, leading to a rise of p56cdc13 levels in preparation for mitosis.
