---
pmid: '10713667'
title: Specific interaction between 14-3-3 isoforms and the human CDC25B phosphatase.
authors:
- Mils V
- Baldin V
- Goubin F
- Pinta I
- Papin C
- Waye M
- Eychene A
- Ducommun B
journal: Oncogene
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203419
---

# Specific interaction between 14-3-3 isoforms and the human CDC25B phosphatase.
**Authors:** Mils V, Baldin V, Goubin F, Pinta I, Papin C, Waye M, Eychene A, Ducommun B
**Journal:** Oncogene (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1203419](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1203419)

## Abstract

1. Oncogene. 2000 Mar 2;19(10):1257-65. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203419.

Specific interaction between 14-3-3 isoforms and the human CDC25B phosphatase.

Mils V(1), Baldin V, Goubin F, Pinta I, Papin C, Waye M, Eychene A, Ducommun B.

Author information:
(1)LBCMCP - CNRS, Université Paul Sabatier, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062 
Toulouse cedex, France.

CDC25 dual-specificity phosphatases are essential regulators that activate 
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at critical stages of the cell cycle. In human 
cells, CDC25A and C are involved in the control of G1/S and G2/M respectively, 
whereas CDC25B is proposed to act both in S phase and G2/M. Evidence for an 
interaction between CDC25 phosphatases and members of the 14-3-3 protein family 
has been obtained in vitro and in vivo in several organisms. On the basis of the 
work performed with CDC25C, it has been proposed that phosphorylation is 
required to mediate the interaction with 14-3-3. Here we have examined the 
molecular basis of the interaction between CDC25B phosphatases and 14-3-3 
proteins. We show that in the two-hybrid assay all three splice variants of 
CDC25B interact similarly and strongly with 14-3-3eta, beta and zeta proteins, 
but poorly with epsilon and Theta. In vitro, CDC25B interacts at a low level 
with 14-3-3beta, epsilon, zeta, eta, and Theta isoforms. This interaction is not 
increased upon phosphorylation of CDC25B by CHK1 and is not abolished by 
dephosphorylation. In contrast, a specific, strong interaction between CDC25B 
and 14-3-3zeta and eta isoforms is revealed by a deletion of 288 residues in the 
amino-terminal region of CDC25B. This interaction requires the integrity of Ser 
323, although it is independent of phosphorylation. Thus, interaction between 
14-3-3 proteins and CDC25B is regulated in a manner that is different from that 
with CDC25C. We propose that, in addition to a low affinity binding site that is 
available for all 14-3-3 isoforms, post-translational modification of CDC25B in 
vivo exposes a high-affinity binding site that is specific for the zeta and 
eta14-3-3 isoforms.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1203419
PMID: 10713667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
