---
pmid: '25568314'
title: Structural and functional study of D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase.
authors:
- Qin Y
- Ke J
- Gu X
- Fang J
- Wang W
- Cong Q
- Li J
- Tan J
- Brunzelle JS
- Zhang C
- Jiang Y
- Melcher K
- Li JP
- Xu HE
- Ding K
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2015'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4335203
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.602201
---

# Structural and functional study of D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase.
**Authors:** Qin Y, Ke J, Gu X, Fang J, Wang W, Cong Q, Li J, Tan J, Brunzelle JS, Zhang C, Jiang Y, Melcher K, Li JP, Xu HE, Ding K
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M114.602201](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M114.602201)
**PMC:** [PMC4335203](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4335203/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 20;290(8):4620-4630. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.602201. Epub 
2015 Jan 7.

Structural and functional study of D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase.

Qin Y(1), Ke J(2), Gu X(3), Fang J(4), Wang W(5), Cong Q(5), Li J(5), Tan J(6), 
Brunzelle JS(7), Zhang C(6), Jiang Y(6), Melcher K(3), Li JP(8), Xu HE(9), Ding 
K(10).

Author information:
(1)From the Glycochemistry and Glycobiology Laboratory, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Pudong, 
Shanghai 201203, China,; the VARI-SIMM Center, Center for Structure and Function 
of Drug Targets, Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Sciences, Center for Structural Biology and Drug 
Discovery, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503,. 
Electronic address: Jiyuan.Ke@vai.org.
(3)Laboratory of Structural Sciences, Center for Structural Biology and Drug 
Discovery, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503.
(4)From the Glycochemistry and Glycobiology Laboratory, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Pudong, 
Shanghai 201203, China,; the Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, University of Uppsala, Biomedical Center, SE-751 23 Uppsala, 
Sweden, and.
(5)From the Glycochemistry and Glycobiology Laboratory, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Pudong, 
Shanghai 201203, China.
(6)the VARI-SIMM Center, Center for Structure and Function of Drug Targets, Key 
Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.
(7)the Life Sciences Collaborative Access Team, Synchrotron Research Center, 
Northwestern University, Argonne, Illinois 60439.
(8)the Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of 
Uppsala, Biomedical Center, SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden, and.
(9)the VARI-SIMM Center, Center for Structure and Function of Drug Targets, Key 
Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China,; Laboratory of Structural Sciences, 
Center for Structural Biology and Drug Discovery, Van Andel Research Institute, 
Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503,. Electronic address: Eric.Xu@vai.org.
(10)From the Glycochemistry and Glycobiology Laboratory, Shanghai Institute of 
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zu Chong Zhi Road, Pudong, 
Shanghai 201203, China,. Electronic address: dingkan@simm.ac.cn.

Heparan sulfate (HS) is a glycosaminoglycan present on the cell surface and in 
the extracellular matrix, which interacts with diverse signal molecules and is 
essential for many physiological processes including embryonic development, cell 
growth, inflammation, and blood coagulation. D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase (Glce) is 
a crucial enzyme in HS synthesis, converting D-glucuronic acid to L-iduronic 
acid to increase HS flexibility. This modification of HS is important for 
protein ligand recognition. We have determined the crystal structures of Glce in 
apo-form (unliganded) and in complex with heparin hexasaccharide (product of 
Glce following O-sulfation), both in a stable dimer conformation. A Glce dimer 
contains two catalytic sites, each at a positively charged cleft in C-terminal 
α-helical domains binding one negatively charged hexasaccharide. Based on the 
structural and mutagenesis studies, three tyrosine residues, Tyr(468), Tyr(528), 
and Tyr(546), in the active site were found to be crucial for the enzymatic 
activity. The complex structure also reveals the mechanism of product inhibition 
(i.e. 2-O- and 6-O-sulfation of HS keeps the C5 carbon of L-iduronic acid away 
from the active-site tyrosine residues). Our structural and functional data 
advance understanding of the key modification in HS biosynthesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M114.602201
PMCID: PMC4335203
PMID: 25568314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

Heparan sulfate (HS) is a glycosaminoglycan present on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix, which interacts with diverse signal molecules and is essential for many physiological processes including embryonic development, cell growth, inflammation, and blood coagulation. d -Glucuronyl C5-epimerase (Glce) is a crucial enzyme in HS synthesis, converting d -glucuronic acid to l -iduronic acid to increase HS flexibility. This modification of HS is important for protein ligand recognition. We have determined the crystal structures of Glce in apo-form (unliganded) and in complex with heparin hexasaccharide (product of Glce following O -sulfation), both in a stable dimer conformation. A Glce dimer contains two catalytic sites, each at a positively charged cleft in C-terminal α-helical domains binding one negatively charged hexasaccharide. Based on the structural and mutagenesis studies, three tyrosine residues, Tyr 468 , Tyr 528 , and Tyr 546 , in the active site were found to be crucial for the enzymatic activity. The complex structure also reveals the mechanism of product inhibition ( i.e. 2- O - and 6- O -sulfation of HS keeps the C5 carbon of l -iduronic acid away from the active-site tyrosine residues). Our structural and functional data advance understanding of the key modification in HS biosynthesis.

Introduction

Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are macromolecules widely expressed on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix of all animal tissues. They consist of a core protein with covalently attached heparan sulfate (HS) 4 chains ( 1 ). HS, a negatively charged polysaccharide, binds to a variety of proteins, including growth factors, chemokines, and interleukins ( 2 ). As such, it can regulate a wide variety of biological activities, including embryonic development, cell growth, inflammatory response, blood coagulation, tumor metastasis, and virus infection ( 2 , 3 ). Heparin, a special form of highly sulfated HS derived from porcine intestine, has been widely used as an injectable anticoagulant since the 1930s.

A heparan sulfate chain is synthesized in vivo by several steps: tetrasaccharide linkage formation, chain elongation, N -deacetylation/ N -sulfation, epimerization, and O -sulfation ( Fig. 1 A ). d -Glucuronyl C5-epimerase (Glce) is a key enzyme in HS/heparin synthesis, converting d -glucuronic acid (GlcA) to l -iduronic acid (IdoA) by C5 epimerization at the polymer level ( 4 ) ( Fig. 1 B ). The epimerization reaction is reversible in vitro but irreversible in vivo ( 5 ). The epimerization step increases the flexibility of the HS chain and is essential for the function of HS in ligand recognition and cell signaling ( 6 ). Targeted disruption of the Glce gene ( Hsepi ) in mice resulted in neonatal death and defects of kidney, lung, and skeletal development ( 7 ), which strongly indicates the crucial role of Glce in animal development. It has also been reported that Glce suppresses the proliferation of human breast cancer cells ( 8 ) and small-cell lung cancer cells ( 9 ), which suggests that Glce may be a tumor suppressor. Quite recently, we showed that Glce depletion promoted PC12 cell neuritogenesis induced by nerve growth factor ( 10 ). In addition, the modification of HS by Glce is critical for controlling the binding or activity of molecules that guide early lymphoid tissue morphogenesis and B lymphocyte maturation and differentiation ( 11 , 12 ).

Today, diverse low molecular weight heparins show great potential as anticoagulants and in cancer, antiviral, and anti-inflammatory therapies ( 13 ). However, the separation and purification of heparin oligosaccharides from the animal tissues are difficult and inefficient. Thus, a promising approach is to synthesize specific heparin oligosaccharides using rational chemoenzymatic design ( 14 , 15 ). To unveil the catalytic mechanism and substrate recognition pattern of HS-modifying enzymes is of critical importance to achieve such a goal. Here, we report the first crystal structures of Glce, in apo-form (unliganded) and in complex with heparin hexasaccharide, which is the product of Glce following 2- O -sulfation on iduronic acid and 6- O -sulfation on N -sulfoglucosamine. Based on the structural and functional data, we identify the active site of Glce and propose the mechanism of product inhibition of Glce in vivo . This work advances our understanding of the HS synthesis reaction and will aid in the development of therapeutic heparin mimics as well as the inhibitors of Glce.

DISCUSSION

Here, we report that zebrafish Glce has a dimeric structure. Recently, it has been reported that Glce from the marine bacterium Bermanella marisrubri is also a dimer ( 30 ). Together, these findings strongly support the concept that Glce functions as a dimer. Each Glce dimer contains two active sites at the C-terminal α-helical domains ( Fig. 3 B ). A long HS chain may thread through the two active sites, or two such polysaccharide chains may simultaneously bind to two active sites of the Glce dimer to allow HS modifications. There are three enzymes involved in epimerization of hexuronic acid at the polymer level: Glce, C5-mannuronan epimerase, and DS-epimerase 1. Our Glce structure revealed that three tyrosine residues (Tyr 468 , Tyr 528 , and Tyr 546 ) are crucial for enzymatic activity and are close to the C5-carboxyl group of IDS3, which probably participates in the catalytic reaction as bases for proton abstraction and donation. A Dali structural alignment search ( 31 ) revealed many polysaccharide hydrolases and lyases whose structures are distantly related to the Glce C-terminal α-helical domain (the catalytic domain in Glce), including endo-β-1,4-glucanase (PDB code 1WZZ, a superposition RMSD of 3.3 Å of 215 residues), family 8 xylanase (PDB code 1XWQ, a superposition RMSD of 3.8 Å of 229 residues), chitosanase (PDB code 1V5D, a superposition RMSD of 3.6 Å of 217 residues), and pectate lyase (PDB code 1GXM, a superposition RMSD of 4.0 Å of 211 residues) with Z -scores from 14.4 to 11.7. The C5-mannuronan epimerase has a right-handed parallel β-helix structure ( 32 ) (PDB code 2PYG), which is completely different from the Glce structure. Dali structural analysis of C5-mannuronan epimerase showed high structural similarity to β-helix polysaccharide hydrolases and lyases, and it catalyzes its reaction using a tyrosine and a histidine acting as a proton acceptor and donor, respectively ( 32 ). In a computational model of DS-epimerase 1, a tyrosine and two histidine residues were identified as potential proton acceptor/donor residues ( 33 ). These three enzymes do not share any sequence and structural homology that would suggest a common evolutionary origin, but all three share a similar catalytic mechanism of proton abstraction and readdition using different amino acids ( 34 , 35 ). Also, both the lyases and the polymer-level epimerases have essentially a common mechanism of action, sharing a similar proton abstraction mechanism and an enolate anion intermediate.

It was previously reported that the three sugars at the non-reducing end in front of the epimerization site could influence the reversibility of epimerization ( 36 ). This suggests that Glce could recognize at least one more sugar residue at the non-reducing end in front of ΔUAP1, which would be adjacent to the Tyr 149 residue. Tyr 149 is far from the Tyr 468 , Tyr 528 , and Tyr 546 residues; it forms a hydrogen bond with the 2- O -sulfate of ΔUAP1. It should be noted that the actual substrate for Glce does not have 2- O -sulfation. Thus, it is likely that Tyr 149 forms a crucial hydrogen bond with the 2-hydroxyl group of the residue in the actual substrate that is at the ΔUAP1 position and is probably involved in recognition of the sugar residue (GlcA or IdoA) at that position.

The epimerization reaction is irreversible in vivo ( 5 , 25 ), thereby increasing the number of IdoA units in the HS chain. O -Sulfation by the downstream O -sulfotransferases is probably a key means of maintaining the epimerization reaction in one direction, through inhibition of Glce activity. The structure of the complex suggests that the mechanism of inhibition is through a binding conformation that is not conducive to catalysis ( i.e. the crucial catalytic residues are kept away from the C5 atom of IDS3 due to 2- O -sulfation and 6- O -sulfation). To allow efficient, consecutive modifications of HS by Glce and O -sulfotransferases, these enzymes need to be in close proximity and may interact. The interaction of Glce with 2- O -sulfotransferase in mammalian cultured cells has been reported, and lack of the 2- O -sulfotransferase caused a decrease of epimerase activity and protein stability ( 37 ). Further, it was reported that Drosophila Glce, 2- O -sulfotransferase, and 6- O -sulfotransferase could physically interact ( 28 ). Here, we used the AlphaScreen in vitro binding assay to examine whether Glce and O -sulfotransferases could physically interact ( Fig. 6 D ). We found that the 2- O -sulfotransferase strongly interacted with Glce, and the 6- O -sulfotransferase proteins also clearly interacted with Glce ( Fig. 6 E ). The data support a model in which Glce and O -sulfotransferases associate to form a protein complex that allows efficient coupling of the epimerization and O -sulfation reactions. The enzymes' association promotes the accumulation of IdoA in the final HS polysaccharide product.

In summary, we report the first dimeric structures of Glce in apo-form and in complex with heparin hexasaccharide. Detailed structural analysis revealed that Tyr 468 , Tyr 528 , and Tyr 546 at the active site are crucial for catalysis. We provide structural evidence that heparin with O -sulfation binds to the Glce active site in a conformation that is not conducive for catalysis. Finally, we demonstrated the direct interaction of Glce with O -sulfotransferases, which couples the epimerization and O -sulfation reactions to ensure efficient HS chain modification in one direction. The structural and functional data advance understanding of the key epimerization step in the HS synthesis and will facilitate the use of Glce in rational biosynthesis of bioactive heparin oligosaccharides for therapeutic applications.
