---
pmid: '23020607'
title: BAT1, a putative acyltransferase, modulates brassinosteroid levels in Arabidopsis.
authors:
- Choi S
- Cho YH
- Kim K
- Matsui M
- Son SH
- Kim SK
- Fujioka S
- Hwang I
journal: Plant J
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/tpj.12036
---

# BAT1, a putative acyltransferase, modulates brassinosteroid levels in Arabidopsis.
**Authors:** Choi S, Cho YH, Kim K, Matsui M, Son SH, Kim SK, Fujioka S, Hwang I
**Journal:** Plant J (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tpj.12036](https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.12036)

## Abstract

1. Plant J. 2013 Feb;73(3):380-91. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12036. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

BAT1, a putative acyltransferase, modulates brassinosteroid levels in 
Arabidopsis.

Choi S(1), Cho YH, Kim K, Matsui M, Son SH, Kim SK, Fujioka S, Hwang I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, POSTECH, Pohang, 790-784, Korea.

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are essential for various aspects of plant development. 
Cellular BR homeostasis is critical for proper growth and development of plants; 
however, its regulatory mechanism remains largely unknown. BAT1 (BR-related 
acyltransferase 1), a gene encoding a putative acyltransferase, was found to be 
involved in vascular bundle development in a full-length cDNA over-expressor 
(FOX) screen. Over-expression of BAT1 resulted in typical BR-deficient 
phenotypes, which were rescued by exogenously applied castasterone and 
brassinolide. Analyses of BR profiles demonstrated that BAT1 alters levels of 
several brassinolide biosynthetic intermediates, including 6-deoxotyphasterol, 
typhasterol and 6-deoxocastasterone. BAT1 is mainly localized in the endoplasmic 
reticulum. BAT1 is highly expressed in young tissues and vascular bundles, and 
its expression is induced by auxin. These data suggest that BAT1 is involved in 
BR homeostasis, probably by conversion of brassinolide intermediates into 
acylated BR conjugates.

© 2012 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/tpj.12036
PMID: 23020607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
