---
pmid: '23516968'
title: 'The biosynthetic gene cluster for sophorolipids: a biotechnological interesting
  biosurfactant produced by Starmerella bombicola.'
authors:
- Van Bogaert IN
- Holvoet K
- Roelants SL
- Li B
- Lin YC
- Van de Peer Y
- Soetaert W
journal: Mol Microbiol
year: '2013'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1111/mmi.12200
---

# The biosynthetic gene cluster for sophorolipids: a biotechnological interesting biosurfactant produced by Starmerella bombicola.
**Authors:** Van Bogaert IN, Holvoet K, Roelants SL, Li B, Lin YC, Van de Peer Y, Soetaert W
**Journal:** Mol Microbiol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/mmi.12200](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12200)

## Abstract

1. Mol Microbiol. 2013 May;88(3):501-9. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12200. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

The biosynthetic gene cluster for sophorolipids: a biotechnological interesting 
biosurfactant produced by Starmerella bombicola.

Van Bogaert IN(1), Holvoet K, Roelants SL, Li B, Lin YC, Van de Peer Y, Soetaert 
W.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology and Biocatalysis, Department of 
Biochemical and Microbial Technology, Ghent University, Coupure Links 653, 
B-9000, Ghent, Belgium. inge.vanbogaert@ugent.be

Sophorolipids are promising biological derived surfactants or detergents which 
find application in household cleaning, personal care and cosmetics. They are 
produced by specific yeast species and among those, Starmerella bombicola 
(former Candida bombicola) is the most widely used and studied one. Despite the 
commercial interest in sophorolipids, the biosynthetic pathway of these 
secondary metabolites remained hitherto partially unsolved. In this manuscript 
we present the sophorolipid gene cluster consisting of five genes directly 
involved in sophorolipid synthesis: a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase, two 
glucosyltransferases, an acetyltransferase and a transporter. It was 
demonstrated that disabling the first step of the pathway - cytochrome P450 
monooxygenase mediated terminal or subterminal hydroxylation of a common fatty 
acid - results in complete abolishment of sophorolipid production. This 
phenotype could be complemented by supplying the yeast with hydroxylated fatty 
acids. On the other hand, knocking out the transporter gene yields mutants still 
able to secrete sophorolipids, though only at levels of 10% as compared with the 
wild type, suggesting alternative routes for secretion. Finally, it was proved 
that hampering sophorolipid production does not affect cell growth or cell 
viability in laboratory conditions, as can be expected for secondary 
metabolites.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12200
PMID: 23516968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
