---
pmid: '11053425'
title: CARD9 is a novel caspase recruitment domain-containing protein that interacts
  with BCL10/CLAP and activates NF-kappa B.
authors:
- Bertin J
- Guo Y
- Wang L
- Srinivasula SM
- Jacobson MD
- Poyet JL
- Merriam S
- Du MQ
- Dyer MJ
- Robison KE
- DiStefano PS
- Alnemri ES
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000726200
---

# CARD9 is a novel caspase recruitment domain-containing protein that interacts with BCL10/CLAP and activates NF-kappa B.
**Authors:** Bertin J, Guo Y, Wang L, Srinivasula SM, Jacobson MD, Poyet JL, Merriam S, Du MQ, Dyer MJ, Robison KE, DiStefano PS, Alnemri ES
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000726200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000726200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 29;275(52):41082-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000726200.

CARD9 is a novel caspase recruitment domain-containing protein that interacts 
with BCL10/CLAP and activates NF-kappa B.

Bertin J(1), Guo Y, Wang L, Srinivasula SM, Jacobson MD, Poyet JL, Merriam S, Du 
MQ, Dyer MJ, Robison KE, DiStefano PS, Alnemri ES.

Author information:
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 
bertin@mpi.com

BCL10/CLAP is an activator of apoptosis and NF-kappaB signaling pathways and has 
been implicated in B cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. 
Although its role in apoptosis remains to be determined, BCL10 likely activates 
NF-kappaB through the IKK complex in response to upstream stimuli. The 
N-terminal caspase recruitment domain (CARD) of BCL10 has been proposed to 
function as an activation domain that mediates homophilic interactions with an 
upstream CARD-containing NF-kappaB activator. To identify upstream signaling 
partners of BCL10, we performed a mammalian two-hybrid analysis and identified 
CARD9 as a novel CARD-containing protein that interacts selectively with the 
CARD activation domain of BCL10. When expressed in cells, CARD9 binds to BCL10 
and activates NF-kappaB. Furthermore, endogenous CARD9 is found associated with 
BCL10 suggesting that both proteins form a pre-existing signaling complex within 
cells. CARD9 also self-associates and contains extensive coiled-coil motifs that 
may function as oligomerization domains. We propose here that CARD9 is an 
upstream activator of BCL10 and NF-kappaB signaling.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000726200
PMID: 11053425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
