---
pmid: '11161816'
title: SH3GLB, a new endophilin-related protein family featuring an SH3 domain.
authors:
- Pierrat B
- Simonen M
- Cueto M
- Mestan J
- Ferrigno P
- Heim J
journal: Genomics
year: '2001'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6378
---

# SH3GLB, a new endophilin-related protein family featuring an SH3 domain.
**Authors:** Pierrat B, Simonen M, Cueto M, Mestan J, Ferrigno P, Heim J
**Journal:** Genomics (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1006/geno.2000.6378](https://doi.org/10.1006/geno.2000.6378)

## Abstract

1. Genomics. 2001 Jan 15;71(2):222-34. doi: 10.1006/geno.2000.6378.

SH3GLB, a new endophilin-related protein family featuring an SH3 domain.

Pierrat B(1), Simonen M, Cueto M, Mestan J, Ferrigno P, Heim J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Expert Laboratory, Novartis Pharma Research, 
Basel, CH-4002, Switzerland. benoit.pierrat@pharma.novartis.com

A new cDNA encoding a protein of 362 amino acids designated SH3GLB1, for SH3 
domain GRB2-like endophilin B1, was identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen 
devoted to the identification of new partners interacting with the apoptosis 
inducer Bax. SH3GLB1 shows strong similarities to the SH3 domain-containing 
proteins of the endophilin family and presumably represents the human homologue 
of the potential Caenorhabditis elegans SH3 containing-protein identified by 
systematic translation of the C. elegans genome (GenBank Accession No. U46675). 
Reversing prey to bait in the yeast screen, a second protein, SH3GLB2, of 395 
amino acids showing 65% identity to SH3GLB1 was identified as an interacting 
partner of SH3GLB1. The discovery of SH3GLB1 itself in the screening with 
SH3GLB1 as a bait and further mapping experiments demonstrated that a core 
coiled-coil-type region is required for the formation of SH3GLB homo- and/or 
heterodimers, whereas the SH3 domain is not involved in these interactions. 
Interestingly, the similarities with the endophilin proteins cover the entire 
sequence of the SH3GLB family, suggesting a common fold and presumably a common 
mode of action. Furthermore, SH3GLB members colocalize to the cytoplasmic 
compartment of the cell together with Bax and are excluded from the nucleus. 
SH3GLB1 and SH3GLB2 do not significantly influence the onset and time course of 
Bax-mediated apoptosis in HeLa or 293T cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/geno.2000.6378
PMID: 11161816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
