---
pmid: '9256071'
title: Isolation and characterisation of a novel stress-inducible PDI-family gene
  from Aspergillus niger.
authors:
- Jeenes DJ
- Pfaller R
- Archer DB
journal: Gene
year: '1997'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00098-x
---

# Isolation and characterisation of a novel stress-inducible PDI-family gene from Aspergillus niger.
**Authors:** Jeenes DJ, Pfaller R, Archer DB
**Journal:** Gene (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00098-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00098-x)

## Abstract

1. Gene. 1997 Jul 9;193(2):151-6. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00098-x.

Isolation and characterisation of a novel stress-inducible PDI-family gene from 
Aspergillus niger.

Jeenes DJ(1), Pfaller R, Archer DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Institute of Food Research, Colney, 
Norwich, UK. david.jeenes@bbsrc.ac.uk

Current strategies to improve the secretion of heterologous proteins in 
Aspergillus niger include the manipulation of chaperones and foldases specific 
to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). A family of ER-specific proteins which share 
active-site homology wit protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) has been identified 
from other systems, many of which are inducible by agents which cause malfolding 
of proteins in the ER. Here we report identification of tigA from Aspergillus 
niger and erp38 from Neurospora crassa, two novel members of the PDI superfamily 
of proteins. TIGA and ERp38 show 66% identity at the amino acid level and are 
putative ER proteins. Both proteins show tandemly linked thiol-oxidoreductase 
domains followed by a functionally uncharacterised C-terminal domain. The most 
distal active site in TIGA is created by excision of a 66-bp intron. Although no 
Unfolded Protein Response elements can be seen in the tigA promoter, sequence 
homology has identified associated with protein trafficking (ERPTRE) in a gene 
encoding the related mammalian protein, ERp72, as well as a second motif 
conserved amongst the glucose-related protein family. Southern and dot blot 
analysis indicate that the tigA gene is present in single copy. Both the A. 
niger and N. crassa proteins show homology with a stress-inducible alfalfa, G1. 
Transcription of tigA is induced 2-3-fold after treatment with tunicamycin, an 
inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation. Strains overexpressing a heterologous 
protein show no increased tigA mRNA levels.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1119(97)00098-x
PMID: 9256071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
