---
pmid: '12105227'
title: Upstream of growth and differentiation factor 1 (uog1), a mammalian homolog
  of the yeast longevity assurance gene 1 (LAG1), regulates N-stearoyl-sphinganine
  (C18-(dihydro)ceramide) synthesis in a fumonisin B1-independent manner in mammalian
  cells.
authors:
- Venkataraman K
- Riebeling C
- Bodennec J
- Riezman H
- Allegood JC
- Sullards MC
- Merrill AH Jr
- Futerman AH
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205211200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Upstream of growth and differentiation factor 1 (uog1), a mammalian homolog of the yeast longevity assurance gene 1 (LAG1), regulates N-stearoyl-sphinganine (C18-(dihydro)ceramide) synthesis in a fumonisin B1-independent manner in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Venkataraman K, Riebeling C, Bodennec J, Riezman H, Allegood JC, Sullards MC, Merrill AH Jr, Futerman AH
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M205211200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M205211200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):35642-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M205211200. Epub
2002  Jun 24.

Upstream of growth and differentiation factor 1 (uog1), a mammalian homolog of 
the yeast longevity assurance gene 1 (LAG1), regulates N-stearoyl-sphinganine 
(C18-(dihydro)ceramide) synthesis in a fumonisin B1-independent manner in 
mammalian cells.

Venkataraman K(1), Riebeling C, Bodennec J, Riezman H, Allegood JC, Sullards MC, 
Merrill AH Jr, Futerman AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
76100, Israel.

The longevity assurance gene (LAG1) and its homolog (LAC1) are required for 
acyl-CoA-dependent synthesis of ceramides containing very long acyl chain (e.g. 
C26) fatty acids in yeast, and a homolog of LAG1, ASC1, confers resistance in 
plants to fumonisin B(1), an inhibitor of ceramide synthesis. To understand 
further the mechanism of regulation of ceramide synthesis, we now characterize a 
mammalian homolog of LAG1, upstream of growth and differentiation factor-1 
(uog1). cDNA clones of uog1 were obtained from expression sequence-tagged clones 
and sub-cloned into a mammalian expression vector. Transient transfection of 
human embryonic kidney 293T cells with uog1 followed by metabolic labeling with 
[4,5-(3)H]sphinganine or L-3-[(3)H]serine demonstrated that uog1 conferred 
fumonisin B(1) resistance with respect to the ability of the cells to continue 
to produce ceramide. Surprisingly, this ceramide was channeled into neutral 
glycosphingolipids but not into gangliosides. Electrospray tandem mass 
spectrometry confirmed the elevation in sphingolipids and revealed that the 
ceramides and neutral glycosphingolipids of uog1-transfected cells contain 
primarily stearic acid (C18), that this enrichment was further increased by 
FB(1), and that the amount of stearic acid in sphingomyelin was also increased. 
UOG1 was localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, demonstrating that the fatty 
acid selectivity and the fumonisin B(1) resistance are not due to a subcellular 
localization different from that found previously for ceramide synthase 
activity. Furthermore, in vitro assays of uog1-transfected cells demonstrated 
elevated ceramide synthase activity when stearoyl-CoA but not palmitoyl-CoA was 
used as substrate. We propose a role for UOG1 in regulating C18-ceramide 
(N-stearoyl-sphinganine) synthesis, and we note that not only is this the first 
case of ceramide formation in mammalian cells with such a high degree of fatty 
acid specificity, but also that the N-stearoyl-sphinganine produced by UOG1 most 
significantly impacts neutral glycosphingolipid synthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M205211200
PMID: 12105227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
