---
pmid: '14744933'
title: 'Suppression of mitochondrial respiration through recruitment of p160 myb binding
  protein to PGC-1alpha: modulation by p38 MAPK.'
authors:
- Fan M
- Rhee J
- St-Pierre J
- Handschin C
- Puigserver P
- Lin J
- Jäeger S
- Erdjument-Bromage H
- Tempst P
- Spiegelman BM
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC338281
doi: 10.1101/gad.1152204
---

# Suppression of mitochondrial respiration through recruitment of p160 myb binding protein to PGC-1alpha: modulation by p38 MAPK.
**Authors:** Fan M, Rhee J, St-Pierre J, Handschin C, Puigserver P, Lin J, Jäeger S, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Spiegelman BM
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1152204](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1152204)
**PMC:** [PMC338281](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC338281/)

## Abstract

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Feb 1;18(3):278-89. doi: 10.1101/gad.1152204. Epub 2004 Jan
26.

Suppression of mitochondrial respiration through recruitment of p160 myb binding 
protein to PGC-1alpha: modulation by p38 MAPK.

Fan M(1), Rhee J, St-Pierre J, Handschin C, Puigserver P, Lin J, Jäeger S, 
Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Spiegelman BM.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Department of Cell Biology, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator PPAR gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1alpha) is a 
key regulator of metabolic processes such as mitochondrial biogenesis and 
respiration in muscle and gluconeogenesis in liver. Reduced levels of PGC-1alpha 
in humans have been associated with type II diabetes. PGC-1alpha contains a 
negative regulatory domain that attenuates its transcriptional activity. This 
negative regulation is removed by phosphorylation of PGC-1alpha by p38 MAPK, an 
important kinase downstream of cytokine signaling in muscle and beta-adrenergic 
signaling in brown fat. We describe here the identification of p160 myb binding 
protein (p160MBP) as a repressor of PGC-1alpha. The binding and repression of 
PGC-1alpha by p160MBP is disrupted by p38 MAPK phosphorylation of PGC-1alpha. 
Adenoviral expression of p160MBP in myoblasts strongly reduces PGC-1alpha's 
ability to stimulate mitochondrial respiration and the expression of the genes 
of the electron transport system. This repression does not require removal of 
PGC-1alpha from chromatin, suggesting that p160MBP is or recruits a direct 
transcriptional suppressor. Overall, these data indicate that p160MBP is a 
powerful negative regulator of PGC-1alpha function and provide a molecular 
mechanism for the activation of PGC-1alpha by p38 MAPK. The discovery of p160MBP 
as a PGC-1alpha regulator has important implications for the understanding of 
energy balance and diabetes.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1152204
PMCID: PMC338281
PMID: 14744933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
