---
pmid: '16258011'
title: The cold-induced early activation of phospholipase C and D pathways determines
  the response of two distinct clusters of genes in Arabidopsis cell suspensions.
authors:
- Vergnolle C
- Vaultier MN
- Taconnat L
- Renou JP
- Kader JC
- Zachowski A
- Ruelland E
journal: Plant Physiol
year: '2005'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC1283760
doi: 10.1104/pp.105.068171
---

# The cold-induced early activation of phospholipase C and D pathways determines the response of two distinct clusters of genes in Arabidopsis cell suspensions.
**Authors:** Vergnolle C, Vaultier MN, Taconnat L, Renou JP, Kader JC, Zachowski A, Ruelland E
**Journal:** Plant Physiol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1104/pp.105.068171](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.105.068171)
**PMC:** [PMC1283760](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1283760/)

## Abstract

1. Plant Physiol. 2005 Nov;139(3):1217-33. doi: 10.1104/pp.105.068171. Epub 2005 
Oct 28.

The cold-induced early activation of phospholipase C and D pathways determines 
the response of two distinct clusters of genes in Arabidopsis cell suspensions.

Vergnolle C(1), Vaultier MN, Taconnat L, Renou JP, Kader JC, Zachowski A, 
Ruelland E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire des Plantes, Formation 
de Recherche en Evolution 2846, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique/Université Pierre et Marie Curie, F-94200 Ivry-sur-Seine, France.

In plants, a temperature downshift represents a major stress that will lead to 
the induction or repression of many genes. Therefore, the cold signal has to be 
perceived and transmitted to the nucleus. In response to a cold exposure, we 
have shown that the phospholipase D (PLD) and the phospholipase C 
(PLC)/diacylglycerol kinase pathways are simultaneously activated. The role of 
these pathways in the cold response has been investigated by analyzing the 
transcriptome of cold-treated Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) suspension 
cells in the presence of U73122 or ethanol, inhibitors of the PLC/diacylglycerol 
kinase pathway and of the phosphatidic acid produced by PLD, respectively. This 
approach showed that the expression of many genes was modified by the cold 
response in the presence of such agents. The cold responses of most of the genes 
were repressed, thus correlating with the inhibitory effect of U73122 or 
ethanol. We were thus able to identify 58 genes that were regulated by 
temperature downshift via PLC activity and 87 genes regulated by temperature 
downshift via PLD-produced phosphatidic acid. Interestingly, each inhibitor 
appeared to affect different cold response genes. These results support the idea 
that both the PLC and PLD pathways are upstream of two different signaling 
pathways that lead to the activation of the cold response. The connection of 
these pathways with the CBF pathway, currently the most understood genetic 
system playing a role in cold acclimation, is discussed.

DOI: 10.1104/pp.105.068171
PMCID: PMC1283760
PMID: 16258011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

In plants, a temperature downshift represents a major stress that will lead to the induction or repression of many genes. Therefore, the cold signal has to be perceived and transmitted to the nucleus. In response to a cold exposure, we have shown that the phospholipase D (PLD) and the phospholipase C (PLC)/diacylglycerol kinase pathways are simultaneously activated. The role of these pathways in the cold response has been investigated by analyzing the transcriptome of cold-treated Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) suspension cells in the presence of U73122 or ethanol, inhibitors of the PLC/diacylglycerol kinase pathway and of the phosphatidic acid produced by PLD, respectively. This approach showed that the expression of many genes was modified by the cold response in the presence of such agents. The cold responses of most of the genes were repressed, thus correlating with the inhibitory effect of U73122 or ethanol. We were thus able to identify 58 genes that were regulated by temperature downshift via PLC activity and 87 genes regulated by temperature downshift via PLD-produced phosphatidic acid. Interestingly, each inhibitor appeared to affect different cold response genes. These results support the idea that both the PLC and PLD pathways are upstream of two different signaling pathways that lead to the activation of the cold response. The connection of these pathways with the CBF pathway, currently the most understood genetic system playing a role in cold acclimation, is discussed.

DISCUSSION

The fact that a temperature downshift induced the expression of genes known to be cold regulated in Arabidopsis plantlets in Arabidopsis cell suspensions allowed us to consider this system as a good model for a genome-wide analysis of gene expression in response to a cold shock.
