---
pmid: '18256511'
title: Human RME-8 is involved in membrane trafficking through early endosomes.
authors:
- Fujibayashi A
- Taguchi T
- Misaki R
- Ohtani M
- Dohmae N
- Takio K
- Yamada M
- Gu J
- Yamakami M
- Fukuda M
- Waguri S
- Uchiyama Y
- Yoshimori T
- Sekiguchi K
journal: Cell Struct Funct
year: '2008'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1247/csf.07045
---

# Human RME-8 is involved in membrane trafficking through early endosomes.
**Authors:** Fujibayashi A, Taguchi T, Misaki R, Ohtani M, Dohmae N, Takio K, Yamada M, Gu J, Yamakami M, Fukuda M, Waguri S, Uchiyama Y, Yoshimori T, Sekiguchi K
**Journal:** Cell Struct Funct (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1247/csf.07045](https://doi.org/10.1247/csf.07045)

## Abstract

1. Cell Struct Funct. 2008;33(1):35-50. doi: 10.1247/csf.07045. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Human RME-8 is involved in membrane trafficking through early endosomes.

Fujibayashi A(1), Taguchi T, Misaki R, Ohtani M, Dohmae N, Takio K, Yamada M, Gu 
J, Yamakami M, Fukuda M, Waguri S, Uchiyama Y, Yoshimori T, Sekiguchi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Protein Chemistry, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka 
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

RME-8 is a DnaJ-domain-containing protein that was first identified in 
Caenorhabditis elegans as being required for uptake of yolk proteins. RME-8 has 
also been identified in other species, including flies and mammals, and the 
phenotypes of their RME-8 mutants suggest the importance of this protein in 
endocytosis. In the present study, we cloned human RME-8 (hRME-8) and 
characterized its biochemical properties and functions in endocytic pathways. 
hRME-8 was found to be a peripheral protein that was tightly associated with the 
membrane via its N-terminal region. It partially colocalized with several early 
endosomal markers, but not with late endosomal markers, consistent with 
observations by immunoelectron microscopy. When cells were transfected with a 
panel of dominant-active Rab proteins, hRME-8 was confined to large vacuoles 
induced by expression of Rab5aQ79L, but not by Rab7Q67L. Expression of 
C-terminally-truncated hRME-8 mutants led to the formation of large puncta and 
vacuoles, and compromised endocytic pathways through early endosomes, i.e., 
recycling of transferrin and degradation of epidermal growth factor. Taken 
together, these results indicate that hRME is primarily involved in membrane 
trafficking through early endosomes, but not through degradative organelles, 
such as multivesicular bodies and late endosomes.

DOI: 10.1247/csf.07045
PMID: 18256511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
