---
pmid: '2882519'
title: Human peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.
authors:
- Schram AW
- Goldfischer S
- van Roermund CW
- Brouwer-Kelder EM
- Collins J
- Hashimoto T
- Heymans HS
- van den Bosch H
- Schutgens RB
- Tager JM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1987'
full_text_available: false
full_text_extraction_method: html_abstract_only
pmcid: PMC304678
doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.8.2494
pubmed_publication_types:
- Case Reports
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: CASE_REPORT
---

# Human peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.
**Authors:** Schram AW, Goldfischer S, van Roermund CW, Brouwer-Kelder EM, Collins J, Hashimoto T, Heymans HS, van den Bosch H, Schutgens RB, Tager JM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1987)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.84.8.2494](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.84.8.2494)
**PMC:** [PMC304678](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC304678/)

## Abstract

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1987 Apr;84(8):2494-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.8.2494.

Human peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-coenzyme A thiolase deficiency.

Schram AW, Goldfischer S, van Roermund CW, Brouwer-Kelder EM, Collins J, 
Hashimoto T, Heymans HS, van den Bosch H, Schutgens RB, Tager JM, et al.

We investigated the peroxisomal beta-oxidation system in liver from a patient 
with clinical features similar to those in the cerebrohepatorenal (Zellweger) 
syndrome and with elevated levels in body fluids of very-long-chain fatty acids 
and intermediates in the biosynthesis of bile acids. The peroxisomal 
beta-oxidation of fatty acids, measured as the cyanide-insensitive formation of 
[14C]acetyl units from [14C]palmitoyl-CoA, was very low in the patient (less 
than 10% of the values in control subjects). Immunoblotting experiments using 
antibodies to peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes indicated that peroxisomal 
3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase (acyl-CoA:acetyl-CoA C-acyltransferase, EC 2.3.1.16) was 
deficient. Addition of purified rat-liver peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase to 
a reaction mixture containing liver homogenate from the patient restored 
peroxisomal beta-oxidation. We conclude that the deficiency of peroxisomal 
3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase is responsible for the very low peroxisomal 
beta-oxidation activity and for the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids 
and intermediates in the biosynthesis of bile acids. Furthermore, the finding 
that both very-long-chain fatty acids and abnormal bile acids accumulate in this 
patient suggests that a single peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase is involved in 
the oxidative chain shortening of both very-long-chain fatty acids and the 
coprostanoic acids.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.84.8.2494
PMCID: PMC304678
PMID: 2882519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

Abstract

We investigated the peroxisomal beta-oxidation system in liver from a patient with clinical features similar to those in the cerebrohepatorenal (Zellweger) syndrome and with elevated levels in body fluids of very-long-chain fatty acids and intermediates in the biosynthesis of bile acids. The peroxisomal beta-oxidation of fatty acids, measured as the cyanide-insensitive formation of [14C]acetyl units from [14C]palmitoyl-CoA, was very low in the patient (less than 10% of the values in control subjects). Immunoblotting experiments using antibodies to peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes indicated that peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase (acyl-CoA:acetyl-CoA C-acyltransferase, EC 2.3.1.16) was deficient. Addition of purified rat-liver peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase to a reaction mixture containing liver homogenate from the patient restored peroxisomal beta-oxidation. We conclude that the deficiency of peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase is responsible for the very low peroxisomal beta-oxidation activity and for the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids and intermediates in the biosynthesis of bile acids. Furthermore, the finding that both very-long-chain fatty acids and abnormal bile acids accumulate in this patient suggests that a single peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase is involved in the oxidative chain shortening of both very-long-chain fatty acids and the coprostanoic acids.
