---
pmid: '11971816'
title: 'Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 mediates tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced
  apoptosis: role of Bcl-2 phosphorylation.'
authors:
- Rajah R
- Lee KW
- Cohen P
journal: Cell Growth Differ
year: '2002'
full_text_available: false
---

# Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 mediates tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced apoptosis: role of Bcl-2 phosphorylation.
**Authors:** Rajah R, Lee KW, Cohen P
**Journal:** Cell Growth Differ (2002)

## Abstract

1. Cell Growth Differ. 2002 Apr;13(4):163-71.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 mediates tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha-induced apoptosis: role of Bcl-2 phosphorylation.

Rajah R(1), Lee KW, Cohen P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mattel Children's Hospital at UCLA, 90095, USA.

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-independent effects of insulin-like growth 
factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) to effect cellular apoptosis have now been 
described in various cellular systems. IGFBP-3 mediates transforming growth 
factor-beta-induced apoptosis. Other growth-inhibitory and apoptosis-inducing 
agents such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and the tumor suppressor 
gene p53 also induce IGFBP-3. In this report, we demonstrate the role of IGFBP-3 
as a mediator of apoptosis induced by TNF-alpha and elucidate the process 
involved in its signaling mechanism. Treatment of PC-3 cells with TNF-alpha 
resulted in the induction of IGFBP-3 expression in a dose- and time-dependent 
fashion and also induced apoptosis. TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis was prevented by 
cotreatment with IGFBP-3 neutralizing antibodies or IGFBP-3-specific antisense 
thiolated oligonucleotides. Both IGFBP-3 and TNF-alpha treatment increased the 
levels of the inactive, serine phosphorylated form of the survival protein 
Bcl-2. The effect of TNF-alpha on Bcl-2 serine phosphorylation was blocked by 
IGFBP-3 antisense oligomers. These findings confirm that IGFBP-3 is essential 
for TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis in PC-3 cells and that this IGFBP-3 effect 
includes the inactivation of Bcl-2 through serine phosphorylation.

PMID: 11971816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
