---
pmid: '26766587'
title: The Interaction of Myc with Miz1 Defines Medulloblastoma Subgroup Identity.
authors:
- Vo BT
- Wolf E
- Kawauchi D
- Gebhardt A
- Rehg JE
- Finkelstein D
- Walz S
- Murphy BL
- Youn YH
- Han YG
- Eilers M
- Roussel MF
journal: Cancer Cell
year: '2016'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC4714043
doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.003
---

# The Interaction of Myc with Miz1 Defines Medulloblastoma Subgroup Identity.
**Authors:** Vo BT, Wolf E, Kawauchi D, Gebhardt A, Rehg JE, Finkelstein D, Walz S, Murphy BL, Youn YH, Han YG, Eilers M, Roussel MF
**Journal:** Cancer Cell (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.003)
**PMC:** [PMC4714043](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4714043/)

## Abstract

1. Cancer Cell. 2016 Jan 11;29(1):5-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.003.

The Interaction of Myc with Miz1 Defines Medulloblastoma Subgroup Identity.

Vo BT(#)(1), Wolf E(#)(2), Kawauchi D(1)(3), Gebhardt A(2), Rehg JE(4), 
Finkelstein D(5), Walz S(2)(6), Murphy BL(1), Youn YH(7), Han YG(7), Eilers 
M(2)(6), Roussel MF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(2)Theodor Boveri Institute, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 
97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(3)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of Pediatric Neurooncology 
(B062) Im Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 262 
Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(5)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(6)Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, University of Würzburg, 
Josef-Schneider-Str.6, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2016 Jan 11;29(1):1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.009.

Four distinct subgroups of cerebellar medulloblastomas (MBs) differ in their 
histopathology, molecular profiles, and prognosis. c-Myc (Myc) or MycN 
overexpression in granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) induces Group 3 (G3) or 
Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) MBs, respectively. Differences in Myc and MycN 
transcriptional profiles depend, in part, on their interaction with Miz1, which 
binds strongly to Myc but not MycN, to target sites on chromatin. Myc suppresses 
ciliogenesis and reprograms the transcriptome of SHH-dependent GNPs through 
Miz1-dependent gene repression to maintain stemness. Genetic disruption of the 
Myc/Miz1 interaction inhibited G3 MB development. Target genes of Myc/Miz1 are 
repressed in human G3 MBs but not in other subgroups. Therefore, the Myc/Miz1 
interaction is a defining hallmark of G3 MB development.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.003
PMCID: PMC4714043
PMID: 26766587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

## Full Text

INTRODUCTION

Members of the MYC family of proto-oncogenes ( c-MYC ( MYC ), MYCN and MYCL ) play important roles in a wide range of cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis ( Dang, 2012 ; Roussel and Robinson, 2013 ). MYC family genes encode closely related basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)/leucine-zipper transcription factors that form heterodimers with MAX to drive transcriptional activation upon binding to Enhancer Box sequences (E-boxes) ( Conacci-Sorrell et al., 2014 ). Whereas a dimeric Myc/Max complex activates gene transcription, Myc represses transcription when in complex with Miz1. Miz1, a Pox virus and zinc finger (POZ) domain transcription factor, is ubiquitously expressed during mouse embryonic development and activates transcription upon binding to its cognate binding site ( Adhikary et al., 2003 ; Wolf et al., 2013 ). When Myc is induced in response to supra physiological mitogenic stimuli, Miz1 is recruited to the Myc/Max complex to repress transcription ( Walz et al., 2014 ; Wolf et al., 2014 ). For example, a ternary Myc/Max/Miz1 complex represses the transcription of negative cell cycle regulator genes CDKN1A and CDKN2B to antagonize TGF-β-dependent activation of these two cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors ( Seoane et al., 2001 ; Staller et al., 2001 ).

Medulloblastoma (MB), the most common malignant pediatric brain tumor, arises in the cerebellum and is characterized by four molecularly distinct subgroups: Wingless-Int (WNT), Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), Group 3 (G3) and G4 ( Taylor et al., 2012 ). MYC genes are often overexpressed or amplified in MB ( Roussel and Robinson, 2013 ). Among the four subgroups, MYC and MYCN are differentially expressed. While WNT and G3 MBs overexpress MYC with or without amplification, SHH and G4 MBs express MYCN ( Robinson et al., 2012 ; Roussel and Robinson, 2013 ). Mycn is a target of SHH signaling ( Kenney et al., 2003 ) and is required for the proliferation of mouse GNPs and SHH MB development ( Zindy et al., 2006 ). Enforced expression of MycN in granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) from the cerebella of Trp53 −/− ;Cdkn2c −/− mice induces SHH MB; remarkably, overexpression of Myc in the same GNPs induces G3 MBs ( Kawauchi et al., 2012 ). This was unexpected since Myc and MycN have similar structures and are partially functionally redundant during mouse development ( Malynn et al., 2000 ).

Previous studies found that the Myc/Miz1 interaction is a prerequisite for Myc-induced lymphoma development ( van Riggelen et al., 2010 ) and that Myc enhances self-renewal of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) via binding to Miz1 ( Kerosuo et al., 2008 ). Interestingly, mouse G3 MB cells express many markers of “stemness”, suggesting that Miz1 might be required for the development of more stem-like G3 MBs in response to Myc overexpression ( Kawauchi et al., 2012 ). We hypothesized that the difference between Myc- and MycN-induced MBs might be due to their interaction with different partner proteins in GNPs.

DISCUSSION

We here show that the interaction of Myc with Miz1 is critical for the development of G3 MBs and distinguishes G3 from other MB subgroups. Specifically, enforced expression of a Myc protein that has reduced binding to Miz1 (MycV394D) in GNPs from the cerebella of Trp53 −/− ;Cdkn2 −/− mice or of a wild-type Myc in GNPs from Trp53 fl/fl ;Miz1 ΔPOZ/POZ ;Nestin-Cre mice induces tumors that develop later than Myc/G3 MBs and that display a pathology no longer characterized as MB and has no counterpart in humans.

Comparison of the transcriptional profiles of G3 MBs showed that, instead of their repression, target genes of the Myc/Miz1-complex are up-regulated in MycVD and Myc/ΔPOZ tumors that have reduced Myc/Miz1-complex activity. We previously observed that Myc induces G3 MBs while MycN generates SHH MBs after enforced expression in GNPs from the cerebella of Trp53 −/− ;Cdkn2c −/− mice ( Kawauchi et al., 2012 ). Using co-precipitation assays and ChIP-Seq analysis, we now show that complexes of MycN with Miz1 are much less detectable than those formed between Myc and Miz1. Acute activation of Myc-ER in GNPs represses Myc/Miz1-target genes, whereas activation of MycN-ER does not. Furthermore, in both mouse and human, expression of Myc/Miz1-repressed genes set apart G3 MB from the other subgroups arguing that Myc/Miz1-mediated gene repression is a defining feature of G3 MBs. Consistent with this interpretation, genes repressed by Myc/Miz1 complexes include transcription factors known to play critical roles in GNPs development. For example, Atoh1, a bHLH transcription factor that is required for proliferation of GNPs and for SHH MB development ( Roussel and Hatten, 2011 ; Zhao et al., 2008 ), was transcriptionally silenced in G3 MBs in a Miz1-dependent manner. This suggested that repression of Atoh1 expression by the Myc/Miz1 complex was likely required to convert SHH-dependent neuronal progenitors to G3 MB tumor cells that lack SHH dependence and are insensitive to Smoothened pathway inhibition ( Kawauchi et al., 2012 ). We previously found that Atoh1 inhibits GNPs differentiation but did not induce tumorigenesis unless co-expressed with Gli1 ( Ayrault et al., 2010 ). Genes repressed by Myc/Miz1 complexes are also required for ciliogenesis; indeed, previous work suggested that Miz1 participates in primary cilia function and SHH signaling ( Lu et al., 2013 ). While mouse and human SHH or WNT tumors express primary cilia that are required for signaling and tumor formation, mouse and human Myc/G3 and G4 MBs do not ( Han et al., 2009 ). MycVD and Myc/ΔPOZ tumors display neuroepithelial characteristics, express primary cilia, and fail to form either G3 or SHH tumors, suggesting that the loss of primary cilia is a specific characteristic of G3 MB.

Notably, neither enforced expression of Atoh1 in G3 MBs nor knock-down of Ift88, which is required for ciliogenesis, in MycVD tumors changed the tumors’ phenotype arguing that Myc/Miz1 represses additional factors and processes that are important for the genesis of G3 MBs. Myc/G3 tumors express many stem cell markers ( Kawauchi et al., 2012 ), and in accordance, Myc/Miz1 complexes enhance the cellular self-renewal of neural progenitor cells ( Kerosuo et al., 2008 ). In contrast, a predominant feature of cultured MycVD and Myc/ΔPOZ tumorspheres is an enhanced rate of apoptosis. Therefore, repression by Myc/Miz1 suppresses both apoptosis and differentiation in G3 MBs.

Myc activation not only promotes growth and proliferation but also induces metastasis. One of the characteristics of human G3 MBs with MYC amplification is their aggressiveness and ability to spread through the leptomeninges, making them difficult to treat ( Gajjar and Robinson, 2014 ). We found that loss of Miz1 binding to Myc dramatically reduced migration and invasion of tumor cells, suggesting that inhibition of Miz1 by a small molecule inhibitor might suppress leptomeningeal spread of G3 MBs.

Myc and Miz1 form a ternary complex with Gfi-1 at the promoter of Cdkn2b , Cdkn1a and Cdkn1b ( Liu et al., 2010 ). Remarkably, recent genomic analysis showed specific and mutually exclusive activation of Gfi-1 or Gfi-1B in G3 and G4 MBs by juxtaposition of their coding sequences to enhancer elements, including super-enhancers, stimulating their oncogenic activity ( Northcott et al., 2014 ). Indeed, ectopic overexpression of Gfi-1 and Myc was sufficient to induce G3 MBs without the loss of Trp53 , suggesting that Gfi-1 may collaborate with Myc and Miz1 to repress genes required for G3 MB development. Further analysis of repressed genes in this model is warranted to confirm this possibility.

We conclude that the interaction of Myc with Miz1 is required for G3 MB development and that active repression of genes by Myc/Miz1 complexes maintains the identity of G3 tumors. In contrast, MycN forms complexes with Miz1 less efficiently in the same cerebellar progenitor cells, and instead induces tumors of the SHH subgroup.

This differential ability of Myc and MycN to form complexes with Miz1 is central to distinguishing two members of the Myc gene family from one another, and reveals their distinct and as yet unappreciated biological functions.
