---
pmid: '8262947'
title: The mannose transporter of Escherichia coli. Structure and function of the
  IIABMan subunit.
authors:
- Stolz B
- Huber M
- Marković-Housley Z
- Erni B
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1993'
full_text_available: false
---

# The mannose transporter of Escherichia coli. Structure and function of the IIABMan subunit.
**Authors:** Stolz B, Huber M, Marković-Housley Z, Erni B
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1993)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 25;268(36):27094-9.

The mannose transporter of Escherichia coli. Structure and function of the 
IIABMan subunit.

Stolz B(1), Huber M, Marković-Housley Z, Erni B.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, University of Bern, Switzerland.

The mannose transporter of the bacterial phosphotransferase system consists of 
two transmembrane subunits (IICMan and IIDMan) and a hydrophilic subunit 
(IIABMan). IIABMan has two flexibly linked domains containing one 
phosphorylation site each and occurs as a dimer. Substrate transport is coupled 
to phosphorylation. The phosphoryl group is transferred from a phosphoryl 
carrier protein to His10 on IIA, hence to His175 on IIB and finally to the 
substrate. IIABMan mutants were analyzed in vitro for complementation, negative 
dominance, cysteine cross-linking and reactivity.
CONCLUSIONS: (i) His10, Trp12, Lys48, and Ser72 form a functional unit 
(phosphorylation site 1); (ii) His86 on the IIA domain and His175 on the IIB 
domain of the same subunit form a functional unit (phosphorylation site 2); 
(iii) phosphoryl transfer can occur between His10 and His175 of the same as well 
as of different subunits and His86 is necessary for this transfer; (iv) the 
subunits in the dimer are interdependent; (v) The phosphorylation site mutant 
H175C is highly reactive toward thiol reagents and it forms extensive homo- and 
heterocross-links with other surface-exposed cysteines. The phosphorylation site 
mutant H10C is 1000-fold less reactive. The two residues might be in 
complementary locations, His10 buried in a concave, His175 exposed on a convex 
surface.

PMID: 8262947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
