---
pmid: '30215512'
title: MIEF1 Microprotein Regulates Mitochondrial Translation.
authors:
- Rathore A
- Chu Q
- Tan D
- Martinez TF
- Donaldson CJ
- Diedrich JK
- Yates JR 3rd
- Saghatelian A
journal: Biochemistry
year: '2018'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6443411
doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00726
---

# MIEF1 Microprotein Regulates Mitochondrial Translation.
**Authors:** Rathore A, Chu Q, Tan D, Martinez TF, Donaldson CJ, Diedrich JK, Yates JR 3rd, Saghatelian A
**Journal:** Biochemistry (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00726](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00726)
**PMC:** [PMC6443411](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6443411/)

## Abstract

1. Biochemistry. 2018 Sep 25;57(38):5564-5575. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00726. 
Epub 2018 Sep 14.

MIEF1 Microprotein Regulates Mitochondrial Translation.

Rathore A(1)(2), Chu Q(1), Tan D(1), Martinez TF(1), Donaldson CJ(1), Diedrich 
JK(3)(4), Yates JR 3rd(4), Saghatelian A(1).

Author information:
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology , The Salk Institute for 
Biological Studies , 10010 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , California 92037 
, United States.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences , University of California, San Diego , 9500 
Gilman Drive , La Jolla , California 92093 , United States.
(3)Mass Spectrometry Core for Proteomics and Metabolomics , The Salk Institute 
for Biological Studies , 10010 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , California 
92037 , United States.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine , The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 
North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , California 92037 , United States.

Recent technological advances led to the discovery of hundreds to thousands of 
peptides and small proteins (microproteins) encoded by small open reading frames 
(smORFs). Characterization of new microproteins demonstrates their role in 
fundamental biological processes and highlights the value in discovering and 
characterizing more microproteins. The elucidation of microprotein-protein 
interactions (MPIs) is useful for determining the biochemical and cellular roles 
of microproteins. In this study, we characterize the protein interaction 
partners of mitochondrial elongation factor 1 microprotein (MIEF1-MP) using a 
proximity labeling strategy that relies on APEX2. MIEF1-MP localizes to the 
mitochondrial matrix where it interacts with the mitochondrial ribosome 
(mitoribosome). Functional studies demonstrate that MIEF1-MP regulates 
mitochondrial translation via its binding to the mitoribosome. Loss of MIEF1-MP 
decreases the mitochondrial translation rate, while an elevated level of 
MIEF1-MP increases the translation rate. The identification of MIEF1-MP reveals 
a new gene involved in this process.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00726
PMCID: PMC6443411
PMID: 30215512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
