---
pmid: '2567216'
title: 'Serum mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase activity: not useful as a marker
  of excessive alcohol consumption in an unselected population.'
authors:
- Schiele F
- Artur Y
- Varasteh A
- Wellman M
- Siest G
journal: Clin Chem
year: '1989'
full_text_available: false
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Serum mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase activity: not useful as a marker of excessive alcohol consumption in an unselected population.
**Authors:** Schiele F, Artur Y, Varasteh A, Wellman M, Siest G
**Journal:** Clin Chem (1989)

## Abstract

1. Clin Chem. 1989 Jun;35(6):926-30.

Serum mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase activity: not useful as a marker 
of excessive alcohol consumption in an unselected population.

Schiele F(1), Artur Y, Varasteh A, Wellman M, Siest G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire du Centre de Médecine Préventive et Centre du Médicament (URA 
CNRS no. 597), Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.

Using an immunochemical method, we measured the activity of the mitochondrial 
isoenzyme (mAST) of aspartate amino-transferase (EC 2.6.1.1, AST) in the serum 
of 687 subjects attending the Centre for Preventive Medicine for a health 
examination. The distributions of the activities were asymmetrical, with mean 
values of 1.8 U/L (SD 2.0) for men and 1.4 U/L (SD 1.6) for women. The average 
ratio of mitochondrial to total AST activity was 0.051 (range 0-0.42). In this 
unselected population we found no change in the mitochondrial activity or in the 
mitochondrial-to-total ratio attributable to alcohol consumption, even in 
subjects who consumed more than 88 g per day. Of 35 men with an alcohol 
consumption greater than 88 g/d, 19 had a serum gamma-glutamyltransferase 
activity of greater than or equal to 60 U/L, 17 had glutamate dehydrogenase 
values greater than or equal to 5 U/L, and only nine had an mAST activity 
greater than or equal to 3 U/L (values corresponding to the 80th percentiles of 
the total population). We conclude that the test is not particularly useful as a 
screening procedure in an unselected population under present-day conditions of 
measurement.

PMID: 2567216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
