---
pmid: '22664726'
title: ATAD3B is a human embryonic stem cell specific mitochondrial protein, re-expressed
  in cancer cells, that functions as dominant negative for the ubiquitous ATAD3A.
authors:
- Merle N
- Féraud O
- Gilquin B
- Hubstenberger A
- Kieffer-Jacquinot S
- Assard N
- Bennaceur-Griscelli A
- Honnorat J
- Baudier J
journal: Mitochondrion
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.05.005
---

# ATAD3B is a human embryonic stem cell specific mitochondrial protein, re-expressed in cancer cells, that functions as dominant negative for the ubiquitous ATAD3A.
**Authors:** Merle N, Féraud O, Gilquin B, Hubstenberger A, Kieffer-Jacquinot S, Assard N, Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Honnorat J, Baudier J
**Journal:** Mitochondrion (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mito.2012.05.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mito.2012.05.005)

## Abstract

1. Mitochondrion. 2012 Jul;12(4):441-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.05.005. Epub
2012  Jun 2.

ATAD3B is a human embryonic stem cell specific mitochondrial protein, 
re-expressed in cancer cells, that functions as dominant negative for the 
ubiquitous ATAD3A.

Merle N(1), Féraud O, Gilquin B, Hubstenberger A, Kieffer-Jacquinot S, Assard N, 
Bennaceur-Griscelli A, Honnorat J, Baudier J.

Author information:
(1)INSERM Unité 1038 and INSERM U873, 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, 
France.

Here we report on the identification of a human pluripotent embryonic stem cell 
(hESC) specific mitochondrial protein that is re-expressed in cancer cells, 
ATAD3B. ATAD3B belongs to the AAA+ ATPase ATAD3 protein family of mitochondrial 
proteins specific to multicellular eukaryotes. Using loss- and gain-of-function 
approaches, we show that ATAD3B associates with the ubiquitous ATAD3A species, 
negatively regulates the interaction of ATAD3A with matrix nucleoid complexes 
and contributes to a mitochondria fragmentation phenotype. We conclude that 
ATAD3B is a negative regulator of ATAD3A and may function as an adaptor of 
mitochondrial homeostasis and metabolism in hESCs and cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.05.005
PMID: 22664726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
