---
pmid: '1712897'
title: 'Ribosomal protein genes are overexpressed in colorectal cancer: isolation
  of a cDNA clone encoding the human S3 ribosomal protein.'
authors:
- Pogue-Geile K
- Geiser JR
- Shu M
- Miller C
- Wool IG
- Meisler AI
- Pipas JM
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '1991'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC361167
doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.8.3842-3849.1991
---

# Ribosomal protein genes are overexpressed in colorectal cancer: isolation of a cDNA clone encoding the human S3 ribosomal protein.
**Authors:** Pogue-Geile K, Geiser JR, Shu M, Miller C, Wool IG, Meisler AI, Pipas JM
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1128/mcb.11.8.3842-3849.1991](https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.11.8.3842-3849.1991)
**PMC:** [PMC361167](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC361167/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Aug;11(8):3842-9. doi: 10.1128/mcb.11.8.3842-3849.1991.

Ribosomal protein genes are overexpressed in colorectal cancer: isolation of a 
cDNA clone encoding the human S3 ribosomal protein.

Pogue-Geile K(1), Geiser JR, Shu M, Miller C, Wool IG, Meisler AI, Pipas JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
15260.

We have isolated a cDNA clone encoding the human S3 ribosomal protein from a 
normal human colon cDNA library. The clone was identified as one of many that 
detected genes whose level of expression was increased in adenocarcinoma of the 
colon relative to normal colonic mucosa. Increased levels of the S3 transcript 
were present in the tumors of all eight patients examined. Moreover, the S3 mRNA 
was also more abundant in 7 of 10 adenomatous polyps, the presumed precursor of 
carcinoma. Additional studies demonstrated that increased levels of mRNAs 
encoding several other ribosomal proteins, including S6, S8, S12, L5, and P0, 
were present in colorectal tumors and polyps. These results suggest that there 
is increased synthesis of ribosomes in colorectal tumors and that this increase 
is an early event in colon neoplasia.

DOI: 10.1128/mcb.11.8.3842-3849.1991
PMCID: PMC361167
PMID: 1712897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
