---
pmid: '1346616'
title: Cloning and expression of a mutant methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase with altered
  cobalamin affinity that causes mut- methylmalonic aciduria.
authors:
- Crane AM
- Jansen R
- Andrews ER
- Ledley FD
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1992'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC442864
doi: 10.1172/JCI115597
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
- Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning and expression of a mutant methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase with altered cobalamin affinity that causes mut- methylmalonic aciduria.
**Authors:** Crane AM, Jansen R, Andrews ER, Ledley FD
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI115597](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI115597)
**PMC:** [PMC442864](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC442864/)

## Abstract

1. J Clin Invest. 1992 Feb;89(2):385-91. doi: 10.1172/JCI115597.

Cloning and expression of a mutant methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase with altered 
cobalamin affinity that causes mut- methylmalonic aciduria.

Crane AM(1), Jansen R, Andrews ER, Ledley FD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Distinct genotypic and phenotypic forms of methylmalonyl CoA mutase (MCM) 
apoenzyme deficiency can be delineated by biochemical analysis of mutant 
fibroblasts. One form, designated mut-, expresses a phenotype in which residual 
enzyme activity is evident in cultured cells exposed to high concentrations of 
hydroxycobalamin. We describe cloning of an MCM cDNA from cells exhibiting a 
mut- phenotype and characterization of the mutant gene product overexpressed in 
primary muto human fibroblasts and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Three novel base 
changes were observed. Recombinant clones containing one of these base changes 
(G717V) express four characteristics of the mut- phenotype: failure to 
constitute [14C]propionate incorporation activity in fibroblasts assayed under 
basal cell culture conditions, constitution of [14C]propionate incorporation 
activity in fibroblasts stimulated with 0.1-1.0 micrograms/ml hydroxycobalamin, 
interallelic complementation with alleles bearing an R93H mutation, and an 
apparent Km (adenosylcobalamin) 1,000-fold higher than normal. These results 
demonstrate that the G717V mutation produces the mut- phenotype and localizes 
determinants for adenosylcobalamin binding near the carboxyl terminus of MCM.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI115597
PMCID: PMC442864
PMID: 1346616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
