---
pmid: '10893425'
title: Cloning, genomic organization, and characterization of a human cholinephosphotransferase.
authors:
- Henneberry AL
- Wistow G
- McMaster CR
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2000'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005786200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# Cloning, genomic organization, and characterization of a human cholinephosphotransferase.
**Authors:** Henneberry AL, Wistow G, McMaster CR
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M005786200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M005786200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29808-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005786200.

Cloning, genomic organization, and characterization of a human 
cholinephosphotransferase.

Henneberry AL(1), Wistow G, McMaster CR.

Author information:
(1)Atlantic Research Centre, Department of Pediatrics, IWK Grace Health Centre, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia B3H 4H7, Canada.

A cholinephosphotransferase activity catalyzes the final step in the de novo 
synthesis of phosphatidylcholine via the transfer of a phosphocholine moiety 
from CDP choline to diacylglycerol. Ethanolaminephosphotransferase activity 
catalyzes a similar reaction substituting CDP ethanolamine as the phosphobase 
donor. We report the identification and cloning of a human cDNA (human 
cholinephosphotransferase (hCPT1)) that codes for a 
cholinephosphotransferase-specific enzyme. This was demonstrated using in vitro 
enzyme assays and in vivo measurement of the reconstitution of the 
phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthetic pathways in yeast 
cells devoid of their own endogenous cholinephosphotransferase and 
ethanolaminephosphotransferase activities. This contrasted with our previously 
cloned human choline/ethanolaminephosphotransferase cDNA that was demonstrated 
to code for a dual specificity choline/ethanolaminephosphotransferase. The hCPT1 
and human choline/ethanolaminephosphotransferase (hCEPT1) predicted amino acid 
sequences possessed 60% overall identity and had only one variation in the amino 
acid residues within the CDP-alcohol phosphotransferase catalytic motif. In 
vitro assessment of hCPT1 and hCEPT1 derived cholinephosphotransferase 
activities also revealed differences in diradylglycerol specificities including 
their capacity to synthesize platelet-activating factor and platelet-activating 
factor precursor. Expression of the hCPT1 mRNA varied greater than 100-fold 
between tissues and was most abundant in testis followed by colon, small 
intestine, heart, prostate, and spleen. This was in marked contrast to the 
hCEPT1 mRNA, which has been found in similar abundance in all tissues tested to 
date. Both the hCPT1 and hCEPT1 enzymes were able to reconstitute the synthesis 
of PC in yeast to levels provided by the endogenous yeast 
cholinephosphotransferase; however, only hCEPT1-derived activity was able to 
complement the yeast CPT1 gene in its interaction with SEC14 and affect cell 
growth.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M005786200
PMID: 10893425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
