---
pmid: '17112520'
title: 'Aluminum inhibits proteolytic degradation of amyloid beta peptide by cathepsin
  D: a potential link between aluminum accumulation and neuritic plaque deposition.'
authors:
- Sakamoto T
- Saito H
- Ishii K
- Takahashi H
- Tanabe S
- Ogasawara Y
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2006'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.075
---

# Aluminum inhibits proteolytic degradation of amyloid beta peptide by cathepsin D: a potential link between aluminum accumulation and neuritic plaque deposition.
**Authors:** Sakamoto T, Saito H, Ishii K, Takahashi H, Tanabe S, Ogasawara Y
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.075)

## Abstract

1. FEBS Lett. 2006 Dec 11;580(28-29):6543-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.075. 
Epub 2006 Nov 9.

Aluminum inhibits proteolytic degradation of amyloid beta peptide by cathepsin 
D: a potential link between aluminum accumulation and neuritic plaque 
deposition.

Sakamoto T(1), Saito H, Ishii K, Takahashi H, Tanabe S, Ogasawara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Biology, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 
Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo 204-8588, Japan.

Neuritic plaques are the key pathological feature of Alzheimer's disease, and 
amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides are major component of these plaques. In this 
study, we demonstrated the influence of aluminum (Al) on the Abeta peptide 
degradation by cathepsin D. Al did not directly affect the cathepsin D activity 
using small synthetic substrate. However, when Abeta peptides were used as 
substrate, the apparent inhibitory effect of Al on cathepsin D activity was 
observed. This inhibitory effect disappeared by treatment of desferrioxamine. 
These results indicate that Al has the potential to interact and disrupt Abeta 
peptide catabolism via the inhibition of proteolytic degradation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.10.075
PMID: 17112520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
