---
pmid: '12851385'
title: The crystal structure of the major cat allergen Fel d 1, a member of the secretoglobin
  family.
authors:
- Kaiser L
- Grönlund H
- Sandalova T
- Ljunggren HG
- van Hage-Hamsten M
- Achour A
- Schneider G
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304740200
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# The crystal structure of the major cat allergen Fel d 1, a member of the secretoglobin family.
**Authors:** Kaiser L, Grönlund H, Sandalova T, Ljunggren HG, van Hage-Hamsten M, Achour A, Schneider G
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M304740200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M304740200)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37730-5. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M304740200. Epub
2003  Jul 8.

The crystal structure of the major cat allergen Fel d 1, a member of the 
secretoglobin family.

Kaiser L(1), Grönlund H, Sandalova T, Ljunggren HG, van Hage-Hamsten M, Achour 
A, Schneider G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Unit of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Karolinska 
Institutet and Hospital L2:04, S-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

The domestic cat (Felis domesticus) is one of the most important causes of 
allergic asthma worldwide. The dominating cat allergen, Fel d 1, is composed of 
two heterodimers. Recently, it has been shown that recombinant Fel d 1, 
consisting of chain 2 and chain 1 fused together without additional linker, has 
immunological properties indistinguishable from the natural heterodimeric 
protein. Herein, we report the crystal structure of recombinant monomeric Fel d 
1 at 1.85-A resolution, determined by multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction 
using selenomethionine substituted protein. Fel d 1 is an all-helical protein 
and consists of eight helices. The two halves of the recombinant Fel d 1 
molecule, corresponding to the wild-type Fel d 1 chains, are very similar in 
three-dimensional structure, despite the lack of significant sequence identity. 
The structure of the Fel d 1 presents a striking similarity to that of 
uteroglobin, a steroid-inducible cytokine-like molecule with anti-inflammatory 
and immunomodulatory properties. An internal, asymmetric cavity is formed in the 
Fel d 1 that could bind an endogenous ligand. The distribution of residues 
lining this cavity suggests that such a ligand must be amphipathic. The 
structure of Fel d 1 displays the localization of three previously defined Fel d 
1 IgE epitopes on the surface of the protein. The three-dimensional structure 
provides a framework for rational design of hypoallergenic mutants aimed for 
treatment of cat allergy.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M304740200
PMID: 12851385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
