---
pmid: '21712812'
title: A novel strategy for evasion of NK cell immunity by tumours expressing core2
  O-glycans.
authors:
- Tsuboi S
- Sutoh M
- Hatakeyama S
- Hiraoka N
- Habuchi T
- Horikawa Y
- Hashimoto Y
- Yoneyama T
- Mori K
- Koie T
- Nakamura T
- Saitoh H
- Yamaya K
- Funyu T
- Fukuda M
- Ohyama C
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
full_text_available: true
full_text_extraction_method: html
pmcid: PMC3160189
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.215
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A novel strategy for evasion of NK cell immunity by tumours expressing core2 O-glycans.
**Authors:** Tsuboi S, Sutoh M, Hatakeyama S, Hiraoka N, Habuchi T, Horikawa Y, Hashimoto Y, Yoneyama T, Mori K, Koie T, Nakamura T, Saitoh H, Yamaya K, Funyu T, Fukuda M, Ohyama C
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.215](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.215)
**PMC:** [PMC3160189](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3160189/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 28;30(15):3173-85. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.215.

A novel strategy for evasion of NK cell immunity by tumours expressing core2 
O-glycans.

Tsuboi S(1), Sutoh M, Hatakeyama S, Hiraoka N, Habuchi T, Horikawa Y, Hashimoto 
Y, Yoneyama T, Mori K, Koie T, Nakamura T, Saitoh H, Yamaya K, Funyu T, Fukuda 
M, Ohyama C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Oyokyo Kidney Research Institute, Hirosaki, 
Japan. tsuboi@oyokyo.jp

The O-glycan branching enzyme, core2 β-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 
(C2GnT), forms O-glycans containing an N-acetylglucosamine branch connected to 
N-acetylgalactosamine (core2 O-glycans) on cell-surface glycoproteins. Here, we 
report that upregulation of C2GnT is closely correlated with progression of 
bladder tumours and that C2GnT-expressing bladder tumours use a novel strategy 
to increase their metastatic potential. Our results showed that C2GnT-expressing 
bladder tumour cells are highly metastatic due to their high ability to evade NK 
cell immunity and revealed the molecular mechanism of the immune evasion by 
C2GnT expression. Engagement of an NK-activating receptor, NKG2D, by its 
tumour-associated ligand, Major histocompatibility complex class I-related chain 
A (MICA), is critical to tumour rejection by NK cells. In C2GnT-expressing 
bladder tumour cells, poly-N-acetyllactosamine was present on core2 O-glycans on 
MICA, and galectin-3 bound the NKG2D-binding site of MICA through this 
poly-N-acetyllactosamine. Galectin-3 reduced the affinity of MICA for NKG2D, 
thereby severely impairing NK cell activation and silencing the NK cells. This 
new mode of NK cell silencing promotes immune evasion of C2GnT-expressing 
bladder tumour cells, resulting in tumour metastasis.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.215
PMCID: PMC3160189
PMID: 21712812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

## Full Text

Abstract

The O- glycan branching enzyme, core2 β -1,6 - N - acetylglucosaminyltransferase (C2GnT), forms O- glycans containing an N- acetylglucosamine branch connected to N- acetylgalactosamine (core2 O- glycans) on cell-surface glycoproteins. Here, we report that upregulation of C2GnT is closely correlated with progression of bladder tumours and that C2GnT-expressing bladder tumours use a novel strategy to increase their metastatic potential. Our results showed that C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells are highly metastatic due to their high ability to evade NK cell immunity and revealed the molecular mechanism of the immune evasion by C2GnT expression. Engagement of an NK-activating receptor, NKG2D, by its tumour-associated ligand, Major histocompatibility complex class I-related chain A (MICA), is critical to tumour rejection by NK cells. In C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells, poly - N - acetyllactosamine was present on core2 O- glycans on MICA, and galectin-3 bound the NKG2D-binding site of MICA through this poly - N - acetyllactosamine. Galectin-3 reduced the affinity of MICA for NKG2D, thereby severely impairing NK cell activation and silencing the NK cells. This new mode of NK cell silencing promotes immune evasion of C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells, resulting in tumour metastasis.

Introduction

The majority of deaths associated with solid tumours are caused by metastasis. The process of metastasis involves various steps, including tumour cell proliferation at primary sites, invasion into surrounding tissues, intravasation into lymphatic or blood vessels, dissemination through the circulation, and proliferation at distal sites ( Gupta and Massague, 2006 ). Among the numerous factors involved in the process, a growing body of evidence has recently supported crucial roles for cell-surface carbohydrates in those steps of metastasis.

Cell-surface carbohydrates attached to proteins are classified by the nature of their linkages to the protein as either N -glycans ( N -acetyllactosamine linked to asparagine) or O- glycans ( N -acetyllactosamine linked to serine or threonine). Both N - and O- glycans have been shown to be involved in the process of metastasis ( Fuster and Esko, 2005 ). For example, N -glycosylation of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor is required for proliferation of melanoma and sarcoma cells ( Girnita et al, 2000 ). Upregulation of the N -glycan branching enzyme β-1,6 -N- acetylglucosaminyltransferase V reduces cell–cell interactions within a tumour, promoting cell detachment and invasion of tumour cells ( Dennis et al, 2002 ). Also, expression of O- glycans containing an N- acetylglucosamine branch connected to N- acetylgalactosamine (GlcNAcβ1-6GlcNAc), which is designated the core2 branch ( Figure 1A ), is closely correlated with highly metastatic phenotypes of several tumour types ( Yousefi et al, 1991 ; Shimodaira et al, 1997 ; Machida et al, 2001 ; Hagisawa et al, 2005 ).

In the case of patients with bladder tumours, the most common cause of the mortality is recurrence with metastasis. However, it has been reported that bladder tumours with the same grade and/or stage differ in recurrence and progression rates ( Droller, 2004 ) and detailed molecular mechanisms of metastasis of bladder tumours are still unclear. We discover that the expression of C2GnT is more useful prognostic indicator of bladder tumour patients than pathological grade and stage and that C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells are malignant and highly metastatic. Based on this discovery, our primary goal is to understand the molecular mechanism how C2GnT expression increases the metastatic potential of bladder tumours to gain the insight into the roles for cell-surface carbohydrates in the process of tumour metastasis.

Discussion

By analysing bladder tumour cell lines and patients' specimens and using animal models, we have clarified one of the most critical factors increasing the metastatic potential of bladder tumours. We provided evidence that MICA, a ligand for an NK-activating receptor (NKG2D), from C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells carries poly -N- acetyllactosamine on O- glycans and that galectin-3 modulates the NKG2D–MICA interaction by binding MICA through poly -N- acetyllactosamine ( Figures 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ). The immunomodulation effect of galectin-3 reduced NK cell activation and degranulation ( Figure 7 ), impairing the rejection of C2GnT-expressing tumours ( Figures 2 and 8 ). Analyses of NKG2D knockout mice revealed that the NKG2D–MICA interaction is critical to tumour rejection responses ( Guerra et al, 2008 ; Zafirova et al, 2009 ) and MICA functions as a ligand for mouse NKG2D in vivo ( Friese et al, 2003 ; Elsner et al, 2007 ). These observations support the immunoevasion mechanism that we reported here. Thus, C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells evade NK cell immunity by silencing NK cell activation, resulting in longer survival of the tumour cells disseminating in the circulation during the process of metastasis.

Previous studies reported that some tumour cells modulate NKG2D-mediated tumour immunosurveillance in the following three ways: (i) large amount of soluble MICA shed by tumour cells downregulate NKG2D expression ( Groh et al, 2002 ; Doubrovina et al, 2003 ; Clayton et al, 2008 ); (ii) tumour cells sustain the expression of NKG2D ligands ( Oppenheim et al, 2005 ); (iii) tumour cells decrease the cell-surface expression of MICA by retaining MICA in cells ( Fuertes et al, 2008 ). Downregulation of NKG2D or NKG2D ligands then allowed the tumour cells to evade the tumour immunosurveillance systems. In fact, we also observed that NKG2D expression was downregulated by the soluble form of MICA ( Supplementary Figure S16C and D ). However, substantial amount of NKG2D (∼70% of unstimulated NK cells) was still present at the cell surface when NK cells were stimulated with MICA-IgG or MICAC2-IgG ( Supplementary Figure S16D–F ). On the other hand, there was no difference in the expression level of MICA among bladder tumour cells and also among patients' specimens ( Figure 4 ; Supplementary Figure S11 ). These results taken together suggest that the NKG2D downregulation by soluble MICA molecules is not a primary immunoevasion system by C2GnT-expressing bladder tumour cells. Our results revealed a novel strategy for immunoevasion from tumour immunosurveillance systems. This novel immunoevasion strategy allows C2GnT-expressing tumour cells to survive longer in the host and to metastasize much more efficiently than C2GnT-non-expressing tumour cells. This is probably a major cause of poor prognosis in patients with C2GnT-expressing tumours ( Figure 1D ). Mechanisms of C2GnT expression in some tumour cells remain to be explored, but suppression of C2GnT expression in tumour cells might be a new therapeutic way to reduce bladder tumour metastasis.

We observed that binding of MICAC2-IgG to NKG2D-Fc was inhibited by galectin-3 ( Figure 6L ), suggesting the possibility that galectin-3 binds soluble MICAC2 shed by tumour cells through poly- N -acetyllactosamine. We examined the effect of galectin-3 on the ability of NKG2D downregulation by MICAC2-IgG. NKG2D downregulation by MICAC2-IgG was slightly reduced in the presence of galectin-3 compared with MICA-IgG ( Supplementary Figure S17 ). However, the difference was small and substantial amount of NKG2D was still present at the NK cell surface after stimulation with either MICA-IgG or MICAC2-IgG in the presence of galectin-3. This suggests that the effect of galectin-3 binding on this immunoevasion mechanism is small.

It has been reported that poly -N- acetyllactosamine on N -glycans modulate the cell–cell interaction to suppress excessive immune responses ( Togayachi et al, 2007 ), which is consistent with our results showing that the attachment of poly -N- acetyllactosamine on the binding site of MICA for NKG2D reduces the MICA–NKG2D interaction to impair NK cell activation ( Figures 6L and 7 ). Poly -N- acetyllactosamine provides a backbone structure for sialyl-Lewis x (SLe x ) which is involved in tumour metastasis by mediating adhesion between tumour cells, platelets, and leukocytes ( Nakamori et al, 1999 ; Borsig et al, 2002 ). However, these bladder tumour cells do not utilize SLe x for metastasis, because we were unable to detect expression of fucosyltransferases (FucT III, FucT IV, and FucT VII) that are responsible for the formation of SLe x by RT–PCR ( Supplementary Figure S18 ).

Galectins are β-galactoside binding proteins that have been implicated in numerous biological processes, including immunity, inflammation, and tumour progression ( Leffler et al, 2004 ; Dumic et al, 2006 ). Among 15 members of galectin family, galectin-1, -2, -3, -4, -7, -8, and -9 are known to be involved in tumour progression and metastasis. Above all, galectin-1 and -3 are widely distributed in normal tissues and many tumour types, although the expression of the other galectins is limited to the certain tissues such as gastrointestinal tract (galectin-4) and skin (galectin-7) ( Rabinovich et al, 2002 ; Liu and Rabinovich, 2005 ). Increased expression of galectin-1 and -3 has been found to correlate with the malignant potential of many tumours ( Rabinovich et al, 2007 ; Demydenko and Berest, 2009 ; Abdou et al, 2010 ; Zaia Povegliano et al, 2010 ; Kim et al, 2011 ). Galectin-3 has been reported to provide a critical determinant for survival of disseminating cancer cells in the circulation during metastasis and has been studied as a potential target of anti-cancer drugs ( Fukumori et al, 2007 ; Thijssen et al, 2007 ; Yang et al, 2008 ; Glinsky and Raz, 2009 ), but the detailed mechanisms were unclear. We, therefore, concentrated our investigation on the role of galectin-3 in cell survival of disseminating bladder tumour cells in the circulation by focusing on cell-surface-bound galectin-3. We here provide evidence that galectin-3 binds the NKG2D-binding site of MICA through poly -N- acetyllactosamine, thereby inhibiting the NKG2D–MICA interaction to reduce stimulation of NK cells with MICA. This is a newly identified function of cell-surface-bound galectin-3.

Immunomodulatory functions of galectin-3 are supported by several recent studies, including the modulation of T-cell responses by tumour-associated galectin-3 ( Peng et al, 2008 ) and the contribution of galectin-3 to the barrier functions of the cell-surface mucin MUC1 ( Argueso et al, 2009 ). The present study also suggests that inhibition of the immunomodulatory functions of galectin-3 may improve the therapeutic potential of cancer immunotherapy. Our investigation will provide a new insight into the roles of cell-surface carbohydrates in tumour metastasis and contribute to better understanding the process of tumour metastasis.
