---
pmid: '10102273'
title: Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription
  factor.
authors:
- Brunet A
- Bonni A
- Zigmond MJ
- Lin MZ
- Juo P
- Hu LS
- Anderson MJ
- Arden KC
- Blenis J
- Greenberg ME
journal: Cell
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80595-4
---

# Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor.
**Authors:** Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J, Greenberg ME
**Journal:** Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80595-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80595-4)

## Abstract

1. Cell. 1999 Mar 19;96(6):857-68. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80595-4.

Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead 
transcription factor.

Brunet A(1), Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson MJ, Arden KC, 
Blenis J, Greenberg ME.

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital and Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Survival factors can suppress apoptosis in a transcription-independent manner by 
activating the serine/ threonine kinase Akt, which then phosphorylates and 
inactivates components of the apoptotic machinery, including BAD and Caspase 9. 
In this study, we demonstrate that Akt also regulates the activity of FKHRL1, a 
member of the Forkhead family of transcription factors. In the presence of 
survival factors, Akt phosphorylates FKHRL1, leading to FKHRL1's association 
with 14-3-3 proteins and FKHRL1's retention in the cytoplasm. Survival factor 
withdrawal leads to FKHRL1 dephosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and target 
gene activation. Within the nucleus, FKHRL1 triggers apoptosis most likely by 
inducing the expression of genes that are critical for cell death, such as the 
Fas ligand gene.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80595-4
PMID: 10102273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
