---
pmid: '10540326'
title: Molecular and functional characterization of IRp60, a member of the immunoglobulin
  superfamily that functions as an inhibitory receptor in human NK cells.
authors:
- Cantoni C
- Bottino C
- Augugliaro R
- Morelli L
- Marcenaro E
- Castriconi R
- Vitale M
- Pende D
- Sivori S
- Millo R
- Biassoni R
- Moretta L
- Moretta A
journal: Eur J Immunol
year: '1999'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199910)29:10<3148::AID-IMMU3148>3.0.CO;2-L
---

# Molecular and functional characterization of IRp60, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that functions as an inhibitory receptor in human NK cells.
**Authors:** Cantoni C, Bottino C, Augugliaro R, Morelli L, Marcenaro E, Castriconi R, Vitale M, Pende D, Sivori S, Millo R, Biassoni R, Moretta L, Moretta A
**Journal:** Eur J Immunol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199910)29:10<3148::AID-IMMU3148>3.0.CO;2-L](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199910)29:10<3148::AID-IMMU3148>3.0.CO;2-L)

## Abstract

1. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Oct;29(10):3148-59. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199910)29:10<3148::AID-IMMU3148>3.0.CO;2-L.

Molecular and functional characterization of IRp60, a member of the 
immunoglobulin superfamily that functions as an inhibitory receptor in human NK 
cells.

Cantoni C(1), Bottino C, Augugliaro R, Morelli L, Marcenaro E, Castriconi R, 
Vitale M, Pende D, Sivori S, Millo R, Biassoni R, Moretta L, Moretta A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di Genova, 
Genova, Italy.

In this study we describe the functional and molecular characterization of IRp60 
(inhibitory receptor protein 60), an inhibitory receptor expressed on all human 
NK cells. The IRp60 molecule has been identified by the generation of three 
novel monoclonal antibodies (mAb). Cross-linking of IRp60 by specific mAb 
strongly inhibits the spontaneous cytotoxicity of NK cells as well as the 
NK-mediated cytolytic activity induced via different non-HLA-specific or 
HLA-specific activating receptors. IRp60 is a 60-kDa glycoprotein that, upon 
sodium pervanadate treatment, becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and associates 
with the SH2-containing phosphatases SHP-1 and SHP-2. The IRp60 gene is located 
on human chromosome 17 and encodes a molecule belonging to the immunoglobulin 
(Ig) superfamily characterized by a single V-type Ig-like domain in the 
extracellular portion. The cytoplasmic tail contains three classical 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs. Southern blot analysis revealed 
cross-hybridization with monkey and mouse genomic DNA, thus suggesting that 
IRp60 may be conserved among different species. Moreover, based on the use of 
different anti-IRp60 mAb, we could identify two IRp60 allelic variants. Since 
IRp60 is also expressed by other cell types, including T cell subsets, monocytes 
and granulocytes, it may play a more general role in the negative regulation of 
different leukocyte populations.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1521-4141(199910)29:10<3148::AID-IMMU3148>3.0.CO;2-L
PMID: 10540326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
