---
pmid: '14657239'
title: P130Cas-associated protein (p140Cap) as a new tyrosine-phosphorylated protein
  involved in cell spreading.
authors:
- Di Stefano P
- Cabodi S
- Boeri Erba E
- Margaria V
- Bergatto E
- Giuffrida MG
- Silengo L
- Tarone G
- Turco E
- Defilippi P
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2004'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC329393
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e03-09-0689
---

# P130Cas-associated protein (p140Cap) as a new tyrosine-phosphorylated protein involved in cell spreading.
**Authors:** Di Stefano P, Cabodi S, Boeri Erba E, Margaria V, Bergatto E, Giuffrida MG, Silengo L, Tarone G, Turco E, Defilippi P
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e03-09-0689](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e03-09-0689)
**PMC:** [PMC329393](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC329393/)

## Abstract

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Feb;15(2):787-800. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e03-09-0689. Epub 2003
 Dec 2.

P130Cas-associated protein (p140Cap) as a new tyrosine-phosphorylated protein 
involved in cell spreading.

Di Stefano P(1), Cabodi S, Boeri Erba E, Margaria V, Bergatto E, Giuffrida MG, 
Silengo L, Tarone G, Turco E, Defilippi P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia e Biochimica, Università di Torino, 10126 
Turin, Italy.

Integrin-mediated cell adhesion stimulates a cascade of signaling pathways that 
control cell proliferation, migration, and survival, mostly through tyrosine 
phosphorylation of signaling molecules. p130Cas, originally identified as a 
major substrate of v-Src, is a scaffold molecule that interacts with several 
proteins and mediates multiple cellular events after cell adhesion and mitogen 
treatment. Here, we describe a novel p130Cas-associated protein named p140Cap 
(Cas-associated protein) as a new tyrosine phosphorylated molecule involved in 
integrin- and epidermal growth factor (EGF)-dependent signaling. By affinity 
chromatography of human ECV304 cell extracts on a MBP-p130Cas column followed by 
mass spectrometry matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time of flight 
analysis, we identified p140Cap as a protein migrating at 140 kDa. We detected 
its expression in human, mouse, and rat cells and in different mouse tissues. 
Endogenous and transfected p140Cap proteins coimmunoprecipitate with p130Cas in 
ECV304 and in human embryonic kidney 293 cells and associate with p130Cas 
through their carboxy-terminal region. By immunofluorescence analysis, we 
demonstrated that in ECV304 cells plated on fibronectin, the endogenous p140Cap 
colocalizes with p130Cas in the perinuclear region as well as in lamellipodia. 
In addition p140Cap codistributes with cortical actin and actin stress fibers 
but not with focal adhesions. We also show that p140Cap is tyrosine 
phosphorylated within 15 min of cell adhesion to integrin ligands. p140Cap 
tyrosine phosphorylation is also induced in response to EGF through an EGF 
receptor dependent-mechanism. Interestingly expression of p140Cap in NIH3T3 and 
in ECV304 cells delays the onset of cell spreading in the early phases of cell 
adhesion to fibronectin. Therefore, p140Cap is a novel protein associated with 
p130Cas and actin cytoskeletal structures. Its tyrosine phosphorylation by 
integrin-mediated adhesion and EGF stimulation and its involvement in cell 
spreading on matrix proteins suggest that p140Cap plays a role in controlling 
actin cytoskeleton organization in response to adhesive and growth factor 
signaling.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e03-09-0689
PMCID: PMC329393
PMID: 14657239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
