---
pmid: '31427437'
title: A two-component protease in Methylorubrum extorquens with high activity toward
  the peptide precursor of the redox cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone.
authors:
- Martins AM
- Latham JA
- Martel PJ
- Barr I
- Iavarone AT
- Klinman JP
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2019'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC6791305
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009684
pubmed_publication_types:
- Journal Article
- Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
- Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
publication_type: PRIMARY_RESEARCH
---

# A two-component protease in Methylorubrum extorquens with high activity toward the peptide precursor of the redox cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone.
**Authors:** Martins AM, Latham JA, Martel PJ, Barr I, Iavarone AT, Klinman JP
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.009684](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.009684)
**PMC:** [PMC6791305](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6791305/)

## Abstract

1. J Biol Chem. 2019 Oct 11;294(41):15025-15036. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009684. 
Epub 2019 Aug 19.

A two-component protease in Methylorubrum extorquens with high activity toward 
the peptide precursor of the redox cofactor pyrroloquinoline quinone.

Martins AM(1), Latham JA(2), Martel PJ(3), Barr I(1)(4), Iavarone AT(1)(4), 
Klinman JP(5)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Denver, Denver, 
Colorado 8020.
(3)Centre for Biomedical Research, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, 
University of the Algarve, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California 94720.
(5)California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California 
Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720 klinman@berkeley.edu.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California 94720.

Pyrroloquinoline quinone is a prominent redox cofactor in many prokaryotes, 
produced from a ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified 
peptide PqqA via a pathway comprising four conserved proteins PqqB-E. These four 
proteins are now fairly well-characterized and span radical SAM activity (PqqE), 
aided by a peptide chaperone (PqqD), a dual hydroxylase (PqqB), and an 
eight-electron, eight-proton oxidase (PqqC). A full description of this pathway 
has been hampered by a lack of information regarding a protease/peptidase 
required for the excision of an early, cross-linked di-amino acid precursor to 
pyrroloquinoline quinone. Herein, we isolated and characterized a two-component 
heterodimer protein from the α-proteobacterium Methylobacterium (Methylorubrum) 
extorquens that can rapidly catalyze cleavage of PqqA into smaller peptides. 
Using pulldown assays, surface plasmon resonance, and isothermal calorimetry, we 
demonstrated the formation of a complex PqqF/PqqG, with a KD of 300 nm We 
created a molecular model of the heterodimer by comparison with the Sphingomonas 
sp. A1 M16B Sph2681/Sph2682 protease. Analysis of time-dependent patterns for 
the appearance of proteolysis products indicates high specificity of PqqF/PqqG 
for serine side chains. We hypothesize that PqqF/PqqG initially cleaves between 
the PqqE/PqqD-generated cross-linked form of PqqA, with nonspecific cellular 
proteases completing the release of a suitable substrate for the downstream 
enzyme PqqB. The finding of a protease that specifically targets serine side 
chains is rare, and we propose that this activity may be useful in proteomic 
analyses of the large family of proteins that have undergone post-translational 
phosphorylation at serine.

© 2019 Martins et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.009684
PMCID: PMC6791305
PMID: 31427437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article
