---
pmid: '22224850'
title: 'An electron-transfer path through an extended disulfide relay system: the
  case of the redox protein ALR.'
authors:
- Banci L
- Bertini I
- Calderone V
- Cefaro C
- Ciofi-Baffoni S
- Gallo A
- Tokatlidis K
journal: J Am Chem Soc
year: '2012'
full_text_available: false
doi: 10.1021/ja209881f
---

# An electron-transfer path through an extended disulfide relay system: the case of the redox protein ALR.
**Authors:** Banci L, Bertini I, Calderone V, Cefaro C, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Gallo A, Tokatlidis K
**Journal:** J Am Chem Soc (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1021/ja209881f](https://doi.org/10.1021/ja209881f)

## Abstract

1. J Am Chem Soc. 2012 Jan 25;134(3):1442-5. doi: 10.1021/ja209881f. Epub 2012
Jan  6.

An electron-transfer path through an extended disulfide relay system: the case 
of the redox protein ALR.

Banci L(1), Bertini I, Calderone V, Cefaro C, Ciofi-Baffoni S, Gallo A, 
Tokatlidis K.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center, University of Florence, via L. Sacconi 6, Sesto 
Fiorentino, Italy. banci@cerm.unifi.it

The oxidative folding mechanism in the intermembrane space of human mitochondria 
underpins a disulfide relay system consisting of the import receptor Mia40 and 
the homodimeric FAD-dependent thiol oxidase ALR. The flavoprotein ALR receives 
two electrons per subunit from Mia40, which are then donated through 
one-electron reactions to two cytochrome c molecules, thus mediating a switch 
from two-electron to one-electron transfer. We dissect here the mechanism of the 
electron flux within ALR, characterizing at the atomic level the ALR 
intermediates that allow electrons to rapidly flow to cytochrome c. The 
intermediate critical for the electron-transfer process implies the formation of 
a specific inter-subunit disulfide which exclusively allows electron flow from 
Mia40 to FAD. This finding allows us to present a complete model for the 
electron-transfer pathway in ALR.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

DOI: 10.1021/ja209881f
PMID: 22224850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
