---
pmid: '20823832'
title: Dishevelled, a Wnt signalling component, is involved in mitotic progression
  in cooperation with Plk1.
authors:
- Kikuchi K
- Niikura Y
- Kitagawa K
- Kikuchi A
journal: EMBO J
year: '2010'
full_text_available: false
pmcid: PMC2964169
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.221
---

# Dishevelled, a Wnt signalling component, is involved in mitotic progression in cooperation with Plk1.
**Authors:** Kikuchi K, Niikura Y, Kitagawa K, Kikuchi A
**Journal:** EMBO J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2010.221](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2010.221)
**PMC:** [PMC2964169](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2964169/)

## Abstract

1. EMBO J. 2010 Oct 20;29(20):3470-83. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.221. Epub 2010 Sep
 7.

Dishevelled, a Wnt signalling component, is involved in mitotic progression in 
cooperation with Plk1.

Kikuchi K(1), Niikura Y, Kitagawa K, Kikuchi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Wnt signalling is known to promote G1/S progression through the stimulation of 
gene expression, but whether this signalling regulates mitotic progression is 
not clear. Here, the function of dishevelled 2 (Dvl2), which transmits the Wnt 
signal, in mitosis was examined. Dvl2 localized to the spindles and spindle 
poles during mitosis. When cells were treated with nocodazole, Dvl2 was observed 
at the kinetochores (KTs). Dvl2 bound to and was phosphorylated at Thr206 by a 
mitotic kinase, Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), and this phosphorylation was required 
for spindle orientation and stable microtubule (MT)-KT attachment. Dvl2 was also 
found to be involved in the activation of a spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) 
kinase, Mps1, and the recruitment of other SAC components, Bub1 and BubR1, to 
the KTs. However, the phosphorylation of Dvl2 by Plk1 was dispensable for SAC. 
Furthermore, Wnt receptors were involved in spindle orientation, but not in 
MT-KT attachment or SAC. These results suggested that Dvl2 is involved in 
mitotic progression by regulating the dynamics of MT plus-ends and the SAC in 
Plk1-dependent and -independent manners.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2010.221
PMCID: PMC2964169
PMID: 20823832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
